novel coronavirus (covid-19) emerged in china in december 2019 and as of 3rd march 2020, more than 90,800 cases and 3100 deaths have been reported from 72 countries ( world health organisation (who) 2020 ). most of the cases and deaths have occurred in wuhan city in china where the outbreak started. as drugs or vaccines are not yet available, various non-pharmaceutical measures have been recommended to reduce the spread of infection, including hygiene and disinfection, improving environmental control, early detection and reporting, isolation, quarantine, use of personal protective equipment, social distancing and travel restrictions (( world health organization (who) 2014 ; bell et al., 2006 ) ). in most pandemic plans, tiered strategies which target front line health workers first, followed by the general community, are usually defined. yet many of these strategies have some level of controversy attached and lack a large evidence base . some are starting to be phased out in some settings such as the use of thermal scanners at airports, due to a lack of evidence, especially for infections with pre-symptomatic transmission ( gunaratnam et al., 2014 ) . however, the use of other interventions continues to be debated.the lack of agreement on the selection and use of masks (medical or surgical facemasks) and respirators (n95/p2/ffp2 or equivalent) is reflected in inconsistent and conflicting policies worldwide chughtai et al., 2013 ) . masks and respirators are commonly used to protect healthcare workers from respiratory infections, particularly during the initial periods of outbreaks/ pandemics when other control measures not yet available ( aiello et al., 2010 a; aledort et al., 2007 ) . in this paper we examined existing policies of selected health organization and countries on the use of masks and respirators to protect hospital health workers from covid-19.while there is a high level of agreement amongst key agencies that masks and respirators play a role in the protection of health workers, there are currently discrepancies between these agencies regarding how and when the different products are used. the world health organization (who), the us centers for disease control and prevention and other leading health organisations have different recommendations for the selection of respiratory protec-tion. for example, the who recommends using masks to protect health workers from covid-19 during routine care and respirators during aerosol generating procedures ( world health organisation (who) 2020 ). in contrast, the us centers for disease control and prevention ( center for disease control and prevention (cdc) 2020 ) and the european center for disease prevention and control ( european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc) 2020 ) recommend using respirators during both routine care of covid19 patients and high risk situations. individual countries also have different policies; some are in line with the who, and others with the us centers for disease control and prevention. for example, the australian ( communicable diseases network australia (cdna) ) and canadian guidelines ( government of canada ) align with the who, while uk ( public health england ) and chinese guidelines ( chinese center for disease control and prevention 2020 ) align with the us centers for disease control and prevention and european center for disease prevention and control. while all organisations recommend using n95/ p2/ffp2 or equivalent respirators, public health england (uk) recommends using filtering facepiece 3 (ffp3) respirators for all cases and the european center for disease prevention and control recommends using ffp3 during aerosol generating procedures. australian guidelines also recommend powered air purifying respirators while performing aerosol generating procedures on multiple patients. although us centers for disease control and prevention guidelines also discuss powered air purifying respirators indication of their use is not clear.these conflicting policies may cause confusion for hospital managers, nurses and other health workers. conflicting guidelines have resulted in a large amount of online debate between infectious disease providers and infection prevention control experts about what approaches should be adopted. history is repeating itself with the same controversies around powered air purifying respirators during the the only similarity is that all health organisations and countries generally recommend the use of masks by suspected or infected cases of covid-19 (i.e. source control) to prevent spread of infections. they simultaneously state that community use of masks has no benefit. yet there are more randomised controlled clinical https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2020.103567 0020-7489/© 2020 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved. trials (rcts) supporting the use of masks in the community than for source control. the community trials show a benefit of face masks with or without hand hygiene, conditional on compliance ( simmerman et al., 2011 ; aiello et al., 2012 ; aiello et al., 2010 b; suess et al., 2012 ; macintyre et al., 2009 ; cowling et al., 2009 ). there are only two rcts of clinical efficacy of source control ( canini et al., 2010 ; macintyre et al., 2016 ) , and one small experimental rct of 9 subjects ( johnson et al., 2009 ). these suggest a benefit, but larger trials are needed.the main difference in masks and respirators is their intended use. masks were originally designed to prevent spread of infections from wearers to other people around them, referred to as "source control". they are also used to protect from infections transmitted through the droplet mode and splashes or sprays of blood or body fluids. disposable medical or surgical masks are common types of face masks used by both health workers and general public. in contrast to this, respirators are designed for respiratory protection. a medical or surgical mask may be enough to prevent droplet transfer, while a respirator is required for airborne infection. in terms of mask use, the physical barrier may also prevent contact transmission such as hand to face/mouth/nose. a respirator may provide protection against multiple modes of transmission, including droplet, airborne and hand-to-mouth/nose transmission. whilst the relative contribution of each mode is difficult to quantify, clinically, the debate about the modes of transmission is academic if an intervention is shown to prevent infection.like other coronavirus diseases (e.g. sars and mers), covid-19 is believed to be transmitted through droplet and contact modes however other transmission modes, such as airborne, are likely given the virus is found in higher concentrations in the lungs than the upper respiratory tract ( world health organisation (who) 2020 ). there had been evidence of airborne transmission of sars as well, therefore respirators were recommended for sars during 2002-03 outbreak ( mckinney et al., 2006 ) . in canada, initially masks were recommended, but this recommendation was later changed to respirators due to the deaths of health workers. a recent study demonstrated the presence of coronavirus in anal swabs from infected patients and possibility of transmission through faecal-oral route ( zhang et al., 2020 ) . transmission dynamics for covid-19 are still unclear and pharmaceutical control measures are not yet available, therefore n95 or higher respirators should be offered to health workers who are working at the frontline ( macintyre et al., 2014 a; macintyre et al., 2014 b). health workers and other first responders in high coronavirus transmission areas (e.g. wuhan) should use respirators during routine care of coronavirus cases. health workers and first responders in low risk countries should use a respirator when encountering a suspected or confirmed case of coronavirus. if respirators are not available, then masks should be used.extended use and reuse of masks and respirators was a common practice during past epidemics and pandemics due to shortage of products ( chughtai et al., 2015 ; beckman et al., 2013 ; lautenbach et al., 2010 ; rebmann and wagner, 2009 ). according to the us centers for disease control and prevention, extended use refers to "the practice of wearing the same n95 respirator for repeated close contact encounters with several patients, without removing the respirator between patient encounters" ( center for disease control and prevention (cdc) 2014 a). the us centers for disease control and prevention defines re-use as "the practice of using the same n95 respirator for multiple encounters with patients but removing it ('doffing') after each encounter" ( center for disease control and prevention (cdc) 2014 a). shortages of respirators were reported in many hospitals in us and japan during the 2009 influenza h1n1 pandemic and staff had to use medical masks ( lautenbach et al., 2010 ; rebmann and wagner, 2009 ; tomizuka et al., 2013 ) .currently, the single use of medical mask and ffp respirators is recommended, but this is not always feasible. during a pandemic or extended outbreak, medical masks and ffp respirators may not be available for everyone. therefore the us centers for disease control and prevention and other health organisations have previously considered the extended use and re-use of medical masks and respirators during outbreaks, pandemics and other high demand situations (( center for disease control and prevention (cdc) 2014 a; occupational safety and health administration (osha) 2009 ; institute of medicine (iom) national academy of sciences 2006 )). during recent covid-19 epidemics the shortage of masks and respirators have been reported from many countries. however, the outer surface of medical masks or respirators may be contaminated and may be a source of infection (( institute of medicine (iom) national academy of sciences 2010 ; viscusi et al., 2009 ) ). a recent study showed that pathogens may be present on the outer surface of around 10% masks and risks increase with prolonged mask use ( chughtai et al., 2019 ) . the number of viral particles and length of survival are important factors to consider in case re-use is deemed essential ( institute of medicine (iom) national academy of sciences 2010 ).currently there is a lack of data regarding the period for which the same mask or respirators may be continuously used, and none of guideline address this. available data suggest that respirators may be used intermittently or continuously for around eight hours ( center for disease control and prevention (cdc) 2014 b) and that adverse effects of facemasks increase with more than eight hours use ( shenal et al., 2012 ) . it has been suggested that extended use of facemasks is acceptable if the mask is not wet and soiled. however there are currently no clinical studies supporting this practice (( occupational safety and health administration (osha) 2009 ; sonoma county department of health services 2006 )).policies and guidelines should also mention implementation of a comprehensive respiratory protection program for respirator use, which includes selection of certified respirators, training and fit checking and testing, and inspection, maintenance and storage ( occupational safety and health administration (osha) 2002 ). certified respirators should be used in healthcare settings and certification processes should be managed by a regulatory body, for example in the us the national institute for occupational safety and health regulates the certification process under regulation 42 cfr 84 ( national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) 1995 ). similarly, in europe, the european norm standard ( european directive ) and in australia, as/ nzs 1716 standard regulates respirator use ( standards australia limited/standards new zealand 2012 ). all guidelines, except the who and the australian guidelines, briefly discuss the need for fit testing but do not provide detail on fit testing procedures. the who and the australian guidelines do not mention fit testing and instead mention fit check (or seal-check) which is not equivalent to fit testing. all guidelines however highlight the importance of training for respiratory (and other personal protective equipment) use.summing up, in the case of serious emerging infections, like covid-19, the precautionary principle should be used for frontline health workers and a properly fitted respirator should be used. if respirators are not available, masks should be used. extended use and reuse are high risk practices and may lead to selfcontamination to the wearer and should be avoided. in case of shortage, extended use should be balanced against the risk of infections and the wearer should not remove masks between patients encounters. there should be a uniform policy around the use of personal protective equipment to avoid confusion which places occupational health and safety of health workers as a high priority.abrar ahmad chughtai had testing of filtration of masks by 3 m for his phd more than 5 years ago. 3 m products were not used in his research. he also has worked with cleanspace technology on research on fit testing of respirators (no funding was involved). c raina macintyre receives funding from nhmrc (center for research excellence and principal research fellowship) and sanofi currently. she has received funding from 3 m more than 10 years ago for face mask research.there was no funding involved.coronavirus, the virus that caused the global pandemic at the beginning of 2020 and affected millions across the globe, presented as an enormous challenge to health care providers around the world with increasing numbers of infected patients presenting daily, health care workers are struggling to take effective measures to protect themselves from transmission against the highly contagious coronavirus this case helps us understand the implications of coronavirus-infected patients on the health care providers directly responsible for the management of these patients and the relative efficacy of different types of respiratory protective equipment mainly n95 masks and surgical masks in preventing the spread of infection among those at the front lines providing carecovid-19 and the efficacy of different types of respiratory protective equipment used by health care providers in a health care settingthe coronavirus (covid-19) was declared a global pandemic by world health organization (who) on march 11, 2020 after it was known to originate from wuhan, china, and resulted in more than 381,000 confirmed cases around the world at the time [1, 2] . very little is known about its effect among those responsible for its management and treatment, primarily the doctors, nurses, and the first responders. the coronavirus causes an acute respiratory infection that is transmitted by contact and droplet routes. the use of personnel protective equipment (ppe), such as surgical gloves, face masks, eye protection, and regular hand washing, is known to limit the spread of the virus, but little is known about the relative efficacy of n95 masks over the regular surgical masks in preventing the transmission of the virus among health care workers (hcws). this aspect of identifying the superior type of respiratory protective equipment (rpe) is of significant importance in order to provide maximal protection to hcws, prevent medical equipment shortages, and to lessen the burden on manufacturers and suppliers of this equipment. both types of face masks are known to prevent the transmission of respiratory particles; however, the n95 masks are thought to have a superior efficacy by filtering out very small particles. in spite of having many benefits, the n95 masks have certain limitations and it is important to understand if the benefits outweigh the risks when compared to surgical masks. this case helps us better understand the efficacy and benefits of different types of rpe used by hcws during the management of patients infected with the coronavirus.a 55-year-old woman with a history of diabetes mellitus was admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) in early march 2020 for severe shortness of breath. she had recently returned from a trip to iran and was suspected to have been in contact with people infected with the coronavirus. on admission, she was given high-flow supplemental oxygen that slightly improved her shortness of breath; however, after a few hours, her respiratory status worsened and she was intubated and mechanically ventilated in the icu. the hcws who performed the aforementioned procedures used either the n95 mask or the surgical mask depending upon availability and personal preference. the patient's respiratory status gradually improved over a period of two days. in accordance with existing guidelines, the patient was extubated and shifted to the isolation ward for further management. three samples of nasopharyngeal swabs were obtained from the patient for three consecutive days for covid-19 testing and all came out positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) on polymerase chain reaction (pcr) assay. all the 34 hcws exposed to the patient were isolated and quarantined for a period of 14 days. information was obtained about the type of rpe used by each hcw during exposure to the patient. half of the hcws used surgical masks, whereas the rest used n95 masks as the rpe while performing procedures on the infected patient. during this period of quarantine, routine surveillance monitoring for cough, shortness of breath, and muscle aches was made. two samples of nasopharyngeal swabs were obtained from the hcws on the day of exposure and the last day of quarantine for covid 19 testing via the pcr assay.each hcw remained asymptomatic and tested negative for covid 19 on both tests.the coronavirus is known to spread through aerosolized particles. hcws are at an increased risk of being infected without proper ppe and protective measures. this case highlighted the importance of evaluating the efficacy of different rpe during a viral pandemic in protecting the hcws from the transmission of infection. none of the hcws who were exposed to the virus tested positive for covid-19 despite using the different types of rpe. this helps us in determining the relative efficacy of surgical masks and n95 masks over one another in preventing the transmission of the virus among hcws. it can also be deduced that both types of rpe offer equal protection to hcws from the virus; however, these findings need to be validated by well-designed large-scale studies. the observation made in this case report was also highlighted by a previous study which showed that n95 masks were not superior to surgical masks for preventing influenza infection among hcws [3] . another study concluded that there was no significant difference between n95 mask and surgical masks in preventing the risk of transmission of respiratory infections from infected patients [4] . although the above studies showed no significant difference in efficacy of both types of rpe, it is vital to understand that different infectious agents have different mechanisms of transmission and action, and hence large-scale randomized controlled trials (rcts) need to be conducted to better understand the particular pattern and characteristics of sars-cov2 that differentiate it from other respiratory infectious agents with similar features. the n95 mask is thought to be superior to the surgical masks. these masks are known to filter out 95% of small airborne particles including bacteria and viruses. they have been tested and approved by the national institute of occupational safety (nios); however, there are certain limitations to its use. since breathing while wearing the n95 mask is harder, it is not recommended for the elderly, claustrophobics, and individuals suffering from lung diseases as it may exacerbate their pre-existing conditions. these masks need to be properly fitted on the face every time to ensure that a proper seal is in place to provide maximal protection. the inability to form a proper seal does not provide adequate protection. this can be difficult to achieve in individuals with facial hair and in children. it can also inadvertently lead to frequent contact between the hands and the face while adjusting the mask, which further increases the risk of transmission. the tight seal also leads to the build-up of heat and humidity within the mask causing discomfort and difficulty in breathing. the duration and cost of manufacturing are longer and higher and during a pandemic, shortages of this equipment can result in avoidable exposure to hcws. during a pandemic or health crisis, hcws need to be able to access ppe readily in order to protect themselves, patients, and their contacts. interpretation of this case and the above studies helps us understand the need to urgently conduct large-scale rcts and incorporate the findings of these trials and studies to revise the existing guidelines regarding the use of rpe by hcws and possibly increase the usage of readily available surgical masks in favor of n95 masks for preventing covid-19 transmission. till the availability of any conclusive evidence, health care providers in direct contact with covid-19 cases should continue the use of n95 respirators as advocated by the current guidelines.although this case report helps us in determining the relative efficacy of different rpe in preventing covid-19 transmission, there is still a lot more that needs to be studied about the transmission and pathology of the coronavirus to introduce effective measures and equipment that will protect hcws in the future. the intricate details about the size and transmission of the virus still need to be studied in depth to figure out the best method of rpe that can be used to prevent its transmission. although this case report signifies that there is no superior protection offered by n95 masks in comparison to surgical masks, it has certain limitations and additional studies, particularly rcts need to be conducted in a health care setting to determine the effectiveness of different rpe, which may lead to the revision of existing policies and guidelines regarding the best ways to protect hcws from being infected with the coronavirus in the event of an exposure.human subjects: all authors have confirmed that this study did not involve human participants or tissue. conflicts of interest: in compliance with the icmje uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: payment/services info: all authors have declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work. financial relationships: all authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. other relationships: all authors have declared that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.a medical librarian searched pubmed, medline, and elsevier embase (from 2003 through 14 april 2020). search strategies are shown in supplement table 1 (available at annals.org). we also searched the world health organization (who) covid-19 database (10) and the medrxiv preprint server (11) and reviewed reference lists of relevant articles, including a living review on risk factors (including mask use) for coronavirus infections in health care workers (hcws) (12) . daily medline surveillance and weekly surveillance on embase, the who database, and the medrxiv server is ongoing; this article includes surveillance through 2 june 2020.studies were selected by using predefined criteria (supplement table 2 , available at annals.org). the population was hcws and persons in the community. interventions were disposable n95 filtering facepiece respirators, surgical masks, and cloth masks. for key question 1, we included randomized controlled trials (rcts) of one mask type versus another that reported effects on risk for infection with sars-cov-2 (including infections meeting criteria for covid- 19) , sars-cov-1 (including sars-1), or mers-cov (including mers); influenza-like illness; laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory illness; and harms. to inform indirect comparisons, we also included rcts of masks versus no masks. we included cohort and case-control studies on the association between mask use and risk for covid-19, sars-1, and mers, owing to the lack of randomized trials for these outcomes. studies on noncoronavirus infections were restricted to randomized trials, because such studies are available. we also included studies on reuse or extended use of masks versus standard use and risk for sars-cov-2, sars-cov-1, or mers-cov infection.one investigator reviewed each citation for potential full-text review and reviewed each full-text article for inclusion. a second investigator verified exclusion decisions at both the citation and full-text level; disagreements were resolved through consensus. we included non-peer-reviewed articles for sars-cov-2 because peer-reviewed literature was sparse. chinese-language articles were translated by a native speaker.one investigator extracted study data into standardized tables, and a second verified data: study author, year; setting (country, health care setting, dates), population characteristics (sample size, age, sex, hcw role or position, number of cases, exposures, personal protective equipment use), mask interventions (randomized trials, including adherence) or mask use (observational studies), and results. if necessary, we calculated relative risks (randomized trials) and odds ratios (observational studies) from available data. for observational studies on hcws and coronavirus, we categorized risk settings as high (coronavirus infection exposures in intensive care units, frequent aerosol-generating procedures [such as tracheal intubation or bronchoscopy], or with inadequate infection control [for example, unrecognized patient infections]), moderate (exposure to coronavirus infections, not meeting criteria for high risk), or low (no care of patients with coronavirus infections) (13) .we categorized randomized trials on hcws and risk for influenza or influenza-like illness as higher risk (inpatient) or lower risk (outpatient).randomized trials were assessed by using criteria adapted from the u.s. preventive services task force (14) . for observational studies, we noted key limitations of each study, such as potential recall, selection, or participation bias; issues regarding outcome evaluation and analytic methods; and confounding (15, 16) . and analytical methods. we created an evidence map showing the strength of evidence and effect direction by setting and infection type. the strength of evidence was classified as high, moderate, low, or insufficient, on the basis of the study design, risk for bias, inconsistency, indirectness, and imprecision (18) .this review is being maintained as a living review focusing on key questions 1a and 2 (sars-cov-2 and covid-19), with a planned end date 1 year from initial searches. surveillance is ongoing, using the same searches as the original review, except dropping searches of preprint servers. study selection and quality assessment will follow the same processes described, except that observational study quality will be formally assessed by using published criteria (14) . new evidence that does not substantively change review conclusions will be briefly summarized on a monthly basis; a major update will be performed when new evidence changes the nature or strength of the conclusions.the study was funded under contract hhsa 290201500009i, task order 75q80119f32021, from the ahrq, u.s. department of health and human services (hhs). the authors of this manuscript are responsible for its content. statements in the manuscript do not necessarily represent the official views of or imply endorsement by ahrq or hhs. staff at ahrq developed the key questions and review scope but did not have any role in the selection, assessment, or synthesis of evidence. the ahrq was not involved in the decision to submit this article for publication.thirty-nine studies (33 867 participants), all addressing key question 1, met the inclusion criteria (19 -50-51-57) . figure 1 summarizes the study selection process and number of included studies, by setting (community or health care) and study type. twelve rcts (19 -21, 23, 24, 28 -30, 37, 41, 48, 49 ) and 3 observational studies (31, 51, 54) were conducted in the community, and 6 rcts (27, 34, 38 -40, 46 ) and 18 observational studies (22, 25, 26, 32, 33, 35, 36, 42-45, 47, 50, 52, 53, 55-57) were conducted in hcws (supplement tables 3 and 4, available at annals.org). there were no rcts on risk for coronavirus infections. for sars-cov-2, there were 2 cohort studies (52, 56) . eighteen observational studies addressed sars-cov-1 (25, 31-33, 35, 36, 42-45, 47, 50, 51, 53-55, 57) , and 1 cohort study addressed mers-cov (22) . no death was recorded in any study. the rcts were usually conducted during influenza season and evaluated the risk for nonspecific clinical respiratory illness, influenza-like illness, and laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory illness. two chinese-language studies were translated into english by a native chinese speaker on the review team (36, 55) . two rcts (27, 34) were randomized by individual participant; the remaining trials were randomized by clusters (households, university residence halls, tents during hajj, hospitals, hospital wards, or outpatient settings). the number of participants ranged from 164 to 7687. the rcts were conducted during influenza season, except for 2 rcts of hajj pilgrims staying in tents (21, 23) . two rcts (34, 37) reported the incidence of laboratory-confirmed nonpandemic coronavirus infections, but 1 trial only reported 1 case (37) . four trials were conducted in the united states, 1 in canada, 1 in australia, 2 in europe, 2 in saudi arabia, and 8 in asia. eleven rcts were rated good-quality, and 7 were rated fair-quality (supplement table 5 , available at annals .org). limitations of the fair-quality trials included baseline between-group differences and high attrition; one cluster rct (23) did not adjust for cluster correlation. blinding of participants to the mask and other interventions (for example, hand hygiene) was not possible.the observational studies had important limitations (supplement table 4 ). all were retrospective and potentially susceptible to recall bias for determining mask use and other exposures. the studies were limited in their ability to measure and control for the amount and intensity of exposures. six studies did not control for potential confounders. of the 15 studies that did control for confounders, only 1 (33) evaluated correlations between masks and other infection control measures (such as gloves, gowns, goggles, or handwashing) to inform variable selection for model building. in the other studies that reported results from multivariate models, correlations between infection control measures and potential collinearity were not addressed.community settings. no study evaluated masks for preventions of sars-cov-2 infections in community settings.health care settings. two cohort studies evaluated mask use and risk for sars-cov-2 infection, but had important limitations (52, 56) . one study (493 participants) of hcws in higher-and lower-risk hospital units found n95 respirators to be associated with decreased infection risk versus no mask, but mask use was based on whether the hcw worked in a department in which masks were used, not on assessment of individual use (52) . in addition, departments with n95 respirator use differed from departments that did not use n95 respirators in other infection control measures (such as handwashing and use of protective clothing) and exposure to patients with covid-19. there were also few hcw cases and serious imprecision. the other study was small (37 participants) and evaluated hcws with inadequate personal protective equipment during exposure to a patient with unrecognized sars-cov-2 infection (56) . it reported 3 cases of sars-cov-2 infection in hcws, resulting in very imprecise estimates.community settings. three observational studies (2857 participants) evaluated masks and sars-1 risk in community settings (supplement table 4 ) (31, 51, 54) . the studies did not compare mask types or provide details regarding mask type. wearing a mask was associated with decreased risk for infection in persons without known sars-1 contacts in 1 study (54) and in household contacts of patients with sars-1 in 2 studies (supplement table 6 , available at annals.org) (31, 51) .health care settings. fifteen observational studies (3994 participants) evaluated the association between mask use by hcws and risk for sars-cov-1 infection (25, 26, 32, 33, 35, 36, 42-45, 47, 50, 53, 55, 57) , and 1 study (283 participants) (22) evaluated the association between mask use and mers-cov infection (supplement table 4 ). five studies were conducted in high-risk settings, and the remainder in moderate-risk settings (supplement table 7 , available at annals.org); no study was low risk. the proportion of hcws with close or direct contact with sars-cov-1 or mers-cov cases was high in studies that reported this information; use of personal protective equipment varied (supplement table 7 ).five observational studies (1208 participants) consistently found n95 respirators to be associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 infection versus surgical masks (sometimes described as "disposable" masks) in hcws (supplement table 8 , available at annals.org) (25, 33, 35, 45, 57) ; all but 1 study (33) were conducted in high-risk settings. results of 3 comparisons (1207 participants) involving an n95 respirator or surgical versus cloth mask and risk for sars-cov-1 in moderaterisk settings were somewhat inconsistent (33, 36, 55) . the cloth mask material was cotton or not reported, and cloth masks were described as 12-or 16-layer masks, potentially reducing generalizability to the united states and other countries where cloth masks typically have far fewer layers.twelve observational studies (2998 participants) consistently found mask use associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 infection versus no use (supplement table 8 ) (33, 35, 36, 42-45, 47, 50, 53, 55, 57) ; of these, 8 specifically evaluated n95 respirators or surgical masks (33, 35, 36, 45, 47, 50, 55, 57) . results were consistent when studies were stratified by high-or moderate-risk setting (34, 45, 53, 57) . masks were associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 infection in multivariate models in 5 studies (33, 43, 47, 50, 55) .four studies (626 participants) found more consistent mask use by hcws to be associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 or mers-cov infection versus less consistent use (supplement table 8 were used by infected index cases ("source control"), household contacts of index cases, cases and contacts, or persons without specific contact with cases. all participants generally received education on preventing respiratory infection and hand hygiene. all of the trials compared a mask versus no mask; 1 trial also compared a mask versus a mask plus handwashing training (48) .only 1 rct (290 participants) directly compared different mask types (37) . it evaluated a p2 mask (australian equivalent to an n95 respirator) versus a surgical mask in adult household contacts of children with influenza-like illness. there were no differences between either mask type versus no mask in infection outcomes, though estimates were imprecise. the rct did table 9 , available at annals .org). in a multivariate analysis, adherence to either mask was associated with decreased risk for influenzalike illness (hazard ratio, 0.26 to 0.32). eight trials (6510 participants), including the trial described above, evaluated use of surgical masks within households with an influenza or influenza-like illness index case (child or adult) (24, 28 -30, 37, 41, 48, 49) . compared with no masks, surgical masks were not associated with decreased risk for clinical respiratory illness, influenza-like illness, or laboratory-confirmed viral illness in household contacts when masks were worn by household contacts (30, 37, 48) , index cases (24, 41) , or both (28, 29, 49) . however, some estimates were imprecise, mask-wearing adherence was limited (supplement table 9 /e), and some crossover oc- curred. two trials found no differences between surgical masks plus handwashing versus handwashing alone in risk for infections in household contacts of index cases (30, 48) . two trials (2475 participants) of students living in university residence halls without specific contacts with cases also found no significant differences between a surgical mask versus no mask and risk for influenza-like illness (19, 20) . two trials (7851 participants) found that surgical masks, compared with no masks, were not associated with decreased risk for infections in hajj pilgrims with or without an infected index case within the same tent (21, 23) .health care settings. six rcts (9411 participants) evaluated mask use among hcws in health care settings ( table 2 and supplement table 3 ) (27, 34, 38 -40, 46) . one was a pilot trial that reported adherence and harms but not effects on risk for infections (27) . of the other 5 trials, 4 compared an n95 respirator versus surgical mask (38 -40, 46 ) and 1 (38) compared a surgical versus cloth mask ( table 2) . masks were generally used in addition to handwashing, though details on use of personal protective equipment (for example, eye protection, gowns, and gloves) were limited.three rcts (3532 participants) compared n95 respirators versus surgical masks in higher-risk settings (such as emergency departments, respiratory wards, pediatric wards, and intensive care units) (34, 39, 40). one trial (422 participants) found both n95 respirators and surgical mask to be associated with a very similar likelihood of a physician visit for acute respiratory illness (6.2% vs. 6.1%) (34). two trials (3110 participants) found an n95 respirator to be associated with decreased risk for clinical respiratory illness, with absolute differences that ranged from -2.8% to -7.7% (39, 40) .in all 3 trials, there were few cases of influenza-like illness, resulting in imprecise estimates (34, 39, 40). for laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory infections, 1 trial (34) that did not require hcws to have symptoms found no difference between an n95 respirator and a surgical mask in infection risk. in the other 2 trials, only symptomatic laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory infections were diagnosed; the number of cases was small, and estimates were imprecise. one trial reported no difference in the subgroup of laboratory-confirmed (not necessarily symptomatic) viral infections by nonpandemic coronaviruses but was underpowered for this outcome, with a total of 21 cases (34). the other 2 trials did not report nonpandemic coronavirus infections.two trials described above included 2 n95 respirator arms (39, 40) . one trial found that the effects of an n95 respirator versus surgical mask on clinical respiratory illness were similar for fit-tested and non-fit-tested n95 respirators (4.6% vs. 3.3%) (39) . the other trial found continuous use (at all times while working) of an n95 respirator to be associated with a small decrease in clinical respiratory illness risk versus intermittent use (only during high-risk procedures or barrier situations) of an n95 respirator (7.2% vs. 11.8%) (40).one trial (1868 participants) of hcws in higher-risk settings found a surgical mask to be associated with decreased risk for clinical respiratory illness, influenzalike illness, and laboratory-confirmed viral infections versus cloth masks, but estimates were imprecise and not statistically significant (38) .one trial of hcws (2862 participants) in lower-risk outpatient settings found no differences between an n95 respirator and a surgical mask in risk for clinical respiratory illness, influenza-like illness, laboratory-confirmed viral illness, or laboratory-confirmed influenza (46).reporting of harms in the rcts was suboptimal but did not indicate serious harms with mask use (supplement table 9 ). when reported, the most common adverse events were discomfort, breathing difficulties, and skin events. one trial found use of an n95 respirator to be associated with increased risk for headache and breathing difficulty compared with a surgical mask in hcws (39), but 1 trial found no difference between a p2 mask (n95 respirator equivalent) versus surgical mask in adverse events in persons in the community (37) . one trial reported no differences in harms between a surgical versus cloth mask in hcws (38) .this rapid, living review summarizes the evidence on the comparative effectiveness and effectiveness for preventing coronavirus and other respiratory infections. figure 2 is an evidence map summarizing the strength of evidence for key comparisons by setting and infection type (supplement table 10 , available at annals.org). the map shows that direct evidence on the comparative effectiveness of masks for preventing covid-19 due to sars-cov-2 infection is lacking. therefore, it was necessary to also consider evidence for other respiratory infections, though the applicability to covid-19 is uncertain. in addition, the strength of evidence varied from moderate to insufficient; no comparison was graded high strength of evidence.in community settings, one rct found no difference between n95 or equivalent respirators versus surgical masks in risk for noncoronavirus respiratory illness (37) . the rcts in community settings, typically conducted during influenza seasons, also did not indicate effectiveness of mask use versus no mask use for reducing viral respiratory infection risk, though mask compliance was suboptimal. observational data on mask use effectiveness in community settings for preventing infections associated with epidemic coronaviruses were limited but suggest possible reduced risk for sars-1. the difference in findings could be related to higher mask compliance in pandemic outbreak settings, greater effectiveness of masks for sars-1, or residual confounding.in hcws, observational studies suggest that n95 masks might be associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 infection compared with surgical masks, and mask use in general appears to be associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 infection. all studies were conducted in high-or moderate-risk settings, with uncertain applicability to low-risk settings (those without direct care of infected patients). review of rcts indicates that n95 respirators and surgical masks are probably associated with similar risk for influenza-like illness and laboratory-confirmed viral infections in highand low-risk settings. however, there was some inconsistency in effects of n95 respirators versus surgical masks on clinical respiratory infections in high-risk settings, with 1 trial (34) showing no difference in physician visits for respiratory illness and 2 trials (39, 40) showing n95 respirators to be associated with a small decrease in risk. the only trial comparing n95 respirators versus surgical masks in a low-risk (primary care) setting found no difference in risk for clinical respiratory illness (46). there was no evidence to address effects of extended or reuse of n95 respirators on infection risk; evidence on nonclinical outcomes (for example, measures of filtration, contamination, and mask failure) is summarized elsewhere (5) .our findings are generally consistent with those of recent systematic reviews on mask use in community and health care settings that found n95 respirators and surgical masks to be associated with similar risk for in-fluenza and influenza-like illness (58 -62) . it differs from prior reviews by considering both randomized trials and observational studies, evaluating mask use in community and health care settings, considering harms, comparing effects of consistent versus less consistent mask use, and including a more comprehensive set of relevant studies. we also implemented living review processes in order to incorporate new evidence on an ongoing basis. there was some overlap between this review and our living review on risk factors (including various types of personal protective equipment) for coronavirus infections in hcws (12) . this review differed from our prior review by including studies conducted in community settings, focusing on mask use, and including effects on noncoronavirus viral respiratory infections.the evidence base has important limitations. as noted, the evidence on mask use and risk for sars-cov-2 infection is very sparse. in randomized trials, adherence to mask use was suboptimal, potentially reducing estimates of effectiveness compared with use during pandemic outbreaks, when adherence may be higher. observational studies were retrospective, sus- * only observational evidence was included for these infections. † only rct evidence was included for these infections. ‡ n95 respirator or equivalent (for example, p2 mask).ceptible to recall bias and confounding, and did not address correlations between mask use and other infection prevention and control measures. applicability of evidence on masks and risk for sars-cov-1, mers-cov, and other viral respiratory illness to sars-cov-2 is uncertain. the applicability of evidence on influenza and influenza-like illnesses to sars-cov-2 could be reduced owing to differential transmission dynamics, lower mask adherence, or limited use of other personal protective equipment (63) . the review process had limitations. in particular, we used streamlined rapid review methods for searching and selecting studies. we did not perform critical appraisal of observational studies by using a formal instrument, though key methodological limitations were highlighted. we included 1 non-peer-reviewed study (21) , which could reduce data quality. meta-analysis was not attempted owing to study limitations and heterogeneity in study designs, comparisons, and analyses.research is urgently needed to clarify the comparative effectiveness of masks for transmission of covid-19 in community and health care settings; randomized trials are in progress (64, 65). observational studies that prospectively measure mask use, other infection prevention and control measures (accounting for potential correlations), and exposures could supplement randomized trials. given limitations in the supply of n95 respirators, understanding the effects of reuse or extended use of n95 respirators is a priority (66) .in conclusion, evidence on the effectiveness of masks for prevention of respiratory infection is stronger in health care than community settings. use of n95 respirators might reduce sars-cov-1 risk versus surgical masks in health care settings, but applicability to sars-cov-2 is uncertain. the authors of this manuscript are responsible for its content. statements in the manuscript do not necessarily represent the official views of or imply endorsement by ahrq or hhs.financial support: by ahrq (contract hhsa290201500009i, task order 75q80119f32021).disclosures: disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline.org /authors/icmje/conflictofinterestforms.do?msnum=m20-3213.on 30 january 2020, who declared the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. the who officially named this infectious disease coronavirus disease 2019 (sars-cov-2) on 12 february 2020. later, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) officially designated the virus as severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) based on phylogeny, taxonomy and established practice. as of june, 06 2020, 6,612,301 confirmed cases had been reported with 391,161 deaths across 213 countries and territories (who, rolling updates on coronavirus disease (sars-cov-2)).sars-cov-2 is a new disease and the world is still learning about how it spreads. in general, respiratory virus infection can occur through contact (direct or indirect), droplet spray in short range transmission, or aerosol in long-range transmission (airborne transmission). with no supply of antivirals and vaccines (who, coronavirus disease (sars-cov-2) pandemic), countries and individuals are looking at other ways to reduce the spread of pandemic sars-cov-2, particularly options that are cost effective and relatively easy to implement. one of the preventions and controls for further spread of sars-cov-2 is the use of facemask, within the context of other public health interventions such as regular handwashing/sanitization, and social distancing (chu et. al., 2020; crowling et. al., 2020; barasheed et. al., 2020; lau et. al., 2020; suess et. al., 2020; ngonghala et. al., 2020) . more recent studies have since added additional evidence of the enhanced protective value of masks (wang et. al., 2020) , and that their use would serve as an adjunctive preventive method regarding the sars-cov-2 outbreak (liang, mingming et al., 2020) . masks were previously not generally recommended for the public because they can be contaminated by other people's coughs and sneezes, or when putting them on or removing them (kwon 2017). they may also offer a false sense of security, although they are beneficial as covers of the mouths of people already infected (who, advice on the use of masks in the context of sars-cov-2). the who currently recommends medical-grade mask for people over 60 years when they are out and cannot socially distance, while all others should wear a three-layer fabric mask (who -coronavirus disease, 2020: advice for the public: myth busters). people without symptoms transmit the coronavirus without knowing they are infected (byambasuren et. al., 2020; wei et. al., 2020; cheng et. al., 2020) . as in prior respiratory infections (sim, moey, and tan, 2014), absence of any documented community cases in uganda appears to have led some people to perceive themselves to not be susceptible and the absence of any sars-cov-2 related death may be perceived as a less severe infection. recent research has shown that people are willing to wear facemasks to protect themselves against infection and further transmission for those already infected (chu et. al., 2020) . there is therefore need to quantify the effect and cost effectiveness of using facemasks in reducing the spread of sars-cov-2.uganda has adopted the use of face masks among the key interventions for prevention of the spread of sars-cov-2, and the government has supported expansion of local manufacturing of masks with a plan to distribute at least one free mask to all ugandans aged 6 years and older. however, there were mixed reactions from the public with concerns about the mandatory use as well as cost of the masks. adhering to public mask use might feel as a forfeiture of one's freedom due to the discomfort (scottie andrew, cnn), while others view it as a sign of fear, weakness or vulnerability. on the other hand, initial public health recommendations did not encourage use of masks in public except for the infected individuals (who, 2020). these mixed messages and uncertainty of the effectiveness of masks in public, may affect compliance with use of masks. masks are not physically comfortable (jefferson et. al., 2020; matusiak et. al, 2020) , and this may be enough to steer some people away from them. the aim of this study is to therefore determine the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of facemasks in reducing susceptibility to and infectivity of sars-cov-2. we also seek to determine what percentage of the population would have to wear this gear in order to reduce the number of coronavirus infections within the community.to estimate/forecast the population level impact and cost-effectiveness of public face masks, we design an seiaqrd mathematical model for a population where a proportion of the general population wears face masks for primary protection against acquiring sars-cov-2, while the other wears masks to prevent against transmitting disease. as in other infectious diseases, we model sars-cov-2 using a conceptual model indicating how individuals move from the susceptible state (at risk state) s, to the pre-symptomatic (those who have been exposed e), the infectious (those who display symptoms after the incubation period i), the asymptomatic (infected but not displaying symptoms a), the institutional quarantined q( traced contacts of the confirmed positives), the recovered (r) and the dead (d). the seiaqrd is parameterized using sars-cov-2 data from uganda to estimate the parameters for its transmission. we assumed 30 initial exposures where 20 are from boarder points and 10 health workers. the transmission rate is obtained by considering the probability of infection multiplied by the estimated number of contacts. to move from one state to another, we estimate the probability of transition using the duration an individual spends in a particular compartment until they are either recovered or dead.the model attempts to determine, if facemasks are effective in reducing susceptibility to and infectivity of sars-cov-2, the percentage of the population that would have to wear this gear to reduce the number of coronavirus infections within the community. the analysis and figures are generated using who guidelines of 3.7% exposure, 10% development of symptoms, and the 80:8:8:3:1 ratio of asymptomaticity, mild, moderate, severe and critical. initial population used is 100,000 and the number of contacts for each confirmed individual is 20. it is assumed that quarantining of contacts ends after 14 days, while isolation or viral clearance takes an average of 21 days for the asymptomatic, mild and moderate, 28 days for severe, and 35 for critical. we explored the effect of adherence to use of masks on viral reproduction, and the effect of early detection to community spread. the model was rerun with varying detection rates, when facemask adherence in both cases is 60%.we also hypothesize that masks can reduce exposure and perform a cost-utility analysis to examine whether they are cost effective as compared to quarantining and/or treatment of symptoms. two scenarios were considered: first, assuming that the entire population received and wore masks, we determine how much it would cost the country in comparison to the cases averted. secondly, how many cases would be averted if the funds were invested in other mitigation measures, or in treatment? we explore this using an initial number of 30 exposed individuals in the community, 20 at boarder points and 10 health workers.a simple model with the transit states and relative costs for each transition was used. we compare the costs for one mask to the unit costs for detection, contact tracing, quarantine, treatment including beds and ventilators. we also compare the cases averted for each intervention, and the quality adjusted life years. the stages of an infected individual are . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 12, 2020. . quantified using a transit state model and the unit cost for masking and treatment are compared. the cost-effectiveness analysis is quantified using the current costs by the ministry of health for quarantining of contacts and treatment of the symptomatic sars-cov-2 infected individuals. figure 1 shows that in the case when 80% of the population do not wear masks and only 20% wear masks, one infected individual can lead to two new infections. a slight reduction in the replication number is observed, but it does not go below unity and the virus is contained. when the proportion that wears masks is increased to 80% there is a tremendous reduction in the new infections resulting from one symptomatic individual in the community (figure 2 ). in figure 2 , we observe that even when modeled with a low mask coverage, the implementation of facemasks still has a relatively large impact on the size of the sars-cov-2 epidemic. however, the greatest reduction is observed when a high percentage wears facemask. in this case, the replication number is reduced to below unity and the virus is suppressed.next we determine the effect of facemasks to community exposure when they are worn to protect the users. when wearing facemasks primarily to protect against exposure of the users to sars-cov-2, there is a high number of exposed individuals in the community. however, when facemask coverage is increased to 90-100%, there is a 34.2% reduction in exposure within 35 days ( figure 3 ). as seen in figure 3 , the limiting value is attained faster and this might lead to possible strong repercussions in the short run, because of limited health system capacity. when masks are worn to control the source is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.11.20128272 doi: medrxiv preprint and protect against transmitting the virus, the same reduction is observed with only 0-30% wearing the face masks ( figure 4 ).in this case, face masking is effective in lowering the replication number to below unity, thereby delaying the spread of the virus in the short run. when face masks are worn to protect against acquiring the virus, the replication number reduces but not below 1 and the curve is not flattened ( figure 5 ). in case of face masking for source control and prevention of further spread, the limiting value takes longer to be achieved but with higher reduction in exposure. we further observe a reduced number of cumulative deaths (42.28%) in the case of more face mask coverage (figure 6 ), and extra time to expand the healthcare system capacity to provide care for those who eventually contract the virus.for example, when face mask coverage is between 80-100%, there is a 91% reduction in sars-cov-2 exposure and the curve is flattened after 220 days. in both scenarios, compliance and adherence must be ensured. we explored the effect of adherence to use of masks on viral reproduction.we find that adherence to public facemasks as a mitigation measure reduces the replacement number to below unity, thereby controlling further spread of sars-cov-2 ( figure 7) . we observe that when individuals adhere to face masking, it provides a faster reduction in replacement number. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.11.20128272 doi: medrxiv preprintwe also point out that the mask used should comply with the who guidelines of medicalgrade masks (who, information on sars-cov-2 and ncds) or a three-layer fabric mask. with low efficiency of masks, sars-cov-2 will still spread within the community.with effective public face masking, we observed a reduction in exposure. next, we sought to determine, how detection rates affect community exposure as an additional control strategy. currently in uganda, once detected, an individual is quarantined until they are cured. how would the detection rate affect the number of exposed or asymptomatic individuals in the community amidst face masking? figures 8 and 9 show that early detection is paramount to retrieve exposed or symptomatic individuals quickly from the community to minimize further spread. as in prior cases, faster dynamics are observed when face masks are worn to reduce susceptibility, but higher reductions are obtained with high detection rates. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.11.20128272 doi: medrxiv preprint cost effective analysis is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.11.20128272 doi: medrxiv preprint although public face masking has been shown to be effective in controlling further spread of sars-cov-2, the cost-effectiveness of this strategy in uganda is unknown. next we determine the cost-effectiveness of facemasks in uganda using the transit states model in figure 9 , with inputs from the ministry of health. in this case we assume 30% adherence to facemasks. the total population used is 40 million, and of this, only 12,000,000 wear masks. thus, 28,000,000 are at risk of exposure. therefore, the number of individuals who are at risk of exposure is 3.7% of 28 million which is 1,036,000. as per who, only of 10% of exposures result in successful infection. therefore, the total number of individuals who eventually get sars-cov-2 infection is 103,600. the third intervention is providing masks for 12,000,000 and treating 103,600. in this study, we look at the efficacy of face masks as a mitigation measure against sars-cov-2. a mathematical model was used to determine the impact and cost effectiveness of face masks to reduce susceptibility or as a source control and prevention of transmission. our results show that when a proper mask is used correctly, there is reduction in exposure, and a delay in the spread of the virus within the community. it also flattens the curve and provides time to expand the healthcare capacity. we caution here that these results are achievable when a proper mask is used efficiently. any mask is only as efficient as the way it is used, fitted, worn and discarded. the reason it can cause more spreading of the virus is because people don't fit their masks properly and continue touching the outer contaminated surface to adjust it, without hand washing or sanitizing thereafter. therefore, our results are obtainable with continued public adherence to correct use of proper face masks. we also note that other primary interventions, such as handwashing, sanitizing and social distance "combination intervention", are essential as public health approaches. model simulations, using data relevant to sars-cov-2 dynamics in uganda suggest that broad adoption of face masks may meaningfully reduce community transmission of sars-cov-2 and decrease peak hospitalizations and deaths. with these results, we caution that masks are efficient when worn to protect against catching the virus, and for source control/protection against further transmission.comparing the implementation costs of face masking, we find that simultaneous provision of face masks and treatment is a more efficient and perhaps sustainable approach than provision of face masks only, or provision of only treatment.these results reinforce the current uganda policy which integrates masks to suppress and contain sars-cov-2. the scenario with dual purpose to protect and prevent further transmission is more efficient and people should be made aware of this and encouraged to wear masks.this report provides an insight into the potential community-wide impact of widespread face mask use by the general population. the mathematical model parameterized using ugandan data relevant to sars-cov-2 transmission suggests strong benefits of the general use of face masks in public. from the study we recommend that facemasks i. should be nearly universal if supplies permit to ensure nation-wide compliance ii.should be adopted as early as possible for the best population-level benefit iii.be used concurrently with other interventions and viewed as a complement to other public health non-pharmaceutical interventions and not as an alternative use even when sars-cov-2 burden is low will pay dividends iv.are most efficient for source control, but valuable as both source control and primary preventionthese are theoretical results and must be interpreted with caution, owing to a combination of potentially high rates of noncompliance with mask use in the community, uncertainty with respect to the intrinsic effectiveness of (especially homemade) masks at blocking respiratory droplets and/or aerosols, and uncertainty regarding the basic mechanisms for respiratory infection transmission. however, these results suggest a significant value even to low quality masks when used widely in the community. despite the uncertainty, the potential for benefit, the lack of obvious harm, and the precautionary principle, we strongly recommend facemask use nationwide, especially if there is no diversion for healthcare supply.wear cloth masks when leaving their home. 2 while not a requirement, the cdc strongly recommends the use of these masks and has provided a guide for citizens to create them.while masks are effective at slowing the spread of novel viruses, like the h5n1 avian flu, citizens in areas where mask wearing is not common are generally not very compliant with these recommendations (macintyre et al., 2009) . how, then, can the usa encourage individuals to adopt this practice? i expect that if the government is able to carefully tailor its messages to individuals about the potential benefits of mask wearing, compliance can be increased. strong and effective messaging from the government can minimize the impacts of crises, like natural disasters (coombs, 1995) . importantly, effective messaging can increase compliance with government recommendations (mcadams and nadler, 2005) . related to the covid-19 pandemic, government messaging can play an important role. in italy, compliance with government messages is generally high, even among individuals who are not inclined to trust the government (barari et al., 2020) . in the usa, compliance is also high (pew research center, 2020), though differences emerge based on how the government messages the threat. when risks to older americans are highlighted, younger americans are marginally less complaint with government recommendations, but messages about younger americans help individuals see covid-19 as a greater threat (utych and fowler, 2020) . while compliance with recommendations is high, it is clear that messaging strategies from the government can influence these levels of compliance.i examine how government messages interact with individual ideology to encourage the use of cloth masks, per recent cdc recommendations. americans are deeply polarized along partisan and ideological lines (mason, 2018) , and this effect extends to response to the covid-19 crisis. preliminary data find that conservatives and republicans are less likely to report intention to conduct simple activities to prevent the spread of the disease, like washing their hands and covering their cough, than liberals and democrats (fowler and utych, 2020) . i argue that the types of messages individuals receive can help bridge this partisan and ideological divide.regulatory focus theory (rft) argues that individual motivation is driven by two conceptspromotion and prevention (higgins, 1997) . promotion focuses on achieving positive outcomes, while prevention focuses on avoiding negative outcomes (higgins, 1997) . importantly, these goals are connected to political ideologyas conservatives tend to achieve happiness through prevention, while liberals achieve happiness through promotion (choma, busseri and sadava, 2009 ). liberals tend to show a sensitivity to detecting positive affect, while conservatives show a sensitivity to detecting negative affect (tomkins, 1965) . when information is framed as a gain, it can be seen as a promotional focus, while information framed as a loss, it is seen as a prevention focus (lee and aaker, 2004) . this suggests that how wearing masks in public is framed by political elites could increase compliance, but that these frames are likely to work differently on liberals and conservatives.rft provides two clear hypotheses with respect to government messaging on wearing surgical masks. the first hypothesis is that messages related to promotion will increase the likelihood that liberals comply with wearing facemasks. the second hypothesis predicts that messages related to prevention will increase the likelihood that conservatives comply with wearing facemasks.participants were recruited from amazon's mechanical turk (mturk) on april 15, 2020. 3 considering worries about bots on mturk, or automated, non-serious responses designed solely to collect payment, care was taken per moss and litman (2018) to screen out bots or non-us respondents. 4 given that general compliance with regulations is high, it is likely that the effects of messaging will be small. using a cohen's d of a small effect, this would require 139 participants per experimental condition, of which there are 3. however, given that only about 1/3 of respondents on mturk identify as conservative, i recruited 3 times that may participants to ensure enough conservatives per group. this gives a total of 1,251 respondents recruited to participate in this study. i conducted a post data collection, pre-analysis screening for bad ip addresses per kennedy et al. (2018) , which left a total of 1,216 respondents.the subject pool was typical of mturk samples. age of participants ranged from 18 to 79, with a mean of 38.6. 48% of the sample identified as female and 76% as white. the sample was highly educated, as 60.2% had a bachelor's degree or higher, and also skewed liberal, with 54.3% identifying as liberal, 17.2% as moderate, and 28.5% as conservative. after answering a brief series of demographics questions, participants were randomly assigned to one of three experimental conditionsa control condition, a prevention condition, and a promotion condition.in the control condition, individuals were presented with purely informational text about the cdc's mask recommendation. in the prevention condition, they were presented information that this recommendation will help prevent negative health and economic outcomes, while in the promotion condition, they were presented information that this recommendation will lead to positive health and economic outcomes. the text of these treatments is below.control:the cdc has recently recommended that all americans wear a facial mask when leaving their homes, in order to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.while mturk may not provide the best sample, trading off costs with other samples makes it appropriate, especially for experimental research. using recommendations on best practices for avoiding lowquality responses (see kennedy et al., 2018) can significantly increase the quality of data obtained from mturk, which comes at a fraction of the price of other sampling methods. 4 these include a brief english language test question, where participants were asked to solve a simple math word problem. additionally, i ask participants to identify a picture of an eggplant, which has different primary words to describe it in the usa and india, to further screen. additional requirements on mturk use their screening functions, where individuals must be listed as located in the usa, over 18 years old, have over 100 hits approved and have a 95% or greater approval rating on all tasks (see kennedy et al., 2018 for these recommendations). lastly, i use advice from kennedy et al. (2018) on ip address screening in qualtrics to ensure individuals are not coming from outside of the usa.the cdc has recently recommended that all americans wear a facial mask when leaving their homes, in order to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.following this recommendation will help us prevent americans from dying and prevent our economy from entering a long-term recession.the cdc has recently recommended that all americans wear a facial mask when leaving their homes, in order to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.following this recommendation will help us to keep americans healthy and allow our economy to return to normal more quickly.after reading this text, individuals responded to four dependent measures, measured on a seven-point scale, ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). the first is a behavioral intention question -"i will wear a mask every time i leave my home." the next two are attitudinal questions -"it is best for society if everyone wears a mask when they leave their home" and "i don't think wearing a mask will impact the spread of the coronavirus." a final question, asking participants whether they would like to get more information about purchasing face masks, was asked as a yes or no question, to better get at behavior, rather than behavioral intention.these analyses follow a pre-analysis plan, registered with open science framework (osf) at https://osf.io/gbpnq/. recall that both hypotheses are conditional on ideologypromotion messages should work better with liberals, and prevention messages better with conservatives. three sets of analyses were pre-registered in this plan.since rft predictions about ideology focus primarily on direction of ideology rather than strength (choma, busseri and sadava, 2009 ), i first separate ideology between liberals and conservatives. ideology was asked on the standard american national election study (anes) seven-point scale, allowing respondents to select responses ranging from "very conservative" to "very liberal," with an option for respondents to select that they "haven't thought much about this."those who report their ideology as "moderate/middle of the road" or respond that they "haven't thought much about this" are excluded from analysis. respondents who answer "very conservative," "conservative," or "somewhat conservative" are coded as "conservative," while those who answer "very liberal," "liberal," or "somewhat liberal" will be coded as "liberal." this creates a dichotomous measure of ideology, with individuals coded as either liberal (1) or conservative (0). this measure is then interacted with each of the treatments, with the control group serving as reference. of course, rft provides relatively unclear predictions about how strength of ideology might impact the power of these types of messages on attitudes and behaviors. as an additional set of analyses, i interact the full ideological measure (ranging from very conservative to very liberal) with the treatments, rather than the dichotomous measure. this allows for the inclusion of ideological moderates in these analyses but still requires excluding those who do not place themselves on the ideological scale.as a last set of analyses, i examine these relationships conditional on a match between a participant's stated partisanship and the partisanship of their governor, given that recent work finds that individuals are less likely to comply with measures when they do not share partisanship with their governor (cornelson and miloucheva, 2020) . while there is little theory available to suggest that types of messages might interact with this, it is an important exploratory analysis given the findings of cornelson and miloucheva (2020) , which are directly related to covid-19. this will create a three-way interaction between the treatments, respondent ideology, and respondent co-partisanship with their state's governor. individual partisanship is based off of the standard two-pronged anes partisanship question, including partisan leaners. this is matched with an individual's self-reported state of residence and the partisanship of the current governor of that state.given that this research design relies upon an observed moderator of ideology, i include controls for observed covariates (kam and trussler, 2017) age, gender, race, education, and whether a respondent has a co-partisan governor or not, since research shows this affects compliance with covid-19 related regulations (cornelson and miloucheva, 2020) .the results of the first set of analyses, based on a binary ideological indicator, are presented graphically in figure 1 . 5 the results for a moderation by the seven-point ideological measure are available in figure 2 , while the results for moderation by both ideology and gubernatorial co-partisanship are presented in figure 3 . all regression models are available in the appendix (supplementary material).as shown in figure 1 , interesting, though primarily null, results emerge. there are no differences between treatments for anyone on the intention to buy mask measureindividuals were equally likely, across treatment groups and ideologies, to request information on where to purchase a mask. the behavioral intention variable, however, shows that the promotion message has an effect on desire to wear a mask. however, contrary to expectations, this does not increase the willingness of liberals but decreases the willingness of conservatives to wear a mask, relative to both the control and prevention message. similar patterns emerge for the attitudinal measuresliberals are not affected significantly by the treatments, but conservatives are less likely to see the benefit of masks, and more likely to believe they will not impact the spread, when exposed to the promotion message, compared to the control and the prevention message.these results are substantively similar, though a bit more difficult to digest and less statistically precise. the gap between treatments still tends to dampen for liberals and is larger for conservatives but does not reach conventional levels of 5 all figures error bars indicating 95% one-tailed confidence intervals around the estimate. statistical significance. it appears, however, that the effect of messages is more conditional upon direction of ideology, rather than strength, as no major differences in treatment effects emerge for strong and slight conservatives. these results show little difference based on shared partisanship with one's governor for conservativesregardless of partisanship of a conservative respondent's governor, they respond to the messages in similar fashion, and the promotion message still seems to dampen their compliance with, and favorability of, the mask wearing measure. for liberals, however, a different pattern emerges, in line with expectations from rft. when liberals are exposed to the promotion message, their attitudes toward mask wearing change, compared to the other messages, dependent upon their governor's partisanship. liberals are more likely to believe that wearing masks is best for society and is less likely to believe that it will not impact the spread of coronavirus when exposed to the promotion message, but only when their governor shares their partisanship. these differences disappear when their governor does not share their partisanship.these analyses find little support for how rft can inform our messaging about mask wearing during the covid-19 crisis. while messages related to prevention seem to have no impact on behaviors and attitudes toward wearing facial masks, regardless of individual ideology, promotion related messages do have some impact, though in unpredicted ways. rft argues that liberals should be more receptive to promotion messages, and i find some very limited support of this prediction respond positively to promotion messages, under a specific conditionthat they share partisanship with their state's governor. however, the most consistent effects occur with conservatives showing less support for mask wearing when exposed to the promotion messagea finding not in line with predictions, which predict that conservatives should not be affected differently by this message than the control message.why are prevention messages no more (or less) effective than a purely information message? while this study is unable to examine the exact mechanism, perhaps prevention messages simply do not work in this context. official and unofficial messaging about the covid-19 crisis has heavily focused on prevention -"flattening the curve" is about stopping and slowing infections, an inherently prevention focused message. perhaps the focus on prevention messages in general has rendered additional information about prevention moot, or perhaps individuals think of the mask wearing recommendation as prevention message by default. in general, this provides little support for targeting prevention and promotion messages based on ideology, as rft would suggest, related to mask wearing in response to the covid-19 crisis. it seems that, generally, control messaging (without a promotion or prevention cue) and prevention messaging work equally well at promoting pro-mask attitudes and behaviors. while a difference emerges related to promotion messaging, it is unexpected, and not in line with rft predictions, serving to dampen support from conservatives. further work should examine this unexpected finding, to determine whether it is specifically related to the covid-19 crisis, or if it broadly extends to how conservatives receive promotion focused messages.this leaves policy recommendations a bit muddledto the extent there is an impact, it is that promotion messages make conservatives less complaint. this suggests that a purely informational message, without an additional prod, may be the most effective strategysince the evidence here provides little support for rft theories of ideological differences in response to messaging about mask wearing during the covid-19 crisis, it is likely easiest to provide a straightforward message.the covid-19 pandemic caused by the virus sars-cov-2, which first emerged in wuhan, china, in the province of huebei in december 2019, is posing a huge global health threat. the total number of global deaths on the date of submitting this paper (24 april 2020) has risen to 191.263, with 2.717.004 infected (european centre for disease prevention and control, 2020c). the economic impact will be undoubtedly colossal and we are still unaware of the real consequences this will have on each country's economy and on the labor market. it is not the first pandemic that we have suffered, but the dimensions of this one are especially shocking and only comparable to the flu pandemic of 1918, a little over a century ago. it is certainly a public health threat that goes beyond occupational health and safety, and it transgresses the borders of business organizations, being of primary concern to virologists and epidemiologists, but also to technicians, specialists and academics in the field of safety who can make a significant contribution to its prevention. in addition to the past and present research carried out to create detection tests, vaccines, antivirals and other treatments, the main measures used in the health, work and domestic spheres have focused on social distancing and lockdown, as well as on the monitoring of safety protocols, the adoption of hygiene measures, and the use of personal protection equipment such as masks, gloves, etc. this has meant that terms that were previously used by occupational health and safety professionals alone, such as ffp2, ffp3, n95, kn95, etc., have become part of the common language and have had a positive effect in the field of health and safety by popularizing and increasing the culture of prevention of society as a whole.however, we cannot forget the importance that the world health organization (who) has played in this context. it initially made different recommendations for the groups including healthcare personnel, people in direct contact with the infected and people with symptoms (holland et al., 2020 , jansson et al., 2020 on the one hand, and for the rest of the people on the other. while recommending the use of masks for the first three groups of people, it did not do the same for individuals, where it focused on measures of social distancing, minimum interpersonal distance, and personal hygiene, more specifically the adequate washing of hands, since airborne propagation was ruled out under normal conditions (who, 2020a) . to date, although the who acknowledges that "wearing a medical mask is one of the prevention measures that can limit the spread of certain respiratory viral diseases, including covid-19" (who, 2020c) it also says that "however, the use of a mask alone is insufficient to provide an adequate level of protection, and other measures should also be adopted". therefore, on 20 april 2020, it still recommends that "if you are healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you are taking care of a person with covid-19" (who, 2020b) . nevertheles, it advises that each country apply a risk-based approach, that is, considering the benefits (possibility of reducing the potential risk of exposure during the presymptomatic period) as well as the potential risks (self-contamination, false sense of security, impact on mask shortages), when deciding whether to recommend the use of masks by the general population (who, 2020c) .in this sense, the success of policies followed by countries such as south korea, china and the czech republic regarding the use of masks from the very beginning, in addition to other measures, have demonstrated their benefits (world economic forum, 2020) .news of this has spread through social networks and the media, and has meant that the use of masks has become widespread in countries such as italy, spain and others hit hard by the pandemic, despite the fact that to date the who still does not explicitly recommend it.this has led to the european center for disease prevention and control (european centre for disease prevention and control, 2020a) to recognize that the use of masks by the population could reduce the spread of the infection, but it remembers that this should be a complementary measure to preventive hygiene measures. likewise, the centers for disease control and prevention (2020b) recommends the use of cloth face coverings to help slow the spread of covid-19 and the government of spain recommends the use of hygienic masks by the population (ministry of health of spain, 2020b).these circumstances together with the mass use of masks by health workers, essential service companies, cleaners, supermarkets and other people in food supply, security, transport, etc., have caused a shortage, leading the authorities in different countries to confiscate ppe and medical masks, among other means, that are used to fight the disease. furthermore, this situation is expected to persist for some time, since the who itself estimates that approximately 89 million medical masks are needed each month to respond to covid-19 (who, 2020d) . this is why governments, hospitals, companies and even individuals, have also begun to look for solutions of all kinds, including the reuse, cleaning and disinfection of certified disposable masks, either personal protection equipment or medical, and the manufacture of homemade or non-certified ones (european centre for disease prevention and control, 2020a) . in addition, at the time of submission of this paper, a lockdown is in place in many countries around the world, but once it is lifted, a greater number of masks will be required to meet increasing needs.consequently, prevention professionals, companies and individuals, from all over the world need to know how to disinfect and sterilize masks that, in principle, were designed, manufactured and certified for short-term use and subsequent disposal, and also to be aware of the effectiveness of homemade or non-certified ones. thus, in this publication we conducted a rapid review of scientific publications, preprints, protocols, guides and other information available online with two objectives. on the one hand, to identify in the scientific literature the effectiveness of disposable or non-certified masks. on the other hand, to identify the main strategies for their disinfection and/or sterilization, as well as their advantages and disadvantages. (une, 2020a (une, , 2020b (une, , 2020d . these masks are intended for people or children without symptoms who are not susceptible to using surgical, medical or ppe/filter masks to protect them against particles, in accordance with the restrictions established by the government of spain, which currently recommends these latest types of masks for healthcare workers and people infected or with symptoms of covid-19. therefore, table 1 focus on disposable mask such as ppe, medical mask and others that can be single use (non-reusable hygienic mask) or some uses (barrier mask, reusable hygienic mask, cloth mask…). reusable face mask respirators, such as reusable half mask or full face mask, that allow long-term use by changing their filters are not included in this classification (see picture 3). due to the public health threat caused by sars-cov-2, there has been a lack of disposable masks certified to meet european technical standards. in this situation, the european commission published the commission recommendation (eu) 2020/403 of march 13, 2020 on conformity assessment and market surveillance procedures within the context of the covid-19 threat to allow, as long as the shortage lasts, the commercialization of ppe or medical devices that comply with non-european standards even if they do not have the ce marking. who recommendations may be followed for their selection, but an adequate level of protection must be guaranteed and the corresponding notifying authority immediately informed (european commission, 2020) .similarly and subsequently, on march 28, 2020 and april 3, 2020 (food and drug administration, 2020a, 2020b), the united states government published authorizations to import non-niosh-approved filtering facepiece respirators from other countries (see table 3 ).this situation of widespread shortages has led the civil society in different countries to dedicate itself to making all kinds of improvised facemasks without any guarantee of certification or homologation (see picture 6). initially, individuals began to do this and the idea spread across social networks, which resulted in misunderstandings and sometimes including intentional fakes or hoaxes by trolls. thus, individuals and even organizations began to prepare masks from different types of materials that allow users to cover their mouth and nose. subsequently, the authorities or institutions themselves have released their own documents to maximize the effectiveness of masks and minimize the negative impact of not being manufactured in accordance with the quality standards established by international standardization and certification bodies. reusable hygienic masks for adults and children. materials, design, manufacturing, marking and use requirements (une, 2020d) . the interesting fact is that these specifications allow conformity assessment to be certified by a laboratory based on technical specifications une-en 14683:2019+ac: 2019, or another equivalent., which offers greater guarantees to wearers.the advantage of hygienic masks compared to barrier masks is that the former have been tested following some of the procedures of en 14683:2019+ac:2019, achieving good results in the acceptance criteria for the effectiveness of bacterial filtration and breathability, as explained in the next section.the development of this specification is positive due to the effect it may have on the availability of masks for the general population, or rather people that are healthy or asymptomatic, since many countries have begun to announce that they will require the use of masks despite the current shortage. however, it still takes time for hygienic masks to reach the population. as it mentioned above, on april 8, 2020, the european centre for disease prevention and control recommended the use of masks by the population as a complementary preventive measure (european centre for disease prevention and control, 2020a) and there are countries, such as spain, that recommend their use beginning april 13, 2020, without sufficient stock to cover the entire population. this is why "improvised" or "community" masks have become crucial and must be used with caution, since their effectiveness has not been proven. the effectiveness of disposable masks is different depending on the type and  8% for ffp2. 2% for ffp3.in the case of the north american standard 42 cfr part 84 developed by niosh (niosh, 1995) , nine types of filters are established, composed of three levels of minimum filtration efficiency and three categories of resistance to the degrading effects of the oil at the workstation. these resistance categories are: "n" non-oil resistant, "r" oil resistant and "p" oil-proof. the levels of efficiency of filtration against aerosols have been determined considering a 0.3 µm aerodynamic mass median diameter and these are: 95% for n95, r95, p95. 99% for n99, r99, p99. 99.97% for n100, r100 and p100.logically, other regulations also establish their particular level of effectiveness. table 4 . although the effectiveness of the masks depends substantially on their correct use, and they can often be overestimated (garrigou et al, 2020) , it is especially interesting to know the comparative effectiveness of different types of masks, assuming their correct use, to determine the level of protection in each case. in particular, the bibliography regarding the comparative effectiveness of ppe-certified, surgical and other masks has been reviewed below.thus, in a hse study, gawn et al. (2008) compared in a laboratory the protection for airborne particles of surgical masks against ffp respirators and found the lowest level of respiratory protection in surgical masks against ffp respirators. specifically, they calculated a reduction factor for exposure to live aerosolized influenza virus as the ratio of the particle concentration inside and outside for each mask. their results indicated that a properly adjusted ffp respirator can provide a mean reduction factor in exposure of 100 while a surgical mask would provide a mean reduction factor of 6. on the other hand, lee et al (2008) have undertaken the task of comparing the n95 respirators and surgical masks against particles representing bacterial and viral size ranges. as a result, their study found that around 29% of n95 respirators and 100% of surgical masks had a protection factor <10 (protection factor set by osha for that type of mask). so, they concluded that the n95s may not offer the expected protection level against bacteria and viruses. however, in 2016 we found the work of smith et al. (2016) in which they compared the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus surgical masks in protecting healthcare workers from acute respiratory infection. their study did not find sufficient evidence to uniquely determine that n95 respirators are superior to surgical masks as protection for healthcare workers against acute respiratory infections in clinical settings.however, they pointed out that in the laboratory setting, the n95 respirators seemed to offer greater protection than the surgical masks. a similar study was carried out by radonovich et al (2019) to compare the effect of n95 respirators vs. surgical masks to protect healthcare workers against influenza and other viral respiratory infections. they found no significant difference between the two masks in the incidence of influenza in the laboratory setting.regarding the comparison with non-certified or homemade masks, rengasamy et al (2010) carried out an evaluation of the filtration efficiency of this type of mask against particles. to do this, they tested these masks for 20-1000 nm size particles, specifically, their results indicate that the penetration of the medical mask by the particles was 44% while the penetration for the cloth mask was almost 97%.in addition to the above, some organizations indicate that these improvised masks should be the last solution and for low-risk cases, but that they can even increase the risk of infection due to humidity, liquid diffusion and virus retention (european centre for disease prevention and control, 2020b).to analyze reuse, disinfection and sterilization, we must differentiate between the different types of marks presented in table 1 .we must remember that either ppe (-ffp respirators) or medical face masks manufactured according to technical standards, require that they be discarded after use, since they are heat sensitive and are not designed to undergo a process as severe as sterilization (rowan and laffey, 2020) . this is why manufacturers like 3m initially advised against the sterilization process (3m, 2020a). however, due to the shortage of these masks caused by the covid-19 crisis, manufacturers, including 3m, governments and related agencies and institutions began to analyze the reuse, disinfection or sterilization of ppe (-ffp respirators).as far as reuse of ppe is concerned, the first thing to know is how long the sars-cov-2 remains on surfaces. kampf et al. (2020) analyzed 22 studies focused on this question and studied different human coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus or endemic human coronaviruses (hcov). they concluded that human coronaviruses remain on inanimate surfaces such as metal, wood, paper, glass or plastic for up to 9days, but they can be efficiently inactivated through disinfection with 62-71% ethanol, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite within 1 minute of exposure.however, it is important to note that none of the studies analyzed by kampf et al. (2020) focused specifically on sars-cov-2 and that only one of them showed 9-day persistence of the coronavirus, all the others indicated 5 days at most. in another recent study, tests were conducted with the sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 in aerosols and on various surfaces. their results indicate that sars-cov-2 remains on plastic, stainless steel, copper and cardboard surfaces for up to 72 hours ( van doremalen et al., 2020) .based on this study and given the need to reuse ffp respirators, the us government has recommended that each healthcare worker receives five ffp respirators and uses one per day in a specific order. at the end of the workday, the ffp respirator must be kept in a breathable paper bag and stored by order of use. if the worker stores and uses their ffp respirators in order each day, a minimum of five days between the use of each ffp respirator elapses (centers for disease control and prevention, 2020a). however, these recommendations should be treated with caution, since ffp respirators are designed for single-use and could be damaged, lose some of their properties and become ineffective as a barrier against contagion. furthermore, due to the aforementioned shortage, five ffp respirators may not be available per healthcare worker. therefore, it is necessary to study disinfection or sterilization methods.in this regard, it should be noted that any method used for the disinfection of ffp respirators must guarantee effectiveness against covid-19, that the mask is not damaged in terms of the adjustment to the face or its filtration capacity, and that it is not harmful to the person wearing the respirator (3m, 2020b). therefore, governments, manufacturers, scientists or experts in the field are working towards finding the most effective method for disinfecting ffp respirators against covid-19.under these premises, multiple potential methods for disinfection and sterilization have begun to be studied. some based on chemical methods, such as the use of h 2 o 2 hydrogen peroxide, chlorine dioxide, bleach, alcohol, soap solutions, ethylene oxide, ozone decontamination, etc., and physical methods, such as the use of heat with steam or with dry air, uv rays, gamma irradiation, microwave, etc. (mohapatra, s, 2017) , although strict follow-up of procedures is undoubtedly of vital importance, and this is not always the case (bessesen et al., 2015) .like all respiratory equipment used for protection against particles, filtering ffp2 respirators are thermally tested for their marking and certification, which entails subjecting the equipment to 70ºc for 24 hours, followed by another 24 hours at 30ºc (ministry of labor and social economy, 2020). it therefore appears that this method is of singular importance. therefore, song et al. (2020) based on this, they proposed practical recommendations to implement a simple disinfection box system using inexpensive and readily available components that could be used for ffp respirators. the ozone concentrations required are 10 to 20 ppm with an exposure for at least 10 minutes. they noted that it is an improvised solution for situations of need such as the covid-19 pandemic, but not an optimal long-term solution. among the advantages of ozone gas, they indicated that its virucidal action is faster than the degradation effect of the ffp respirator, which is effective for disinfecting fibrous materials, as it is a dry virucidal, and that it reaches shadows and crevices in the process disinfection, unlike ultraviolet radiation as will be seen later. recently, another report also focusing on the use of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (uvgi) on ffp respirators (n95) has been published online by nebrasca medicine (lowe et al., 2020) . however, it must be considered that the effectiveness of uv depends on the dose or fluence and shading, since it only inactivates by irradiating surfaces. the ffp respirators must thus be irradiated from both sides (rowan and laffey, 2020) . the internationalmedical center of beijing (2020) indicates that uv disinfection does not affect the filtration levels of the ffp respirators, although it does not recommend its use because the inactivation effect it produces on ffp respirator fibers is unknown.this has given rise to uncertainty about the actual decontamination capacity in the inner layers of the ffp respirators. thus, the (centers for disease control and prevention, 2020a) warns that "uvgi is unlikely to kill all the viruses and bacteria on an filtering facepiece respirator due to shadow effects produced by the multiple layers of the filtering facepiece respirator´s construction". therefore, it would be necessary to develop methods or procedures that can eliminate this uncertainty. in this regard, fisher and shaffer (2011) established a method to evaluate decontamination of inner layers of ffp respirators (n95) using ultraviolet-c. therefore, based on this study, a standard procedure could be established to evaluate the effectiveness of uvgi in the inner layers and confirm or rule out its possible use for the inactivation of the coronavirus in ffp respirators.the use of ultraviolet radiation is currently being evaluated by 3m with a 254 mm uv lamp for its possible use as an ffp respirator decontamination method during the covid-19 pandemic. however, the evaluations have not yet been completed nor has its use been authorized by the fda (3m, 2020b). according to n95decon (2020c), the advantages of this could be that ≥1 j/cm of uv-c inactivates viruses similar to sars-cov-2 on n95s and the n95 maintains fit and filter performance after 10-20 cycles of 1-1.2 j/cm uv-c; and the disadvantages are that uv-c may not reach the inner layer of the ffp respirator, shadows may appear giving rise to parts of the ffp respirator that have not been decontaminated, straps may not be completely decontaminated, the strap and facepiece may be damaged after uv-c and at high uv-c doses (≥120 j/cm) the n95 can be damaged.on the other hand , the use of hydrogen peroxide or h 2 o 2 has also been recently evaluated, although there were already previous studies such as that carried out bybattelle, an fda contractor, which analyzed the decontamination and reuse of ffp respirators (n95) using hydrogen peroxide vapor (hpv) and the bioquell clarus c system. in this study, only the efficacy of disinfection for the inactivation of g.stearothermophilus spores was verified. they specifically demonstrated that they had achieved a 6-log reduction in organism and that inactivation continued to occur in up to 50 decontamination cycles. regarding mechanical integrity and performance in up to 50 cycles, the filtration capacity was maintained, but the adjustability was affected because the strap became degraded after 10 to 20 cycles and broke after 30 cycles. the recommended wash cycle was 480 minutes. in this way, they demonstrated that this process was feasible to decontaminate large amounts of ffp respirators simultaneously (up to 50 cycles) with hydrogen peroxide vapor, since the filtration requirements of ffp respirators were maintained, although they recommended studying alternative materials for the straps or studying other models of ffp respirators (battelle, 2016) .actually, based on this study, schwartz et al. (2020) have performed validation tests on hydrogen peroxide vapor (hpv) to decontaminate ffp respirators (n95) using the bioquell 61 clarus™ c system with a 35% hydrogen peroxide solution for the time recommended by battelle (2016) . they have validated the method and point out that ffp respirators retain their filtering effectiveness after 50 cycles in the laboratory. in addition, they performed fit tests and the results indicate that no loss of fit occurred.therefore, they say that they are going to start using this decontamination process, which has been internally validated and approved by the duke institutional biosafety review committee (ibrc).it is important to note that, on march 29, 2020, the fda issued an emergency use table 3 . based on these, it was preliminarily concluded that "double sterilization using a short process with hydrogen peroxide gives an acceptable result" (dutch national institute for public health and the environment, 2020). the use of ethylene oxide, which is widespread in hospitals, is less safe than hydrogen peroxide vaporization and less environmentally friendly. research seems to confirm that the coronavirus is highly affected by vaporization of hydrogen peroxide, which is lethal with a concentration of 0.5% in less than one minute (rowan and laffey, 2020) .according to n95decon (2020b) the advantages of hydrogen peroxide vapor (vhp) are that it inactivates the coronavirus and that after 20 cycles it does not degrade the effectiveness of the filter, fit or straps.other study was also found that analyzed the use of hydrogen peroxide as plasma gas (hpgp) for disinfection. the results showed that out of the six models of ffp respirators analyzed, four of them demonstrated mean penetration levels of less than 5%. however, this has not been tested for the specific case of sars-cov-2 (bergman et al. 2010 ).according to n95decon (2020b) a low dose hpgp for 2 cycles does not degrade fit for 3m 8822 n95s and a high dose reduces ffp respirator filtration.also, moist heat has been proposed as a decontamination method. this is a process based on applying heat and humidity to the ffp respirators. there are different studies that address this method for the disinfection of ffp respirators (3m, 2020b , bergman et al., 2010 , heimbuch et al., 2011 , lore et al., 2012 , viscussi et al., 2011 . among them, the study carried out by 3m is the only one that specifically focuses on the inactivation of sars-cov-2. they used an environment chamber and introduced each ffp respirator in a high temperature self-seal pouch. a temperature of 65 ± 5°cand 50-80% relative humidity were used for 30 min. they tested up to 10 reprocessing cycles and both the filtration efficiency and the fit were maintained. although 3m indicates that they are still working to obtain from the u.s. food and drug administration issue an there are even those who need an alternative disinfection method and propose a twostep process to maximize the effectiveness. thus, derraik et al. (2020) propose to store the ffp respirators for 4 or more days and then subject them to a disinfection process using ultraviolet light (uvc), dry heat treatment or chemical disinfection, although the efficiency of these has not been proven.summarizing, there seems to be a more or less generalized consensus on some methods that are not recommended for disinfection or sterilization such as cleaning with soapy water, alcohol, bleach immersion, ethylene oxide, ionizing radiation, microwave, high temperature, autoclave or steam because they can significantly degrade the filter, either because they alter the electrostatic properties of the filter fibers, affect particle penetration levels, or deform the ffp respirator leading to ffp respirator degradation (3m, 2020b, centers for disease control and prevention, 2020a n95decon, 2020a, viscusi et al., 2007 , viscusi et al., 2009 .masks that are not ppe, medical or surgical, such as the spanish reutilizable hygienic mask or the french barrier mask. there are detailed instructions for machine washing.in the first case, specification une 0065:2020 (une, 2020d) recommends washing the hygienic mask in the washing machine through a complete cycle of washing at 60ºc with the usual detergent and afterwards it must be completely dried for 2 h. after washing.next, the hygienic mask must be visually checked (minor adjustment, deformation, wear) and if its degradation is detected it must be discarded. in the second case, afnor spec s76-001 (afnor, 2020) recommends that, before washing the barrier mask, the empty washing machine should be cleaned using a cold rinse with bleach or by turning it to 60 or 95ºc without spinning. the washing cycle must be equal to or longer than 30 minutes at 60ºc. the use of regular detergents is recommended. as for drying, it is recommended to use the dryer for two hours and then clean its filters. once the barrier mask is completely dry, the fit should be checked.in the case of the spanish non-reusable hygienic mask, according to specification une 0064 (une, 2020a, 2020b) a maximum use of 4 hours is recommended, unless the mask becomes previously degraded or humid. therefore, washing or disinfecting are not recommended.in relation to homemade masks, cloth face coverings or non-certified masks, the centers for disease control and prevention (2020b) indicate that these can be washed in the washing machine, although no specific washing instructions are provided.finally, it must be considered that many of these studies and tests presented are carried out with a specific type and/or model of mask. therefore, it is necessary to be cautious since they can have different effects on other models or types of masks and reduce their effectiveness or affect the properties of the mask or even the straps.although technical standards are the main reference that should be used as a guide to the manufacture and use of personal protective equipment such as disposable masks, in situations of extreme scarcity caused by epidemics, and in this particular case, the covid 19 pandemic, other strategies should be considered. among them, the reuse of disposable filtering facepiece respirators does not seem like a bad transitional solution until the shortage is over. among the different methods, the available literature seems to point out that the most promising methods are those that use hydrogen peroxide vapor, ultraviolet radiation, moist heat, dry heat and ozone gas. within them, hydrogen peroxide vapor treatment appears to be the best system and is being widely recommended.although ultraviolet reduction has also been recommended in some countries, there are those who point to doubts about its effectiveness in the inner layers due to shadows. dry heat also appears to be effective although it has not been widely recommended. there is even a study that points out the effectiveness of dry heat using a hair dryer for disinfection. the moist heat is currently being evaluated to verify that it does not degrade the fit or the filtration capacity. ozone gas appears to be effective in decontaminating ffp respirators without damaging them, although it presents risks for the safety and health of workers who carry out the process if it is not handled properlyother decontamination procedures allow reuse for a limited number of times and with certain limitations and negative side effects, including the deformation of the elastic, the metal strip to fasten it to the face, or the possibility of causing the accumulation of humidity with the consequent risk of exposure to the virus and self-infection.in addition to effectiveness, other variables may influence the selection of one or another decontamination method by organizations, hospitals or companies that need to apply them to guarantee the supply of ppe during the covid-19 pandemic. in fact, some methods require specific technology or resources that make the decontamination process more expensive. in this sense, dry heat seems to be cheap. another factor to consider would be that the method chosen for disinfection must be adapted to the needs of the companies in terms of time and amounts of decontaminated ffp respirators. they must also be logistically and organizationally viable. even it can take into account other issues such as the traceability of the process or the confidence that is generated in the workers who must reuse the ffp respirators.furthermore, surgical masks, compared to personal protection equipment, have a similar effectiveness and are therefore a good alternative. disinfection processes for reuse have not been described for this type of masks. the hygienic mask offers a lower level of protection than the previous ones. however, in the case of recommending the use of mask by the uninfected and asymptomatic population during the shortage of personal protection equipment and surgical masks, hygienic masks seem the best option since they are certified according to a specification.finally, improvised homemade or non-certified masks are the worst alternative of those studied, although it seems better than using nothing at all. however, some bodies say that they may even increase the risk of infection due to humidity, the diffusion of liquids and the retention of the virus in the mask, which would facilitate self-infection. the washing machine and dryer should be used for decontamination.the 2019 novel coronavirus disease , with an epidemic centered in wuhan, china, was declared a public health emergency on january 20, 2020, by the world health organization and a public health emergency by the us on january 31, 2020. a total of 463,412 cases worldwide and 20,912 deaths till now.[1] amongst the currently infected patients, 328,698 a total of 314,319 (96%) have mild condition and 14,379 (4%) are serious or critical.amongst the closed cases of 134,714, the mortality was in 20,912 (16%) [1] . the early reported mortality rate of 4.3% [2] appears to be lower than that of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome, but this initial figure is believed likely to be an underestimation, as most of the confirmed patients are still inpatients, and their condition is not yet resolved. common symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. muscle pain, sputum production, diarrhea, and sore throat are less common. [3] while the majority of cases result in mild symptoms, some progress to pneumonia and multiorgan failure [4] .based on current evidence, it is speculated that respiratory droplets and possibly feco-oral routes are culprits for the mode of transmission, similar to the sars epidemic in 2003. [5, 6] with the outbreak of covid 19, there has been redistribution of manpower and resources to critically meet the current and anticipated hospital service needs. due to total lockdown announced in our country, the patients availing the medical help for minor ailments has been reduced considerably. also all the elective surgical procedures have been postponed for a month or so as to avoid unnecessary overcrowding and possible exposure and spread of coronavirus. there has also been a reduction in elective clinics and operations to mobilize manpower to acute specialties combatting the outbreak and maximize hospital beds numbers available in anticipation of the outbreak. there is also understandably fear from the public in visiting hospitals.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. it has taken a lot of lives since its outbreak. this outbreak has additionally seen a high morbidity among healthcare workers, much like previous outbreaks of human coronavirus. the first fatality of a physician documented globally was that of an otolaryngology physician in wuhan on january 25, 2020, whose situation was similar to that of an otolaryngologist who died of sars in 2003. thus, it is important that otolaryngologists and physicians globally stay abreast of this outbreak and realise the need for essential precautionary practices that are potentially crucial in protecting themselves and patients during this epidemic. in many regions globally, it is a very common practice for patients with upper respiratory tract infections to seek family practitioners and otolaryngologists as a primary care physician. such a practice inadvertently poses inherent potentiall risks for physicians examining patients potentially carrying the virus.considering the pandemic outbreak of covid 19, and its virility at present there is no vaccine or any other treatment for this deadly virus. infection prevention at present is an appropriate control measure in addition to other measure like hand hygiene, personal protective equipment (ppe) and waste management materials.an area of particular concern for use of personal protective equipment (ppe) in otolaryngolgy field is aerosolgenerating procedures that would include open systems for tracheostomies and possibly the performance of flexible laryngoscopy. the protective equipment consists of garments placed to protect the health care workers or any other persons to get infected. personal protective equipment (ppe) is most important in preventing transmission of the virus. these usually consist of standard precautionary measures like gloves, mask and gown. for blood or airborne high infections, it includes: face protection, goggles and mask or face shield, gloves, gown or coverall, head cover, rubber boots.with the current covid-19 outbreak in our country and our region of maharashtra, india, all outpatient clinic patients are seen by otolaryngologists and physicians wearing minimum an n95 mask and gloves. considering the situation in developing countries like ours there is economic burden of providing the ppe to all the health care professionals (including doctors, nursing staff, supporting staff, icu technicians, laboratory technicians), law handling forces (police and soldiers who manage the mobs during the lockdown), infected and non-infected patients and their relatives. it's a tremendous health care burden protecting all these key people who are prone to risk of exposure. we need simple solutions and it is the responsibility of the government to take care of all the people at risk. so finding a simple economical solution is a must in all the developing countries and to provide the safety protection equipment to one and all to prevent the spread of covid 19. in our country with a large population, supplying ppe to all the health care workers of all hospitals definitely is an economic burden. there is need for cheap, disposable face masks, eye protection, gloves and gowns, enough safety gear for medical workers, sick people and for the public. procurement of such large amount of protection wear is difficult as it runs out of stock due to high demands. there is a tremendous need that the masks and the protection wear to be prepared by the health workers for self-protection. with a continuous and constant contemplation, we have come up with a solution, which is economic, simple solution as well as easily prepared. we have designed a face mask which will cover not only nose and mouth but also the whole of the face thereby preventing the exposure to the eyes, nose, mouth and face.we recommend a very economical face protection mask as a safety barrier to prevent contact/exposure to the corona virus. it would be a better alternative other than no protection at all. it will definitely save many lives of the health care workers working selflessly for the community during the covid 19 pandemic. we propose the use of a4 size ohp transparency plastic slide and a regular cloth mask (or disposable mask) for it. it can be prepared by dividing the a4 size ohp transparency sheet across length into half (measuring 30 cm 9 10 cm) and to be sewn to mask in its upper half (sketch diagrams where blue is cloth mask and red is a4 half sheet). the cloth mask can be double folded made of cloth (either cotton or polyester). punch holes are made on the opposite two sides of the transparent plastic ohp transparency paper. passing strings through these punched holes would help to fasten the face mask onto face and secure at the back of the head with the knotting of the strings. it would form an effective barrier protecting the exposure of eyes (corneal), nasal, buccal mucosa as well as skin of face.we the mode of transmission is by respiratory droplets and by feco-oral route. the respiratory droplet transmission is very rapid if no barrier is present. it can be prevented by the use with the ongoing pandemic, there is an extreme shortage of masks not only in developing countries but also in the affluent developed countries with a demand and supply mismatch. with the disposable masks available in the market are running out of stock as the demand is more of such masks. as a result of which, the health care workers exposed to the suspected/potential covid 19 patients are deprived of even masks. in such situations, the ppe is definitely out of question. under these circumstances, it is of immense importance that the health care workers use at least some sort of protection or a barrier and thus prevent exposure and thus the risks. our mask, though a simple one, definitely serves as a protection and effective barrier than no protection at all. it can be used in adjunct with the n95 mask, or a simple disposable mask or a simple double folded polyester cloth mask. such masks can be prepared by the hospital staff within the hospital itself and can be sterilised too as mentioned in quantity as required by the staff. so it wouldn't increase the burden on the economy of the country and makes the health care workers self-sufficient. it obviates the need for additional eye wear by the health care workers. it can also be supplemented by the wearing of disposable gowns as an additional protection.with the extreme shortage of the n95 masks and other disposable masks, our simple and economic option for preparing our own effective barrier face masks and face shields by use of ohp transparent sheet and the routine masks will help to tide over the crises of the mask shortage as well as serve as a ppe.funding this study was not financially supported from external sourcesconflict of interest all authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.the potential of face masks to reduce the spread of respiratory infections and could be useful. 7 in the study 8 of attitudes of influenza-vaccinated healthcare workers toward masks, 65.7% of the participants agreed with infection control recommendation "wearing a mask" to prevent influenza transmission. due to the lack of research on face masks, further research should focus on assessing the efficacy of face masks against covid-19, investigating reuse of face masks and assessing compliance.covid-19, face masks, infectious diseasethe authors declare that they have no competing interests.sisen zhang 1,2,3 1the potential of face masks to reduce the spread of respiratory infections and could be useful. 7 in the study 8 of attitudes of influenza-vaccinated healthcare workers toward masks, 65.7% of the participants agreed with infection control recommendation "wearing a mask" to prevent influenza transmission. due to the lack of research on face masks, further research should focus on assessing the efficacy of face masks against covid-19, investigating reuse of face masks and assessing compliance.covid-19, face masks, infectious diseasethe authors declare that they have no competing interests.sisen zhang 1,2,3 1macau confirmed its first case of the 2019-ncov infection on 22 january 2020 1 and as of feb 8, 2020, there were 10 confirmed cases in the city. 2 the 2019-ncov is a novel strain of coronavirus that was first detected in the city of wuhan, in the province of hubei china. with cases confirmed earlier in its neighboring cities of shenzhen and zhuhai in mainland china, the small city is vulnerable to the spread of the virus and has escalated the health emergency preparedness and response arrangements soon after the reports about a cluster of pneumonia-like illnesses with unknown causes in wuhan came into light in the end of december 2019. on january 5, 2020, the local government swiftly took the lead in coordinating and communicating actions across various sectors. 3 to support infection prevention and control overseen by the health department, departments of economy and finance, police service and customs, information, tourism, gaming, social welfare, consumer protection, municipal affairs, education formed partnerships to step up border control and surveillance, execute isolation and quarantine measures, promote personal and environmental hygiene, ensure medical and daily supply stability and monitor the pricing, deliver public and tourist education, and disseminate accurate up-to-date information on a unified platform. this echoed the recommendations made in the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nconv): strategic preparedness and response plan published by the world health organization on february 3, 2020. 4 during the previous 6 weeks, the stages of "preparedness", "high risk of imported cases", "imported cases" and possibly "local transmission" in an infection outbreak had been experienced. the highest alert is now on to try to avoid or minimize the last stage of "community transmission", a highly challenging task considering the possible existence of super spreaders. 5 at a professional level, while many doctors and nurses were fighting the uphill battle in the frontline, pharmacists at community settings also played an important part in the prevention of the spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak and contributed to the overall emergency management. apart from ensuring the stable supply of key medicines and becoming the information hub about the coronavirus infection, being the most common first point of contact, community pharmacists were also charged with the responsibility of early detection and appropriate referral. they also played a key role in implementing the government arrangement of "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" which highlighted the importance of public-private partnerships and data exchange at times of emergency. on january 30, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared the emergence of 2019-ncov a public health emergency of international concern calling on all countries to take urgent measures to contain the respiratory disease 6 as the spread has already extended to at least 24 countries. 7 it is speculated that pharmacists in many cities and countries are finding their ways to contribute to the collaborative forces in combating the spread of the virus. on february 5, 2020, the international pharmaceutical federation (fip) issued the "coronavirus 2019-ncov outbreak: information and interim guidelines for pharmacists and the pharmacy workforce" to provide relevant information and guidelines on coronavirus outbreaks for pharmacists and the pharmacy workforce. 8 this paper aimed to improve the understanding of community pharmacists' role in case of 2019-cov outbreak by sharing the experiences in macau in consultation with the fip guideline.knowing about the coronaviruses to many people, the memories about severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and the recent outbreak of middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) were still fresh and worrisome. sars was caused by a novel betacoronavirus that emerged in guangdong, china in november 2002. 9 it resulted in more than 8000 human infections and 774 deaths in 37 countries during 2002-03. 10 at that time, sars hit hard on the neighboring city of hong kong which resulted in 1755 confirmed cases including 300 fatal cases 11 but no cases were identified in macau. on the other hand, mers, caused by a different kind of novel coronavirus, was first detected in saudi arabia in 2012 12 and was responsible for 2499 human infections and 861 fatalities since september 2012. 13 when scientific evidence suggested that the virus responsible for the pneumonia-like disease spreading fast across china in december 2019 was closely related to sars and mers, any miscommunication could easily spark panic among the general public.out of the hundreds of coronavirues, 7 of them are known to cause human disease and only 3 of the 7 can have more serious outcomes in people including sars, mers and 2019-cov. 13 similar to sars and mers, patients infected with 2019-cov exhibited symptoms of viral pneumonia including fever, difficulty breathing, and bilateral lung infiltration. 14 in the most severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and even death. 15 however, the disease may occur with mild symptoms only, including: low-grade fever, cough, malaise, runny nose, sore throat but without any warning signs, 16, 17 which made early detection challenging. epidemiological evidence shows that 2019-ncov can be transmitted from person to person among close contacts possibly through respiratory droplets. the acute respiratory infection has an incubation period of 2-14 days before any symptoms show. preliminary data report 11% lethality among hospitalized patients. 16 at the time of this manuscript's authorship, there was no specific medicine or vaccine for coronavirus 2019-ncov. 17, 18 according to the cases identified in macau, the impact of 2019-cov on human health appears to be mild, and the first patient with the confirmed diagnosis had full recovery and been discharged on february 6, 2020. 19 such information is important for community pharmacist to know, convey and employ. being able to address the public enquires with accurate up-to-date information about the local situation and the overall infection progress is the key to build trustful relationship with them at troubled times. this will in turn improve the outcomes of educating the public about the preventative measures of the 2019-cov outbreak and the early recognition of symptoms. as fip suggested, "community pharmacies in outbreak-affected and unaffected countries are often the first point of contact with the health system for those with healthrelated concerns or simply in need of information and reliable advice. " 8pharmacists, like any other health professionals, are responsible for providing safe and ethical care to the public in accordance to the professional standards at all times. implementation of infection prevention and control practices in the community pharmacy can help both staff and customers feel safe and at ease inside the premise. more importantly, it is critical for ensuring personal safety, reducing the risks of transmitting the virus between people, and preventing the spread of infection through contacts of items in the pharmacy. for this, pharmacy managers will need to ensure the correct and regular practice of hand hygiene among all staff members, and to ensure all the necessary facilities are installed and hand hygiene products readily available for use. 20 additionally, regular cleaning of surfaces and items will also help to eliminate the potential sources for spread of infection. 21 pharmacy staff should be encouraged to educate all customers about hand hygiene, infection prevention and control strategies as instructed by the government. all these preventative measures at the community pharmacies were exceptionally important for pharmacies visited not only by local residents but also tourists from around the world. similarly, the personal and environmental practice by the public should be reinforced whenever possible and community pharmacists are wellpositioned to do so more than any other health professionals.routine hand hygiene is essential for preventing the spread of the virus and requires the correct use of alcohol-based formulation. 21 however, community pharmacists encountered a major issue soon after the news about the potential spread of 2019-cov to the citya foreseeable short supply of hand hygiene products which were all imported products. community pharmacy is often one of the major retail outlet of such products and is expected to play the important role of ensuring the availability of such products in the pharmacy. ever since the first diagnosis of 2019-cov, the supply of various disinfection products, such as alcohol, alcohol hand rub, and disinfectant, has been tight. the overreliance on importation exposed the public health to substantial vulnerability. community pharmacists continued to seek new product sources but without success. on february 7, 2020, the local government stepped in and commissioned two local pharmaceutical manufacturers to produce disinfectant products. 22 on reflection, instead of being less than proactive, community pharmacists could have taken steps to try to prepare alcohol-based handrub formulations. some of them indicated the lack of knowledge and therefore lack of confidence to do so. the underlying problem was indeed the lack of knowledge about where to locate reliable instructions of preparing such formulations. a step-bystep guide for production of handrub formulations at pharmacy bench had been provided by the who 23 and re-iterated in the annex 4 of the fip guideline. 8 it is important for community pharmacists to get familiarized with the procedure and to ensure all the necessary reagents and devices are available in the pharmacy.one of the most unforgettable lessons learnt from the sars outbreak was that wearing a mask could offer protection against sars and other viral infections alike. 24 according to the who, wearing a surgical mask, in combination with hand hygiene and other preventative measures, is one of the prevention measures to limit the spread of 2019-ncov in affected areas. 25 more importantly, stable accessibility of this protective gear was considered a key to stability in the society. this posed another vulnerability for the city as the supply of surgical mask totally relied on external sources. on this matter, community pharmacists in macau were positioned to do three things: (1) help consumers differentiate surgical masks from other types of face masks not made for protection against virus transmission; (2) control the price of surgical masks within reasonable price range; and (3) help implement "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" in response to the new government policy.many types of face masks are available in the local market and online. misinformed choice of face masks that are not designed to offer protection against viral transmission would cause a false sense of security and hamper the defense mechanism at the society level. unlike ordinary face masks, surgical masks were required to demonstrate their performance in terms of bacterial filtration efficiency, differential pressure, resistance to penetration by synthetic blood, sub-micron particulate filtration efficiency and/or flammability as stipulated in the who guideline and national standards. [26] [27] [28] the spreading of the new coronavirus infection inevitably drove demands for protective masks and community pharmacists should play a reliable gatekeeper in advising about the right choice and stocking the appropriate surgical masks for the intended purposes. in addition, by selling the surgical masks within the reasonable price range, the community pharmacies set the reference price which could help counteract irrational pricing elsewhere. pharmacists' self-conscious about upholding ethical and professional responsibilities towards the safety of the community was evident across the community setting and should be continually encouraged.one of the policies the government put in place to allay fears of surgical mask shortage and dissuade people of the need to stockpile supplies was the "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" in which community pharmacy played a key role in the smooth implementation. after the first coronavirus case was confirmed in the city on january 22, 2020, the local government ordered 20 million masks and announced a controlled distribution through pharmacies. 29 according to the scheme, each local resident and person on working visa could buy a maximum of 10 surgical masks every 10 days for only 8 patacas (us$1) at contracted pharmacies as long as they presented their valid identity card. moreover, the government had set up a webpage with updates every 15 minutes of the number of surgical masks available at different pharmacies and their contact details for the convenience of the buyers. 30 this scheme was feasible due to the preexisting partnership between the government and the participating pharmacies. fifty-six of the 294 community pharmacies in macau joined the public-private partnership and became the contracted pharmacies to share the dispensing duties and pharmaceutical care for patients from the public health institutes long before the outbreak. in order to monitor the pharmacy stock take of pharmaceutical products as required in the partnership agreement, an it system was installed so that the data about the purchase and sales of those pharmaceutical products were collected during each transaction at the pharmacy and immediately submitted to the central data system in the government for real-time monitoring purposes. with this system already in place before the 2019-cov outbreak, only minor adjustment was needed to include government-provided surgical masks on the monitoring list, and make such information publicly available on the official website. while the community pharmacies were the components of this "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" and the it system being the infrastructure, it was really the data that ensured the connectivity of the system for it to run smoothly and serve the purpose. community pharmacists, therefore, played the role of custodian in data availability and accuracy.all the imported cases of 2019-cov infection in macau were residents from wuhan who fell ill during their stay in macau. considering the possibility of human-to-human transmission and the continuous growth of outbreak, the high volume of travel from wuhan was considered a major threat to the effectiveness of infection prevention and control. reinforcement of health inspection and isolation efforts at various cross-boundary checkpoints, mandatory requirements for all travelers from wuhan to declare their health status, and tighter bordercontrol took place immediately. while these measures aimed to step up the respiratory-disease-surveillance system, the potential risks of carrying and transmitting the virus by the wuhan travelers who were still staying in macau could not be dismissed. early detection and referral of suspected cases were crucial to prevent large-scale community transmission. as mentioned above, the early symptoms could be mild and non-specific, 15, 16 and community pharmacy could well be the first point of contact when the affected people sought basic medical aid for symptomatic relief. community pharmacists, therefore, must be on full alert and be able to screen patients for any necessary referral. the guide for the evaluation of patients under investigation for 2019-ncov recommended provided by the us cdc was included in the fip guideline and community pharmacists should become familiar with the criteria recommended. 8community pharmacists have a key role in preventing the spread of 2019-cov virus. they are charged with key responsibilities of informing, advising and educating the community, maintaining a stable supply of pharmaceuticals and personal hygiene products, and screening of suspected cases and making appropriate referral as required. as this or similar situations evolve, community pharmacists should remain engaged in the coordinated efforts and be readily adaptive to changes required in pharmacy practice. for pharmacists to assume a role in the health emergency preparedness and response arrangements at community level, public private partnership and the application of real-world data have been shown to be vital.macau confirmed its first case of the 2019-ncov infection on 22 january 2020 1 and as of feb 8, 2020, there were 10 confirmed cases in the city. 2 the 2019-ncov is a novel strain of coronavirus that was first detected in the city of wuhan, in the province of hubei china. with cases confirmed earlier in its neighboring cities of shenzhen and zhuhai in mainland china, the small city is vulnerable to the spread of the virus and has escalated the health emergency preparedness and response arrangements soon after the reports about a cluster of pneumonia-like illnesses with unknown causes in wuhan came into light in the end of december 2019. on january 5, 2020, the local government swiftly took the lead in coordinating and communicating actions across various sectors. 3 to support infection prevention and control overseen by the health department, departments of economy and finance, police service and customs, information, tourism, gaming, social welfare, consumer protection, municipal affairs, education formed partnerships to step up border control and surveillance, execute isolation and quarantine measures, promote personal and environmental hygiene, ensure medical and daily supply stability and monitor the pricing, deliver public and tourist education, and disseminate accurate up-to-date information on a unified platform. this echoed the recommendations made in the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nconv): strategic preparedness and response plan published by the world health organization on february 3, 2020. 4 during the previous 6 weeks, the stages of "preparedness", "high risk of imported cases", "imported cases" and possibly "local transmission" in an infection outbreak had been experienced. the highest alert is now on to try to avoid or minimize the last stage of "community transmission", a highly challenging task considering the possible existence of super spreaders. 5 at a professional level, while many doctors and nurses were fighting the uphill battle in the frontline, pharmacists at community settings also played an important part in the prevention of the spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak and contributed to the overall emergency management. apart from ensuring the stable supply of key medicines and becoming the information hub about the coronavirus infection, being the most common first point of contact, community pharmacists were also charged with the responsibility of early detection and appropriate referral. they also played a key role in implementing the government arrangement of "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" which highlighted the importance of public-private partnerships and data exchange at times of emergency. on january 30, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared the emergence of 2019-ncov a public health emergency of international concern calling on all countries to take urgent measures to contain the respiratory disease 6 as the spread has already extended to at least 24 countries. 7 it is speculated that pharmacists in many cities and countries are finding their ways to contribute to the collaborative forces in combating the spread of the virus. on february 5, 2020, the international pharmaceutical federation (fip) issued the "coronavirus 2019-ncov outbreak: information and interim guidelines for pharmacists and the pharmacy workforce" to provide relevant information and guidelines on coronavirus outbreaks for pharmacists and the pharmacy workforce. 8 this paper aimed to improve the understanding of community pharmacists' role in case of 2019-cov outbreak by sharing the experiences in macau in consultation with the fip guideline.knowing about the coronaviruses to many people, the memories about severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and the recent outbreak of middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) were still fresh and worrisome. sars was caused by a novel betacoronavirus that emerged in guangdong, china in november 2002. 9 it resulted in more than 8000 human infections and 774 deaths in 37 countries during 2002-03. 10 at that time, sars hit hard on the neighboring city of hong kong which resulted in 1755 confirmed cases including 300 fatal cases 11 but no cases were identified in macau. on the other hand, mers, caused by a different kind of novel coronavirus, was first detected in saudi arabia in 2012 12 and was responsible for 2499 human infections and 861 fatalities since september 2012. 13 when scientific evidence suggested that the virus responsible for the pneumonia-like disease spreading fast across china in december 2019 was closely related to sars and mers, any miscommunication could easily spark panic among the general public.out of the hundreds of coronavirues, 7 of them are known to cause human disease and only 3 of the 7 can have more serious outcomes in people including sars, mers and 2019-cov. 13 similar to sars and mers, patients infected with 2019-cov exhibited symptoms of viral pneumonia including fever, difficulty breathing, and bilateral lung infiltration. 14 in the most severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and even death. 15 however, the disease may occur with mild symptoms only, including: low-grade fever, cough, malaise, runny nose, sore throat but without any warning signs, 16, 17 which made early detection challenging. epidemiological evidence shows that 2019-ncov can be transmitted from person to person among close contacts possibly through respiratory droplets. the acute respiratory infection has an incubation period of 2-14 days before any symptoms show. preliminary data report 11% lethality among hospitalized patients. 16 at the time of this manuscript's authorship, there was no specific medicine or vaccine for coronavirus 2019-ncov. 17, 18 according to the cases identified in macau, the impact of 2019-cov on human health appears to be mild, and the first patient with the confirmed diagnosis had full recovery and been discharged on february 6, 2020. 19 such information is important for community pharmacist to know, convey and employ. being able to address the public enquires with accurate up-to-date information about the local situation and the overall infection progress is the key to build trustful relationship with them at troubled times. this will in turn improve the outcomes of educating the public about the preventative measures of the 2019-cov outbreak and the early recognition of symptoms. as fip suggested, "community pharmacies in outbreak-affected and unaffected countries are often the first point of contact with the health system for those with healthrelated concerns or simply in need of information and reliable advice. " 8pharmacists, like any other health professionals, are responsible for providing safe and ethical care to the public in accordance to the professional standards at all times. implementation of infection prevention and control practices in the community pharmacy can help both staff and customers feel safe and at ease inside the premise. more importantly, it is critical for ensuring personal safety, reducing the risks of transmitting the virus between people, and preventing the spread of infection through contacts of items in the pharmacy. for this, pharmacy managers will need to ensure the correct and regular practice of hand hygiene among all staff members, and to ensure all the necessary facilities are installed and hand hygiene products readily available for use. 20 additionally, regular cleaning of surfaces and items will also help to eliminate the potential sources for spread of infection. 21 pharmacy staff should be encouraged to educate all customers about hand hygiene, infection prevention and control strategies as instructed by the government. all these preventative measures at the community pharmacies were exceptionally important for pharmacies visited not only by local residents but also tourists from around the world. similarly, the personal and environmental practice by the public should be reinforced whenever possible and community pharmacists are wellpositioned to do so more than any other health professionals.routine hand hygiene is essential for preventing the spread of the virus and requires the correct use of alcohol-based formulation. 21 however, community pharmacists encountered a major issue soon after the news about the potential spread of 2019-cov to the citya foreseeable short supply of hand hygiene products which were all imported products. community pharmacy is often one of the major retail outlet of such products and is expected to play the important role of ensuring the availability of such products in the pharmacy. ever since the first diagnosis of 2019-cov, the supply of various disinfection products, such as alcohol, alcohol hand rub, and disinfectant, has been tight. the overreliance on importation exposed the public health to substantial vulnerability. community pharmacists continued to seek new product sources but without success. on february 7, 2020, the local government stepped in and commissioned two local pharmaceutical manufacturers to produce disinfectant products. 22 on reflection, instead of being less than proactive, community pharmacists could have taken steps to try to prepare alcohol-based handrub formulations. some of them indicated the lack of knowledge and therefore lack of confidence to do so. the underlying problem was indeed the lack of knowledge about where to locate reliable instructions of preparing such formulations. a step-bystep guide for production of handrub formulations at pharmacy bench had been provided by the who 23 and re-iterated in the annex 4 of the fip guideline. 8 it is important for community pharmacists to get familiarized with the procedure and to ensure all the necessary reagents and devices are available in the pharmacy.one of the most unforgettable lessons learnt from the sars outbreak was that wearing a mask could offer protection against sars and other viral infections alike. 24 according to the who, wearing a surgical mask, in combination with hand hygiene and other preventative measures, is one of the prevention measures to limit the spread of 2019-ncov in affected areas. 25 more importantly, stable accessibility of this protective gear was considered a key to stability in the society. this posed another vulnerability for the city as the supply of surgical mask totally relied on external sources. on this matter, community pharmacists in macau were positioned to do three things: (1) help consumers differentiate surgical masks from other types of face masks not made for protection against virus transmission; (2) control the price of surgical masks within reasonable price range; and (3) help implement "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" in response to the new government policy.many types of face masks are available in the local market and online. misinformed choice of face masks that are not designed to offer protection against viral transmission would cause a false sense of security and hamper the defense mechanism at the society level. unlike ordinary face masks, surgical masks were required to demonstrate their performance in terms of bacterial filtration efficiency, differential pressure, resistance to penetration by synthetic blood, sub-micron particulate filtration efficiency and/or flammability as stipulated in the who guideline and national standards. [26] [27] [28] the spreading of the new coronavirus infection inevitably drove demands for protective masks and community pharmacists should play a reliable gatekeeper in advising about the right choice and stocking the appropriate surgical masks for the intended purposes. in addition, by selling the surgical masks within the reasonable price range, the community pharmacies set the reference price which could help counteract irrational pricing elsewhere. pharmacists' self-conscious about upholding ethical and professional responsibilities towards the safety of the community was evident across the community setting and should be continually encouraged.one of the policies the government put in place to allay fears of surgical mask shortage and dissuade people of the need to stockpile supplies was the "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" in which community pharmacy played a key role in the smooth implementation. after the first coronavirus case was confirmed in the city on january 22, 2020, the local government ordered 20 million masks and announced a controlled distribution through pharmacies. 29 according to the scheme, each local resident and person on working visa could buy a maximum of 10 surgical masks every 10 days for only 8 patacas (us$1) at contracted pharmacies as long as they presented their valid identity card. moreover, the government had set up a webpage with updates every 15 minutes of the number of surgical masks available at different pharmacies and their contact details for the convenience of the buyers. 30 this scheme was feasible due to the preexisting partnership between the government and the participating pharmacies. fifty-six of the 294 community pharmacies in macau joined the public-private partnership and became the contracted pharmacies to share the dispensing duties and pharmaceutical care for patients from the public health institutes long before the outbreak. in order to monitor the pharmacy stock take of pharmaceutical products as required in the partnership agreement, an it system was installed so that the data about the purchase and sales of those pharmaceutical products were collected during each transaction at the pharmacy and immediately submitted to the central data system in the government for real-time monitoring purposes. with this system already in place before the 2019-cov outbreak, only minor adjustment was needed to include government-provided surgical masks on the monitoring list, and make such information publicly available on the official website. while the community pharmacies were the components of this "the guaranteed mask supply for macao residents scheme" and the it system being the infrastructure, it was really the data that ensured the connectivity of the system for it to run smoothly and serve the purpose. community pharmacists, therefore, played the role of custodian in data availability and accuracy.all the imported cases of 2019-cov infection in macau were residents from wuhan who fell ill during their stay in macau. considering the possibility of human-to-human transmission and the continuous growth of outbreak, the high volume of travel from wuhan was considered a major threat to the effectiveness of infection prevention and control. reinforcement of health inspection and isolation efforts at various cross-boundary checkpoints, mandatory requirements for all travelers from wuhan to declare their health status, and tighter bordercontrol took place immediately. while these measures aimed to step up the respiratory-disease-surveillance system, the potential risks of carrying and transmitting the virus by the wuhan travelers who were still staying in macau could not be dismissed. early detection and referral of suspected cases were crucial to prevent large-scale community transmission. as mentioned above, the early symptoms could be mild and non-specific, 15, 16 and community pharmacy could well be the first point of contact when the affected people sought basic medical aid for symptomatic relief. community pharmacists, therefore, must be on full alert and be able to screen patients for any necessary referral. the guide for the evaluation of patients under investigation for 2019-ncov recommended provided by the us cdc was included in the fip guideline and community pharmacists should become familiar with the criteria recommended. 8community pharmacists have a key role in preventing the spread of 2019-cov virus. they are charged with key responsibilities of informing, advising and educating the community, maintaining a stable supply of pharmaceuticals and personal hygiene products, and screening of suspected cases and making appropriate referral as required. as this or similar situations evolve, community pharmacists should remain engaged in the coordinated efforts and be readily adaptive to changes required in pharmacy practice. for pharmacists to assume a role in the health emergency preparedness and response arrangements at community level, public private partnership and the application of real-world data have been shown to be vital.n ephrogenic systemic fibrosis (nsf) is a debilitating and often fatal condition caused by collagen deposition in soft tissues and internal organs, such as the heart, liver, and lungs (1) . nephrogenic systemic fibrosis is associated with exposure to gadolinium-based contrast agents (gbcas) administered during magnetic resonance imaging or angiography scans (2) and has no definitive treatment. because these scans gain diagnostic effectiveness in many clinical situations when administered with gbcas (3), patient exposure to these agents has become ubiquitous. in 2007, the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) released warnings about the use of gbcas in recognition of the substantial risk for nsf with their use (4) .two important variables that seem to account for much of the nsf risk are the degree of stability of the linkage of gadolinium to its chelate ligand and the host's degree of kidney impairment (5) . dissociation of the gadolinium-ligand complex releases the toxic unbound gadolinium ion that, in a subset of patients, triggers a cascade of events culminating in the histologic manifestations of nsf (5) (6) (7) . newer gbcas have relatively greater stability in their gadolinium-ligand bond compared with older gbcas (8) and so are thought to carry markedly lower nsf risk (3) . kidney impairment is an additional risk factor for nsf, probably because of the kidney's role in clearing most gbcas, and almost all cases of nsf have occurred in patients with advanced kidney disease (5) . however, uncertainties remain about the relative safety of newer gbcas compared with older agents, and the degree and chronicity of kidney dysfunction that portends nsf risk (2, 9) .uncertainties about nsf risk are reflected in the divergent positions of advisory boards, some of which recommend liberal use of the newer gbcas, whereas others recommend against use of both older and newer gbcas in patients with impaired kidney function (5, 10) . thus, we sought to synthesize the evidence about the safety of newer versus older gbcas across the spectrum of kidney function. our review addressed 2 key questions. first, with exposure to newer gbcas, what is the occurrence of nsf per index gbca expo-sure among all patients, regardless of kidney function; patients with key risk factors for chronic kidney disease (ckd), such as diabetes and hypertension; and patients with any degree of kidney impairment, including acute kidney injury and ckd? second, compared with older gbcas, what is the occurrence of nsf per index gbca exposure for newer gbcas among all patients, regardless of kidney function; patients with key risk factors for ckd; and patients with any degree of kidney dysfunction?this review was conducted as a project for the veterans affairs (va) evidence synthesis program. the original technical report is available at www.hsrd .research.va.gov/publications/esp. the protocol was registered a priori (prospero: crd42019135783), and each step was pilot tested to train and calibrate the study team.we searched medline (pubmed), embase (elsevier), cochrane central register of controlled trials (wiley), and web of science (clarivate) for englishlanguage references from inception to 5 march 2020 by using a combination of database-specific subject headings and keywords related to nsf and gadolinium (supplement table 1 , available at annals.org). we handsearched key references to identify citations not captured in the electronic database searches (5, 10 -27) .consistent with the classification system of the american college of radiology (acr) for gbcas (table  1) , we hereafter refer to newer gbcas as acr group ii or iii agents and older gbcas as acr group i agents (10) . we included studies that documented exposure to acr group ii or iii gbcas; assessed nsf occurrence after gbca exposure; and had 1 of the following study designs: randomized controlled trials, cohort studies, case-control studies, case series, and case reports. we excluded studies that did not report the number of patients exposed to gbcas; those not published in english; and, for longitudinal studies, those with a follow-up shorter than 2 weeks between gbca exposure and occurrence of nsf cases (supplement table 2 , available at annals.org).we screened titles and abstracts initially by using distillerai (evidence partners), an artificial intelligence technology (28). two authors (k.m.g. and j.l.) reviewed titles and abstracts of a subset of articles (n = 100) to train the distillerai program to perform study selection on the remaining titles and abstracts by using the eligibility criteria described earlier. the distillerai program identified eligible titles and abstracts by assigning a prediction score of relevance to the study questions, with citations scoring 0.5 and above automatically advancing to full-text screening. human investigators reviewed articles with a prediction score below 0.5. at the full-text screening stage, authors dual-screened all fulltext articles for inclusion. any disagreements between author pairs were resolved by joint review or by conferring with a third team member. articles that met inclusion criteria underwent data abstraction and quality assessment.one investigator abstracted relevant data from each study into a customized distillersr (evidence partners) database, and this information was verified by a second investigator. if disagreement about data abstraction arose between investigators, a third investigator provided a majority decision. key elements for data abstraction were patient descriptors, gbca exposure, comparator (if any), confirmed or suspected nsf cases, and source of funding. we defined nsf cases as "confounded" if evidence was clear that a patient had been exposed to several gbcas before nsf developed.author pairs conducted quality assessment of each study, with arbitration by a third author whenever disagreements arose. we used the cochrane effective practice and organization of care risk of bias (rob) tool to assess randomized, nonrandomized, and controlled before-after studies for quality (29) . for observational studies, we assessed quality by using an adapted version of the newcastle-ottawa scale (from the version modified by guyatt and busse [30] ). we then assigned a summary rob score of low, unclear, or high to each study.we summarized key characteristics of included studies (such as patient descriptors, gbca exposure, and nsf outcome) overall and by acr gbca subgroup. because of heterogeneity in methodology, patient population, and length of follow-up across included studies, quantitative data synthesis using metaanalytic techniques was not feasible. instead, we reported nsf cases per index gbca exposure from individual studies grouped by our key questions, and calculated an exact 95% ci around estimates by using the method described by clopper and pearson (31). we did not calculate 95% cis for studies with a sample size less than 26 or those reporting nsf as a secondary outcome. analyses were performed with the r statistical package, version 3.5.3 (r foundation for statistical computing).we followed the grade (grading of recommendations assessment, development and evaluation) approach to assess the certainty of evidence of the collated data (32) . in brief, this assessment focused on 4 domains that might limit the certainty of evidence: rob, consistency, directness, and precision. additional domains, whenever applicable, included coherence, dose-response association, impact of plausible residual confounders, strength of association or magnitude of effect, and publication bias. two authors (k.m.g. and a.m.g.) assigned a summary rating of high, moderate, low, or very low for the certainty of evidence in each study.the u.s. department of veterans affairs, which funded this review, was not involved in the design, conduct, or analysis of the study.we identified 3084 studies through the primary literature search and 170 additional articles through hand-searches of relevant publications, totaling 3254 retrieved articles. after removing duplicates, 1269 articles remained. of these, we identified 329 potentially eligible articles after screening titles and abstracts and retained 34 articles reporting on 32 studies after fulltext review ( figure 1 ) (7, . most of the studies were conducted in north america, europe, or asia. supplement table 3 (available at annals.org) provides detailed study characteristics.twenty studies met inclusion criteria for key question 1. nine were prospective cohort studies, 10 were retrospective cohort studies, and 1 was a nonrandomized trial. most index gbca exposures in the 19 cohort studies were to acr group ii agents; only 2 cohort studies reported exposures to the acr group iii agent gadoxetic acid (of note, 1 cohort study had exposures to gadobenate dimeglumine and gadoteridol). five studies reported exposures to several gadolinium agents (35, 41, 45, 50, 53) , 12 reported exposures to the same agents (7, 36, 37, 43-47, 49, 50, 53, 54) , and 2 reported several exposures to unknown agents (42, 51) . only 12 studies reported the approach to diagnosing nsf, which varied and included review of patient medical records (n = 4), clinical symptoms and examination of skin lesions or biopsy (n = 5), and the girardi criteria (n = 3) (66) . eight studies were postmarketing surveillance studies funded by gbca manufacturers (33, 42, 44, 45, 47, 50, 51, 53) . the nonrandomized controlled trial enrolled patients with ckd stage 3 or 4; all patients in the exposure group received the acr group ii agent gadoterate meglumine. follow-up for nsf incidence was 3 months, with the diagnostic approach for ascertaining nsf cases unclear (33) . four studies featured all patients, regardless of kidney function; no studies included patients with ckd risk factors; and 15 included patients with ckd ( table 2 ). three of the 5 studies in this subgroup were prospective cohort studies that were phase 4 postmarketing surveillance studies funded by gbca manufacturers (47, 51, 53) . together, they comprised 3 of the 4 largest studies (n > 1000) for this key question. these 3 studies had a pooled patient population of 62 544, of whom only 1045 had an estimated glomerular filtration rate less than 60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 . among their 27 045 patients with index exposures to gadobutrol and 35 499 with index exposures to gadoterate meglumine, no cases of nsf occurred (upper limit of the exact 95% ci, 0.0001 to 0.0011 case) ( figure 2 ). the other 2 studies reported no cases of nsf among 901 patients with chronic liver disease (39, 49) .no studies specifically targeted patients with ckd risk factors, nor were ckd risk factors consistently assessed in studies that enrolled patients regardless of kidney function.for this subgroup, we further divided studies into those that enrolled patients across the spectrum of ckd, those that enrolled patients with stage 3 to 5 ckd, and those that enrolled patients with end-stage renal disease (esrd) or receiving dialysis. overall, no cases of nsf were reported (upper limit of the exact ci, 0.0002 to 0.0258 case [0.0002 to 0.002 case in the largest study]).across the spectrum of ckd. three studies included patients with ckd of any stage. one study followed 15 377 patients with no ckd or ckd stage 1 to 5 for a mean of 6 years after exposure to gadoterate meglumine (54) . a second study followed 908 patients with ckd ranging from moderate to severe after index exposure to gadobutrol (45) . the third study was a prospective cohort trial conducted as a phase 4 observational study to evaluate nsf risk after gadoxetic acid exposure in 186 patients with moderate to severe ckd undergoing liver imaging (n = 186) (42) . no cases of nsf were reported in any of these 3 studies ( figure 2 ). ckd stages 3 to 5. eight studies examined nsf risk after gadolinium exposure specifically in patients with ckd stage 3 to 5. primary index exposures were to gadoteridol and gadobenate dimeglumine in 1 study, gadobenate dimeglumine only in 4 studies, gadoterate meglumine in 2 studies, and gadoxetic acid in 1 study. nephrogenic systemic fibrosis was the primary outcome in 5 studies, with a pooled patient population of 2350 (35, 37, 41, 44, 50) , and a secondary outcome in the remaining 3 studies, with a combined population of 126 patients (33, 38, 43) . none of these studies reported any nsf cases (figure 2) .esrd or receiving dialysis. four studies investigated nsf risk in patients with esrd (7, 36, 40, 46) . across the 4 studies, no cases of nsf were reported among the 896 combined patients after exposure to the acr group ii agents gadoteridol (n = 141), gadobenate dimeglumine (n = 401), or gadoterate meglumine (n = 354) (figure 2 ).among the cohort studies, rob was high in 11 (58%) (7, 38, 40 -44, 47, 49 -51) and unclear in 8 (42%) (supplement figure, graphs a the nonrandomized prospective trial was high (supplement figure, graph c, available at annals.org) (33) . major factors contributing to high rob were inadequate or unclear exposure characterization (such as not considering coexisting exposure to gbcas outside that of the study), inadequate outcome identification (such as not using standard diagnostic criteria for nsf or limiting nsf assessment to a subpopulation of patients), and clinically significant rates of missing data. table 3 summarizes the certainty of evidence for the occur- twelve studies had data for key question 2. of these, 1 was a nested case-control study and 11 were cohort studies (9 retrospective and 2 prospective) (34, [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] . the primary index exposure to acr group i agents in the studies was to gadopentetate dimeglumine (n = 9) or gadodiamide (n = 8). group ii agents included gadoterate meglumine (n = 4), gadobutrol (n = 5), gadobenate dimeglumine (n = 6), gadofosveset trisodium (n = 1), gadoteridol (n = 2), and gadoversetamide (n = 1). ten studies reported their approach for diagnosing nsf, which varied and consisted of review of patient medical records (n = 1), clinical symptoms and examination of skin or biopsy (n = 8), or use of cowper criteria (67) (n = 1) (55-62, 64, 65) . follow-up for ascertainment of nsf cases after index gbca exposure ranged from 60 days to 15 years, with a median of 28 months ( table 2) .across the 12 studies in this subsection, 8499 patients had an index exposure to acr group ii agents and 110 345 patients had an index exposure to acr group i agents; no patient had an index exposure to the acr group iii agent gadoxetic acid. thirty-seven nsf cases developed after index exposure to acr group i agents (upper limit of exact ci, 0.001 to 0.0672 case [0.0001 to 0.0003 case for the 2 studies with n > 20 000 patients]), and 4 nsf cases occurred after index exposure to acr group ii agents (upper limit of exact ci, 0.0018 to 0.0204 case [0.0018 to 0.0026 case for the 3 studies with n > 1000 patients]).three retrospective cohort studies included patients in this subgroup (62, 64, 65) . fourteen cases of nsf developed in 109 096 pooled patients with index exposures to acr group i agents (upper limit of the exact ci, 0.0001 to 0.0120 case) and 1 nsf case occurred in 4321 pooled patients with index exposures to acr group ii agents (upper limit of the exact ci, 0.0018 to 0.0058 case). all 15 nsf cases occurred in patients with impaired kidney function at the time of gbca exposure ( figure 2 ).no study assessed nsf risk in this subpopulation of patients.nine studies specifically included patients with ckd. across 4 studies with at least 30 participants (total n = 1173), 14 cases of nsf occurred after index exposure to acr group i agents (upper limit of the exact ci, 0.0065 to 0.067 case); no cases occurred across 5 studies (total n = 4152) with index exposures to acr group ii agents (upper limit of the exact ci, 0.0025 to 0.0204 case). eight additional nsf cases developed after acr group i exposure and 3 after acr group ii exposure in 2 studies in which nsf was a secondary outcome.across the spectrum of ckd. three studies-2 retrospective cohort and 1 case-control-included patients with ckd of any stage (34, 58, 60) . no nsf cases were reported in the cohort studies. however, in the case-control study, 7 nsf cases occurred after index exposure to acr group i agents and 3 after index exposure to acr group ii agents ( table 3) . § includes 2 cohort studies and 1 nonrandomized controlled study that are not included in the upper-limit 95% ci ranges. ͉͉ all 10 cases were from 1 case-control study (34) and thus are not included in the upper-limit 95% ci ranges. ¶ studies were excluded if they had a study population of <26. only the upper 95% ci is shown where there is only 1 study in the category. ** one case of nsf was reported in a cohort study in which nsf was not a primary outcome, which is not included in the upper-limit 95% ci ranges.ckd stages 3 to 5. two retrospective cohort studies reported gbca exposures specifically among patients with ckd stage 3 to 5 (57, 59) . six nsf cases developed among 246 patients with index exposure to acr group i and no cases among 1423 patients exposed to acr group ii agents in 1 study (57) . in the second study, 1 nsf case occurred among 26 patients with index exposure to acr group i agents; nsf did not develop in 1 patient with index exposure to acr group ii agents (59) .esrd or receiving dialysis. four studies-2 prospective (55, 63) and 2 retrospective (56, 61)-included patients receiving dialysis. across the studies, 9 nsf cases developed in 348 patients with index exposure to acr group i agents and no cases developed in 1079 patients with index exposure to acr group ii agents.risk of bias was low in 1 study (59) , unclear in 4 studies (34, 55, 62, 63) , and high in 7 studies (supplement figure, graphs d to f, available at annals.org) (56 -58, 60, 61, 64, 65) . similar to key question 1, the most common methodologic issues that led to high rob included inadequate or unclear exposure characterization (n = 5), inadequate outcome identification (n = 9), and higher rates of missing data (n = 7). see table 3 for a summary of the certainty of evidence for the occurrence of nsf after exposure to acr group ii versus acr group i gbcas.we reviewed 20 studies with patients who were exposed only to newer gbcas (acr groups ii and iii) and 12 studies that assessed the occurrence of nsf among patients after index exposure to newer gbcas compared with older linear gbcas (acr group i). we found that nsf occurs very rarely after exposure to newer linear or macrocyclic gbcas. however, the upper exact 95% cis around nsf cases per index exposure to newer gbcas (that is, acr group ii and iii) are similar to those for older gbcas (acr group i): specifically, 0.0018 to 0.0204 case for newer versus 0.0001 to 0.0672 case for older gbcas. in addition, data are relatively scarce for patients with ckd, those with acute kidney injury, those at risk for ckd, and those exposed to acr group iii agents, which limits conclusions about safety among these populations.our findings are generally consistent with 2 recent reviews of nsf risk after gbca exposure that we retrieved from our database search of medline, embase, the cochrane central register of controlled trials, and web of science on 5 march 2020. the review by woolen and colleagues (2019) (68) examined the risk for nsf among patients with stage 4 or 5 ckd after exposure to acr group ii gbcas and found no cases of nsf among 4931 patients across 16 studies (upper exact ci, 0.07 case). our analysis included all studies in that review, except for 2 that did not meet inclusion criteria. in addition, we included 14 studies that were not part of woolen and colleagues' review. the other review, by attari and colleagues (2019) (69), examined clinical features and risk factors of confirmed nsf cases in addition to comparing the incidence of nsf before and after 2008 (when the fda issued the boxed warning). the authors derived the denominator for incidence rate calculations from assumptions about market share for gbcas by acr group and found an nsf rate of 1.52 cases per million exposures (ci, 1.37 to 1.68 cases) for acr group i agents and 0.008 case (ci, 0.001 to 0.032 case) for acr group ii agents.our review builds on the recent reviews by woolen and colleagues (68) and attari and colleagues (69) in several ways. first, we prioritized studies that provided a specific denominator for patient exposure by gbca and those that included a comparison with acr group i gbcas. a reliable exposure denominator and control group are critical for application of data to clinical decision making (70) . second, we included patient populations across the spectrum of kidney function and specifically sought to identify data that would elucidate the risk for nsf among key patient subpopulations, such as those at risk for ckd and those with acute kidney injury. establishing risk heterogeneity by clinical condition would support a more nuanced and patient-centered approach to radiologic imaging decisions. examining the literature on subpopulation risk also allowed us to identify gaps in the evidence base, which may guide future nsf risk evaluation, especially as clinical practice evolves. finally, our review included data across acr group ii and iii agents. this inclusive approach found additional evidence gaps given the particularly limited data on acr group iii agents, which is probably a consequence of the restricted indications for their use (5) .the evidence base reported in this review has a few limitations. first, most included studies were of a less rigorous, observational design. second, assessment of gadolinium exposure was frequently incomplete because study authors did not account for gbca exposures outside the health care settings evaluated. as a consequence, this exposure misclassification bias might have inflated estimations of nsf risk after gadolinium exposure by shrinking the exposure denominator for calculations of nsf risk. third, many studies had substantial missing data, which is particularly relevant in situations of a rare adverse event and which may have led to underreporting of nsf cases. fourth, a potential for conflict of interest was present, because many of the larger, single-agent observational studies included in this review were conducted by the gbca manufacturers (42, 45, 47, 50, 51, 53) . in fact, most of these studies were conducted in response to an fda mandate for postmarketing surveillance and were powered on the basis of expected incidence rates that turned out to be greater than observed. underpowering was complicated further by the fda's removal of the postmarketing surveillance requirement in the midst of some study periods, and recruitment subsequently was stopped early. finally, notable heterogeneity existed in patient populations, methodology, and timeframe, which drove our decision not to conduct meta-analyses or calculate risk ratios. despite these study-level differences, our findings were consistent across included studies, with no or very few cases of nsf reported.despite this review's rigorous design, our approach has some potential limitations. to be specific, this work is not a comprehensive review of all potential risk for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis after exposure to gadolinium agents review annals.org annals of internal medicine harms associated with gadolinium exposure. awareness and concern are growing about the long-term deposition of gadolinium in brain and other tissues among patients with normal kidney function (1, 3) . in addition, we focused our review on higher-order evidence that could provide risk calculations. however, in doing so, we may have excluded studies that reported information about nsf cases potentially linked to gadolinium exposure, but those from which we could not identify a clear numerator or denominator. we attempted to mitigate methodologic limitations by using an a priori publicly registered protocol, conducting a comprehensive literature search, and performing a thorough quality assessment.in conclusion, the occurrence of nsf after exposure to newer linear or macrocyclic gbcas was very rare. limited evidence suggests that additional studies in patient populations with mild kidney disease would substantially change these conclusions. however, considering the scarcity of data about the use of newer and seemingly safer gbcas among patients with advanced ckd, ckd risk factors, or acute kidney injury, further investigations in these populations are warranted and will require particular attention to comprehensive exposure and outcome assessment (such as documentation of all gbca exposures and use of standardized diagnostic criteria for nsf). meanwhile, caution in the use of gbcas in patients with severely impaired kidney function and acute kidney injury remains prudent, because the exact clinical factors contributing to nsf risk in these subpopulations are still unknown. found that 29% (40/138) were healthcare workers that had been infected in hospital. 3 as of february 11, 2020, china's infectious disease information system has reported covid-19 in 1716 healthcare workers. 4 although the transmission of covid- 19 is not yet fully understood, it is believed to be mainly through large respiratory droplets. 5 for aerosol-generating procedures, such as intubation or bronchoscopy, there is consensus that n95 respirators offer better protection than medical masks. [6] [7] [8] [9] n95 respirators are designed to minimize facial seal leakage because of tight fit and prevent inhalation of small airborne particles. they also are required to pass filtration tests. in contrast, medical masks (also known as surgical masks) are loose fitting, provide barrier protection against large droplets and prevent hand-to-face contact. 10 globally, current recommendations to protect healthcare workers against covid-19 for non-aerosol-generating care are conflicting. [6] [7] [8] [9] for example, the u.s centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and european centre for disease and prevention (ecdc) recommend the n95 respirator for non-aerosol-generating routine care of patients with covid-19, 6,7 while the world health organization and the public health agency of canada recommend medical masks. 8, 9 shortages of personal protective equipment for healthcare workers, including medical masks and n95 respirators, have been widely reported in this pandemic. 11 a shortage of n95 respirators for aerosol-generating procedures, where the risk to healthcare workers is high, is of particular concern. this, along with conflicting recommendations, warrants an update of previous systematic reviews (where the last search was conducted in 2015). 12, 13 evidence to support similar relative effectiveness of medical masks compared with n95 respirators might help preserve stockpiles of n95 respirators for aerosol-generating procedures. on the other hand, if n95 respirators are clearly more effective, then their use for non-aerosol-generating procedures should be universally recommended. we conducted an updated systematic review and meta-analysis to help answer this question.we adhered to the prisma statement when reporting of this review (appendix s1). 14we adapted search strategies published by smith et al by removing terms related to surrogate exposure studies (ie, simulations and experiments involving manikins) and applying database-specific randomized controlled trial (rct) filters (appendix s2a-c). 12 we included rcts that met all the following criteria: the design was an rct including cluster randomized trials; the intervention was medical masks (defined surgical, procedural, isolation, laser, fluid resistant or face masks certified for use as a medical device) compared with n95 respirators (defined as respirators were n95 filtering face piece respirators certified by the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) and european standard filtering facepiece (ffp2) respirators) 12 ; the population was healthcare workers (defined as workers in a healthcare setting that could be exposed to a patient with acute respiratory illness) and reported on any of the following outcomes: viral respiratory infection laboratory confirmed by pcr, serology, or viral culture (our primary outcome), laboratoryconfirmed coronavirus infection, laboratory-confirmed influenza respirators for high-risk, aerosol-generating procedures in this pandemic should be considered when in short supply.coronavirus, covid-19, masks, meta-analysis, n95 respirators, sars-cov-2, systematic review infection, influenza-like illness, clinical respiratory illness, or workplace absenteeism.a single reviewer extracted data on study characteristics, participant characteristics, and cases of respiratory illness or infection into a standardized form. a second reviewer completed quality control on the extracted data to ensure its integrity. we combined data from fit tested and non-fit tested n95 respirator groups for macintyre 2011 to generate a single comparator n95 group. 16 similarly, we combined targeted use of n95 respirators with non-targeted use of n95 respirators for macintrye 2013. 17 for radonovich 2019, we used healthcare worker-seasons as the population metric (denominator) given that healthcare workers were treated independently and allowed to participate for up to all 4 years the study was conducted (2011/12 to 2014/15). 18 reviewers assessed risk of bias of eligible rcts independently and in duplicate using a modified cochrane risk of bias tool. 19 selection bias (random sequence generation and allocation concealment), performance bias (blinding of participants and personnel and other threats to validity), detection bias (blinding of outcome assessment and other potential threats to validity), attrition bias (incomplete outcome data), and reporting bias (selective outcome reporting assessed by comparing outcomes reported in the protocol to those in the published study or by comparing outcomes reported in the results to those in the methods of the published study) were assessed. for each domain in the tool, trials judged as definitely or probably being free of a given risk of bias were considered low risk of bias, whereas trials judged as probably or definitely biased were considered high risk of bias to reduce reporting of unclear bias assessments. for each outcome, we considered individual trials to be at serious risk of bias overall if 2 of the 8 risk of bias domains were judged as high risk and very serious risk of bias overall if more than 2 domains were judged as high risk. similarly, reviewers assessed the certainty in the evidence independently and in duplicate using the grading of recommendations assessment, development and evaluation (grade) approach. 20 the certainty we can have in our evidence ranges from very low, low, and moderate to high. it depends on risk of bias, inconsistency, indirectness, imprecision, and other considerations like publication bias. the cochrane risk of bias tool and grade were applied at the outcome level. consensus was reached through discussion among the review pair or with consultation of a third reviewer when necessary.pooled odds ratios (ors) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (cis) comparing medical masks to n95 respirators on dichotomous outcomes were calculated in r project for statistical computing (version 3.6.3). the "metafor" package was used, applying the inverse variance method and assuming a random effects model due to expected heterogeneity between studies. 21, 22 we set the criterion for statistical significance at alpha = 0.05. visual inspection of forest plots and the chi-square test were performed to evaluate heterogeneity. an i 2 statistic value of 0%-40%, 30%-60%, 50%-90%, or 75%-100% was interpreted as not likely important, moderate, substantial, or considerable heterogeneity, respectively. 23 when inconsistent magnitudes and directions of effect were observed upon visual inspection of the forest plot, and the chi-square test was significant, we interpreted heterogeneity as more important (ie, interpretation corresponding to the higher range in overlapping i 2 statistic values was reported). 23 to avoid unit-of-analysis errors in pooling data from cluster-rcts with individual participant rcts, we adjusted meta-analyses by calculating the effective sample sizes of included cluster-rcts. we used data on the average cluster size and intraclass correlation coefficient (icc) to calculate the design effect of the cluster-rct when not reported. individual level data were divided by the design effect to calculate the effective sample sizes (ie, number of events in each trial arm and the total sample size of each trial arm were reduced by the amount of correlation in clusters). we rounded effective sample sizes to the nearest whole number to be meta-analyzed. 24 aggregate data from the trials, corresponding effective sample sizes, and the statistical parameters used to calculate the effective sample sizes are available upon request.this study was conducted without financial support.our systematic review update identified 1 new randomized trial (n = 5180) eligible for meta-analysis following screening of 389 titles and abstracts, and 12 full-texts ( figure 1 ). 18 to date, there have been four trials where healthcare workers providing care for patients with acute febrile illness were randomized to medical masks (n = 3957) or n95 respirators (n = 4779), of which 3 were identified from a 2016 systematic review (table 1) . [16] [17] [18] 25 three of the trials were cluster-randomized, [16] [17] [18] and one was not. 25 two trials were conducted in north america (canada and us), 18, 25 and two were conducted in china. 16, 17 all randomized trials reported on laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory infection, defined by the detection of viral rna using reverse-transcriptase pcr from nasopharyngeal and flocked nasal specimens. [16] [17] [18] 25 all studies included pcr testing for respiratory viruses in the coronavidiae family [16] [17] [18] 25 ; however, only one trial reported results directly on coronavirus (oc43, 229e, sars, nl63, and hku1) infection. 25 laboratory-confirmed influenza infection (using pcr or hemagglutination inhibition) and influenza-like illness (based on pre-determined respiratory symptoms and fever ≥ 38˚c) were also studied in all 4 randomized trials. [16] [17] [18] 25 the criteria for clinical respiratory illness varied among trials and are detailed in the appendix s3. [16] [17] [18] only loeb 2009 reported on workplace absenteeism. 25 for influenza-like illness, the effect was or 1.31 (95% ci: 0.94-1.85), figure 2c ). [16] [17] [18] 25 for clinical respiratory illness, or 1.49 (95% ci: 0.98-2.28), i 2 = 78% ( figure 2d ). [16] [17] [18] since only one trial reported directly on coronavirus and workplace absenteeism; metaanalysis was not possible. 25 when seasonal coronavirus (oc43, hku1, 229e, nl63) was tested for by pcr in this non-cluster ran- i 2 = 5% (using the cochrane risk of bias tool, randomized trials were judged to have low risk of selection, attrition and reporting biases. risk of performance bias was high across all trials and outcomes due to lack of blinding of participant healthcare workers. risk of detection bias was high for influenza-like and clinical respiratory illness due to lack of laboratory confirmation, but low for laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory and influenza infection (appendix s4). in applying grade, the certainty of the overall evidence was judged to be low for laboratory-confirmed respiratory infection and laboratory-confirmed influenza infection, and very low for influenza-like illness and clinical respiratory illness, largely due to indirectness and imprecision ( table 2 ).there is no convincing evidence that medical masks are inferior to n95 respirators for protecting healthcare workers against laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory infections during routine care and non-aerosol-generating procedures. medical masks also performed similarly to n95 respirators in preventing laboratoryconfirmed influenza infection. for influenza-like illnesses and clinical respiratory illnesses, the point estimates favored n95 respirators; however, the confidence intervals were wide and there f i g u r e 1 prisma study flow diagram (randomized controlled trials, rcts) was considerable heterogeneity for the clinical respiratory illness outcome (p = .01, i 2 = 78%). this heterogeneity may have been due to the subjective nature of the criteria used to define this outcome between trials (appendix s3). reduced protection with medical masks during routine care of covid-19 patients cannot be ruled out. our low certainty in available evidence is because of its indirectness. when we searched for randomized trials comparing the protective effect of medical masks to n95 respirators against coronaviruses, we did not identify any for novel sars-cov-2 causing covid-19.our findings support preliminary epidemiological data from a case-report of respiratory protective devices for covid- 19. 26 forty-one healthcare workers were exposed to aerosol-generating procedures from a patient with severe pneumonia, who later there are several limitations in this meta-analysis. first, only one trial individually studied cases of coronavirus infection between medical masks and n95 respirators; therefore, we were unable to meta-analyze coronavirus infection specifically. this led us to downgrade the evidence with grade as it relates to indirectness because our findings may not be generalizable to sars-cov-2. all trials however did report a composite outcome of laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory infections that included coronavirus infections. second, this is a meta-analysis of aggregate data, rather than individual data.the latter would allow for harmonization of confounding co-variates and outcome definitions, specific to coronavirus infection. the reassuringly, outcome definitions (excluding clinical respiratory illness) were consistent among all four studies.a strength of this review is that it is up-to-date and incorporates the largest randomized trial of medical masks vs n95 respirators that have been completed to date. 18 secondly, we used appropriate meta-analytic techniques that accounted for cluster randomization that was present in three of the four included trials. [16] [17] [18] cluster randomization was not adjusted for in the most recent meta-analysis potentially leading to falsely narrower confidence intervals around point estimates of protection. 13, 27 for aerosol-generating procedures, n95 respirators are unanimously recommended by national and international guidelines; however, there is inconsistency in recommendations for routine care and non-aerosol-generating procedures of covid-19 patients. [6] [7] [8] [9] our evidence is in keeping with current who and public health agency of canada recommendations to use medical masks for non-aerosol-generating procedures when caring for covid-19 patients. in contrast, the cdc and ecdc recommend use of n95 respirators for non-aerosol-generating procedures over the less expensive and more readily available medical masks.with the widespread of sars-cov-2, a serious concern is that stockpiles of n95 respirators will be depleted. for all studies, appendix s1 includes the associated datasets, and appendix s2 includes the complete reporting of methods, analyses, and results.study 1 was conducted to generate items for the fmps using mechanical turk (mturk) on 26 april 2020. researchers have supported that results from mturk samples are reliable and valid when sufficient precautions are taken, and we followed prior guidelines for ensuring adequate data quality when using mturk (buhrmester et al., 2018; mellis & bickel, 2020; robinson et al., 2019). for all studies, we restricted participants to only those with more than 50 mturk assignment completions at a 95% approval rate or better. for studies 2 and 3, we included multiple attention checks and utilized time‐separate research designs. via these efforts, we believe that our analyses included only those providing appropriate survey responses.in study 1, two open‐ended questions were administered to 205 participants in return us$0.05. the first question queried participants’ personal perceptions regarding face masks, whereas the second question queried participants’ public perceptions. the questions read as follows: ‘face‐masks are often recommended to reduce the spread of viruses, but many people don’t wear face masks in public. in the box below, please list as many reasons as possible that [you/ people in general] do not wear a face mask when you go out in public. please write at least three reasons’. (bolded and underlined in original questions).the primary author thematically categorized and qualitatively analysed responses following recommendations for item generation and scale pretesting (devellis, 2016; howard, 2018; presser & blair, 1994). thirteen categories were identified (table 1). to ensure that an adequate scope of face mask perceptions was assessed in the fmps while being reasonably concise, we developed items for categories with more than a 10% frequency in participants’ qualitative responses for either personal or public perceptions. this resulted in the inclusion of eight categories: comfort, efficacy doubts, access, compensation, inconvenience, appearance, attention, and independence. because we intended to develop a concise measure (~30 items), we initially developed six to eight items per category (55 total) to be subsequently reduced to four items per category in the following study. these initial items were developed from participants’ responses to ensure content relevance. all initial items can be seen in appendix s3.in study 2, we subject our initial item list to exploratory factor analysis (efa) to support the eight‐dimension factor structure and reduce the initial item list to a more concise measure. reducing the item list results in the fmps, and we then assess its construct validity.participants (n = 745, m age = 36.76, sd age = 12.59, 45% female, 85% western english‐speaking countries) were recruited from mturk and were provided us$1.25. we included nine attention checks and removed participants’ responses if they failed any. all statistics, including the reported sample size above, reflect the sample after removing these participants’ responses.participants enrolled into study 2 via mturk on 28 april 2020. they provided their informed consent and completed the first survey online (time 1). one day later, they were emailed and completed the second survey (time 2). two days after the second survey, they were emailed and completed the third survey (time 3).please refer to appendix s2 for descriptions of all scales. at time 1, we administered measures of face mask usage, presence of government order to wear facemasks, age, and gender. at time 2, we administered the initial face mask perception items. at time 3, we administered measures of coronavirus seriousness perceptions, socializing in public behaviours, health safety perceptions, general face mask perceptions, personal health perceptions, doctor visitation perceptions, and current face mask usage.we analysed our item list via efa using the recommendations of prior authors (costello & osborne, 2005; fabrigar et al., 1999; howard, 2016). we applied a principal axis factoring method with direct oblimin rotation, as we expected our factors to be correlated. our initial efa supported an eight‐factor solution (appendix s4), but some items did not produce satisfactory results. we removed eight problematic items in a stepwise process, resulting in an intermediate list of 47 items. while these items produced adequate psychometric properties, our intent was to develop a more concise measure. we continued removing items with the lowest primary factor loading in a stepwise manner until four items remained for each factor. our final factor structure can be found in appendix s4. an eight‐factor solution was again observed, and each item produced satisfactory factor loadings. we label these 32 final items as the fmps (appendix a).we assessed the relation of the fmps with other relevant variables (table 2). three variables reflected face mask wearing. none of the eight dimensions significantly correlated to face mask wearing before the prior six months (p > .05), but six of the eight dimensions significantly correlated to face mask wearing within the prior six months as well as the course of the study (p < .05). the two dimensions that did not significantly relate to these two variables were comfort and attention. further, six variables reflected general health perceptions and behaviours. efficacy doubts had the strongest average correlation with each of these variables (average |r| = .35, all p < .01). inconvenience (average |r| = .23, all p < .05) and appearance (average |r| = .23, all p < .05) also significantly correlated to each of these variables, whereas attention (average |r| = .14, five p < .05) and independence (average |r| = .25, five p < .05) significantly correlated to most. lastly, comfort (average |r| = .14, four p < .05), access (average |r| = .07, two p < .05) and compensation (average |r| = .08, two p < .05) each had smaller and fewer significant relationships with these variables. together, most of the fmps dimensions significantly predicted recent face mask usage, but more variation was seen among the dimensions regarding their relation to general health perceptions and behaviours.we confirm the factor structure of the fmps via confirmatory factor analysis (cfa).participants (n = 327, m age = 36.46, sd age = 11.52, 43% female, 66% western english‐speaking countries) were recruited from mturk and were provided us$0.40. we included five attention checks and removed participants’ responses if they failed any. all statistics, including the reported sample size above, reflect the sample after removing these participants’ responses.participants enrolled into study 3 via mturk on may 3, 2020. they provided their informed consent and completed the first survey online (time 1). one day later, they were emailed and completed the second survey (time 2).at time 1, we measured age and gender. at time 2, we administered the fmps.we followed the recommendations of prior authors to perform our cfa (brown, 2015; harrington, 2009). although our eight face mask perception dimensions are measured via a single scale, we do not consider these dimensions to form a unitary construct. instead, we conceptualize these dimensions as independent perceptions, and therefore, we modelled these dimensions as eight covaried latent factors – each with four indicators. no second‐order factors were included.initially, our model fit indices (cfi = .86, ifi = .86, rmsea = .09, srmr = .07, χ2/df = 3.41) fell short of recommended cut‐offs (cfi ≥ 0.95, ifi ≥ 0.95, rmsea ≤ 0.08, srmr ≤ 0.05, χ2/df ≤ 2.00). five pairs of items had particularly strong modification indices (>10) and loaded onto the same factor. when analysing the content of these pairs, each was near synonyms. we then covaried the error terms of these item pairs because they each loaded on common factors and their association could be clearly justified, which is a process recommended by prior authors (brown, 2015; harrington, 2009). the revised model fit indices each met or closely approached recommended cut‐offs (cfi = 0.95, ifi = 0.95, rmsea = 0.05, srmr = 0.07, χ2/df = 1.86). each item strongly loaded onto its respective latent factor (≥ .48), and full reporting of these factor loadings is included in appendix s4.despite dramatic rises in coronavirus, those in western societies appear reluctant to wear face masks (bbc, 2020a, 2020b). our goal was to develop the fmps to identify justifications for not wearing face masks. via a three‐study process, we developed a measure with satisfactory psychometric and validity evidence. we supported an eight‐dimension structure via efa and cfa, showing that face mask perceptions are complex. people may have many justifications for not wearing face masks, which poses several implications for research and practice.most broadly, the current results can be situated within the com‐b model to understand their association with behavioural change and relevant interventions (michie et al., 2011). the com‐b model synthesizes extant models of behavioural change and provides an organizing framework to identify and interlink behavioural sources, intervention functions, and policy categories. it identifies six behavioural sources, nine intervention functions, and seven policy categories. face mask perceptions are a type of reflective motivation source, which involves evaluation and cognition in developing behavioural attitudes; reflective motivation sources are most closely associated with the intervention functions of education, persuasion, incentivization, and coercion; and these intervention functions are associated with each of the policy categories except environmental/social planning. because several face mask perceptions significantly related to face mask wearing in the current study, future authors should utilize the com‐b model to develop face mask interventions associated with education, persuasion, incentivization, and coercion – the relevant intervention functions to reflective motivation sources (and the fmps).in developing these interventions, researchers should integrate frameworks associated with reflective motivation sources and these four intervention functions (arden & chilcot, 2020; bish & michie, 2010; teasdale et al., 2012). notably, bish, and michie (2010) systematically reviewed determinants of prevention behaviours during a pandemic in response to h1n1 (swine flu). they discovered that predictors of protective behaviours differ based on whether the behaviour is preventive or avoidant, and they identified predictors of face mask wearing in the scope of preventive behaviours. these included demographic characteristics (gender, age, and marital status) and attitudes (perceived severity, perceived susceptibility, social pressure, and perceived efficacy) – the latter being a reflective motivation source. only one of these antecedents, perceived efficacy, represents a perception identified in the current article, and thereby their model can be expanded by incorporating the other perceptions. also, face mask perceptions may serve as mediators between certain antecedents and face mask wearing, as many of their antecedents (e.g., demographics, social pressure) are known to influence perceptions (wilson et al., 1988). identifying specific perceptions (and not others) as mediators may not only increase the sophistication of face mask research, but it would also identify which face mask perceptions may be susceptible to influences and useful to target via interventions. lastly, bish and michie (2010) showed that some antecedents predicted other preventative behaviours but not face mask wearing. this finding suggests that not all relations of preventative behaviours can generalize to face mask wearing, emphasizing the need to replicate results regarding one type of preventative behaviour across each of the other types of preventative behaviours.similar assertions could be made for teasdale et al.’s (2012) findings. these authors supported that, as predicted by protective motivation theory, threats and coping appraisals predict protective behaviours. their experimental manipulations of threat and coping appraisals included the intervention functions of education, persuasion, incentivization, and/or coercion – aligning with the proposed associations of reflective motivation sources in the com‐b model. future research could extend their findings to face masks by incorporating face mask perceptions as mediators of threats’ and coping appraisals’ effects on face mask wearing behaviours.additionally, interventions to encourage face mask wearing are not a ‘one size fits all’ approach. instead, researchers should consider specific perceptions in developing interventions, and the most common perceptions may not be the most important to target. while comfort, for example, was among the most common perceptions reported by participants, it did not have significant relationships with face mask wearing. other perceptions, such as efficacy concerns, may be more fruitful to address. furthermore, face mask perceptions may be associated with differing theoretical frameworks. for instance, the perception of efficacy doubts may be relevant to theory associated with message framing and even fake news (e.g., prospect theory, parallel response theory; effron & raj, 2020; gallagher & updegraff, 2012; murphy et al., 2019), as perceptions regarding the efficacy of face masks may be largely developed via communicated information and misinformation. other face mask perceptions, such as comfort, may be less relevant to these theoretical approaches, as perceptions of comfort may be more developed through embodied experiences than communicated information. these differences emphasize the need for future researchers to apply multiple theoretical frameworks to understand face mask perceptions and behaviours.future research should also replicate the current results and address our limitations. although face mask perceptions likely differ between eastern and western populations, we did not perform any tests of measurement invariance (van de schoot et al., 2012). the fmps may not be appropriate for use with eastern populations, and future research should assess this possibility. we also did not assess test–retest reliability, which would provide insights into the stability of face mask perceptions. likewise, we did not explore participant reactions to items via think‐aloud methods to identify problematic wording and cognitive burdens1we would like to thank the reviewer for identifying this future research direction. (devellis, 2016; howard, 2018; presser & blair, 1994), and such an assessment would provide insights into the ease (or difficulty) of completing the fmps.all authors declare no conflict of interest.t he world health organization (who) officially named the atypical pneumonia the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , which is caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). on march 11, 2020 , who declared covid-19 outbreak a pandemic. as of april 17, 2020, >2,000,000 people from 210 countries and territories had been infected. the death toll is >140,000. the case fatality rate (cfr) is 6.7%.despite sharing similar properties with other lethal coronaviruses, covid-19 is much more infectious, and has become the biggest challenge to healthcare systems in many countries including the developed ones who have the most advanced healthcare facilities. before vaccines and/or specific treatments are available, infection control is the key to minimize damage made by covid-19. this can be achieved by case identification, contact tracing, isolation, and supportive treatment. personal hygiene and social distancing are extremely important as well, since these are the means to prevent community spread.ophthalmologists are at risk of covid-19 infection, since routine ophthalmic examinations are usually performed in a setting with close doctor-patient contact. moreover, the covid-19 present in tears could become a source of crossinfection. therefore, eye care professionals shall remain highly vigilant all the time during the pandemic.in the following sessions, we will discuss the properties and characteristics of sars-cov-2 and covid-19. we have also prepared answers to frequently asked questions (faq) regarding the virus, personal hygiene, and the differences between various face masks. we have also shared the precautions and strategies that we have implemented in our ophthalmic practice, based on our previous and current successful experiences in preventing severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2003 and the current covid-19 outbreaks in hong kong.coronaviruses spread mainly through inhalation of droplets, direct or indirect contacts, and to a limited scale, aerosol-related transmission. direct contact means the virus is transmitted from the infected to the healthy through direct physical contacts, whereas indirect contacts are usually transmitted through fomites. droplets as well can transmit the infection both by direct and indirect means. it can be inhaled directly by others when the infected cough or sneeze; in contrast, droplets may settle on table surface, and later on when another person touches the table before touching his own mucosal surfaces (including nose, mouth, and eyes), the transmission of disease might then happen. [1] [2] [3] aerosols are a collection of very tiny droplets in air, produced in specific circumstances, which are capable of traveling a longer distance and longer time in air, compared with typical droplets, before settling down owing to the small size and light weight. aerosols can be generated during aerosol-generating procedures in hospital settings, such as resuscitation, endotracheal intubation, positive pressure ventilation, tracheostomy insertion, bronchosocopy, airway suction, and so on. 4, 5 when medical personnel is performing aerosol-generating procedures, full personal-protective equipment should be put on, including goggles, n95 respirators, face shield, protective gowns, and shoe-cover, among others. coughing, sneezing, toilet flushing, cigarette smoke, and hot pot steam, among others, might also have a possibility to generate infective aerosols but need further studies to confirm it (fig. 1) .epidemiologists use basic reproductive number (r 0 ) to represent the infectivity of certain infectious disease. it is defined as the number of individuals being infected when a confirmed case enters the population composed of only susceptible individuals. 6 for example, r 0 ¼ 1.0 means on average an infected patient would infect one other healthy individual in the community and r 0 ¼ 2.0 refers to 2 healthy individuals acquired the infection from a single confirmed case. r 0 of covid-19 was initially estimated to be 2.2 to 2.7; however, as more data are available with time, some epidemiologists suggested that the true r 0 of this virus could be much higher and lies between 3.3 and 5.47, or even higher between 4.7 and 6.6. 7, 8 in contrast, r 0 of sars-cov were 1.88 in beijing, 1.70 in hong kong, and 0.95 worldwide, 9, 10 whereas r 0 of mers-cov were 0.47 in middle east, 0.45 in saudi arabia, and 0.91 overall for middle east and south korea. 10, 11 the infectivity of covid-19 is, therefore, highest among the 3 lethal coronavirus infections. the cfr, however, has a reverse order for the 3 viruses when comparing with infectivity. they are 6.7%, 9.6%, and 34.4% for covid-19, sars, and mers, respectively. 12 possible reasons for the covid-19 to be more infectious than mers or sars coronavirus sars-cov-2 utilizes the same cellular receptors as sars-cov, the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. therefore, it is expected that this new virus would behave very similar to sars-cov in terms of transmission properties, such as causing lower instead of upper respiratory tract symptoms. 13 however, unlike sars-cov or mers-cov, epithelial cells in human airway are more suitable than standard tissue culture medium for the growth of sars-cov-2. 13 moreover, the incubation period of this virus is up to 24 days and the virus is capable of transmitting the disease even when patients only have mild or even no symptoms. 14 unlike sars in which most patients developed fever, studies from china and europe showed only 43% to 48% of them had fever at the time of admission. 15, 16 this renders comprehensive early identification of cases extremely difficult. lastly, the low cfr of the disease relative to sars and mers may make people more complacent and less compliant with preventive measures. with global spread, the role of quarantine is to slow or stop the transmission of infection so that serious cases are at least spread over a longer period of time. an uncontrolled outbreak of infection could easily overwhelm the ability to care for patients and lead to exponential spread. all of the aforementioned characteristics of covid-19 facilitate the transmission of virus in the community thus increasing the difficulty of its containment. further studies to investigate the mechanisms for covid-19's high infectivity are warranted. coronaviruses (covs) are the largest group of viruses belonging to the nidovirales order. the name "coronavirus" comes from the latin "corona," which means crown, due to its characteristic appearance resembling a crown or solar corona. cov can induce respiratory, gastrointestinal, and neurological dysfunction in their hosts and predominately respiratory infections in human (fig. 2) . 17 a total of 7 species of covs have been found to be pathogenic to humans, including hku1, oc43, nl63, and 229e, which can lead to mild upper respiratory tract infections and are still circulating among human, 18, 19 whereas the more aggressive sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 are zoonotic and these viruses crossed species from animals and infected human.sars was first known to human in 2002 to 2003, starting in guangdong province of china, infecting 8098 people worldwide and with a cfr of 9.6%. 20,21 mers-cov, however, first appeared in 2012 in saudi arabia, infected almost 2500 people, mainly in the middle east and korea and with a high cfr of 34.4%. 22 recently, a new member to the coronavirus family, sars-cov-2, has led to a large-scale pandemic with an estimated cfr of 6.7%. 23 the earliest cluster of covid-19 identified as "pneumonia of unknown etiology" or "atypical pneumonia" was defined as evidence of pneumonia on x-ray or computer tomography scans, fever of !388c, normal or low white blood cell count, and no clinical improvement despite standard antibiotics treatment for 3 to 5 days. according to the studies from china and europe, symptoms of covid-19 include fever, olfactory dysfunction, gustatory dysfunction, cough, fatigue, sputum, shortness of breath, conjunctival injection, and so on (fig. 3) . 13, 15, 16 viable sars-cov-2 could be detected in aerosol up to 3 hours after aerosolization, thus raising concerns on the possibility of viral transmission through aerosolization. the survival time of sars-cov-2 varies among different materials. for example, viable sars-cov-2 could only be detected on copper up to 4 hours, but its survival time could be as long as 2 to 3 days on plastic and stainless steel (table 1) . 24 therefore, indirect transmission of sars-cov-2 through fomite is highly likely! to lower the risk of infection, we must always remain vigilant and be aware of personal hygiene. droplets, in term of respiratory infections, refer to small liquid drops that are generated by expiratory events such as coughing, sneezing, laughing, talking, or even breathing. 25 aerosols are suspensions of small liquid droplets or solid particles in air. droplets are subdivided by size into large and small droplets, and the smallest form as droplet nuclei. the size definitions vary among studies, but most naturally and artificially produced aerosols contain a range of droplet sizes. after being expelled, droplets are usually brought down to ground under gravity and are transmitted over a limited distance only. however, the water content of small droplets may evaporate during the stay in air, producing even smaller droplet nuclei that could then remain suspended in air and could be transmitted over a long distance (fig. 1 ). 26the traditional model of infectious disease, known as the epidemiologic triad, consists of a pathogen, a susceptible host, and an environment that brings the host and agent together. the overall risk of infection further depends on the infectivity, pathogenicity, and virulence of the invading pathogen. effective preventive measures for infectious disease require assessment of all the above components and their interactions. in general, it is advisable to avoid going to places that are crowded with people, or with higher risk of infection such as clinics or hospitals. good hand hygiene and proper wear of suitable face mask are other key preventive measures. standard recommendation on hand hygiene is to use alcoholbased handrubs or washing hands with soap and water for at least 29 ethanol is the ingredient present in most alcoholic drink. however, commercially available high concentration ethanol may contain toxic additives to prevent people from drinking as required by certain countries, making it less popular as disinfectant. isopropyl alcohol, however, is produced in high quantities with high purity, and is widely used in households and industries as disinfectants or detergents.face mask is defined as a physical barrier loosely worn between the mouth and nose of the wearer and the surrounding. it is not tightly fit and offers no air-sealing. surgical masks are face masks that are qualified to prevent contamination of sterile surgical field. respirators (eg, n95 respirators) are air filtration devices designed to remove particulates from inhaled air. it should be tightly fitted onto the mouth and nose to ensure air sealing. one major common property is that they utilize filters to prevent unwanted substances from passing through the barrier, while allowing air to pass through. 30 filters can capture particles of different size through various mechanisms. larger particles are captured by filter fibers directly when they impact or intercept the fibers. smaller particles are constantly bombarded by air molecules, causing them to deviate from the air stream and come into contact with a fiber. furthermore, oppositely charged particles are attracted to charged fiber. all particles that come into contact with a fiber will stay attached to the fiber firmly. in that way, filters can capture particles smaller than the pore size. structures and mechanisms of various filter materials are illustrated in figure 4 . table 2 . n95 respirators are primarily developed for industrial safety to reduce particulates inhaled by wearers. 30,31 they are certified by national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) under the guidance of "niosh 42 cfr part 84," with the mark "niosh" printed on the surface of the respirators. the notation "95" implies that they can filter at least 95% of particles sized 0.3 microns, and "n" represents non-oil particles. they are tested under stringent protocols which aim to simulate the "worst case" condition. 32 noncharged sodium chloride particles of 0.3 mm was selected, which represent the most penetrating particle size, where the particles are most likely to bypass various mechanisms to capture them. n95 respirators have also been tested under conditions similar to that of astm standards, showing filtration efficiency of >99% for uncharged particles sized around 0.1 mm. 33 the overall filtration efficiency of n95 respirators is superior to surgical masks of all astm levels. (see fig. 5 for performance of various respirators and masks). 34 n95 respirators offer better protection than surgical masks, which are loosely fit and not air-tight. both of them offer protection against splash of fluid and droplets, but only n95 respirators protect the wearer against small viral particles or aerosol inhalation. fitting procedure is required for n95 to ensure tight air-seal, and should not be worn by children, men with beard or individuals with breathing difficulty. n95 respirators offer better protection against air-borne infection. for surgical masks, fitting procedure is not required. although the theoretical particle filtration efficiency of the filter material in surgical mask may reach 98% (for astm level 2 and 3 masks), the actual total inward leakage (til) may reach 30% to 35% due to inadequate sealing. 34, 35 therefore, 30% to 35% of air that is breathed into the wearer's respiratory system might not have passed through the filtering materials of surgical marks. this is the reason why surgical masks can prevent droplets but not airborne particles or aerosols. despite that, surgical masks should be worn by individuals with suspected respiratory infections, effectively lowering the environmental contamination due to droplets expelled by individuals with respiratory infection. for healthcare workers, surgical masks should be worn when performing sterile procedures, or as general protection against droplets infections. for public use, such as individuals with respiratory symptoms, people exposed in crowded and poorly ventilated places, such as taking public transports, students in school and individuals visiting clinics or hospitals, surgical masks are also recommended. 36 n95 respirators are recommended to be worn by healthcare workers when working in high-risk areas such as fever wards, inpatient or isolation rooms for patients with confirmed or suspected covid-19. 36 they should be removed and discarded when leaving the patient room or care area, followed by immediate hand hygiene. the outer layer of masks is considered dirty, whereas the inner layer is relatively clean. hand hygiene should be performed before and after taking off the mask to avoid contamination of our hands. mask should be fitted snugly over the face. other points worth noting are: the colored side of the mask should face outwards; the metallic strip at the uppermost side molds to the bridge of the nose; the mask covers the nose, mouth, and chin; the strings or elastic bands are positioned properly to keep the mask firmly in place; and avoid touching or manipulating the mask once secured on face as frequent handling may reduce its protection. if you must do so, wash your hands before and after touching would help.change masks timely. replace the mask immediately if it is damaged, wetted, or soiled. after taking off the mask, discard it into a lidded waste bin and perform hand hygiene immediately.surgical n95 mask is a subgroup of n95 respirator that also fulfils astm requirements and food and drug administrationcleared as surgical mask. they are fluid-resistant, whereas other standard n95 respirators may not be fluid-resistant. both types exhibit similar filtration efficiencies for small particles like viruses. for general protection of the wearer, standard or surgical n95 respirators will all suffice. 32 the key difference is that the surgical n95 masks prevent the wearers from contaminating the surgical field or environment and are used when performing sterile procedures under the threat of air-borne transmission. there are industrial respirators with higher filtration efficiency available, eg, n99, p100, etc. however, their uses in healthcare settings are often limited due to relatively lower breathability. respiratory distress may occur after prolonged wearing. n95 respirators already provide good protection against viral droplets or aerosol protection and their breathability are similar to surgical masks. therefore, they are satisfactory in most healthcare settings, especially when prolonged wearing is needed. 31 no, the protection is very limited! although reusable cotton masks can be sterilized for reuse, they generally suffer from limitations including low filtration efficiency, time-consuming production, and higher risk of contamination. charcoal-activated carbon masks are intended to absorb chemicals from inhaled air.those masks are not formally tested for the particle and bacterial filtration efficiency, and do not claim for protection from airborne or droplet transmission. at the height of covid-19 epidemic, it would be better than none to be worn by patients with respiratory symptoms to reduce environmental contamination, if surgical masks are not available.the close proximity of patients and doctors during eye examination, the presence of tears and liquids for anesthesia and dilation, or the potential aerosol or droplets from "air puff" tonometry, all pose a high risk for infective transmission. 37 conjunctivitis was reported to be present in 0.8% to 5.2% of covid-19 patients. 15, 38, 39 conjunctivitis can be the presenting symptom/sign of covid-19, high vigilance is essential as conjunctivitis is a common condition in ophthalmic practice. furthermore, because eye centers could harbor asymptomatic patients with covid-19 that have subtle or even no symptoms, proper precautions should be taken to protect for both patients and staff from the infection. yes. conjunctivitis could be present in covid-19 patients, and virus may even be present in their tears and conjunctival secretion. direct contact with the ocular surface and mucosal membrane during routine ophthalmic examination may have risk of infection. the doctor-patient distance during examination is usually <1 m, where the possibility of droplet transmission is high if there is no proper protection. air jet produced in non-contact tonometry might also generate aerosol of fluids from the eye, which might be infectious. last but not least, ophthalmic centers may be crowded with patients with potential risk of infection. extra precautions should be taken in ophthalmic practices.preventing patients with potential respiratory infection from entering the facilities might minimize the chance of exposure. for patients with potential risk, nonurgent ophthalmic consultations will be deferred after appropriate period of quarantine and observation. special precautions will be taken in handling such patients with sight-threatening conditions ( fig. 6 and table 3 ).patients are screened before entering the facilities by phone screening and triage at the entrance. face masks should be worn by all personnel and visitors inside the facilities. visitors wait at an adequately ventilated area, keeping at least 1-m distance from others, and were provided with adequate alcohol-based handrubs, rubbish bins, and educational material in the waiting area. in consultation rooms, transparent shields are installed on slit-lamps to prevent droplet transmission. all instruments and surfaces are disinfected properly after each use.if patients are screened as high risk of covid-19 infection and having ophthalmic emergencies, doctor-in-charge should be informed. ideally patient should be isolated in a single room, with a dedicated team of healthcare workers entering with full personal protective equipment including n95 respirators for examination. patients are not allowed to enter the public waiting areas. potentially aerosol-generating procedures are to be avoided. all equipments are disinfected immediately after patient contact.in slit-lamp examination, physical barrier between doctors and patients is advisable to prevent droplet transmission. commercially available breath shields are available, but producing home-made shields is not difficult. the material chosen should be highly transparent to allow effective visualization, rigid enough not to collapse, and thin enough to be cut into desired shape (fig. 7) . a clear polyvinyl chloride document holder is a good choice. make a central opening and fit it in between the optical modules. the edges of the shield should be smoothen with a sand paper polisher should it be too rough or sharp. the size of the shield should not be too small in which protection effect will be compromised; or too large in which manipulation of the slit-lamp equipment will become difficult. the size of an a3 size paper or one that is slightly larger would be quite optimal and recommended. the location of the hole is also important. we want the upper portion to be larger to provide more protection while the lower portion to be smaller to allow easier access to slit-lamp manipulation. it should be cleaned and disinfected regularly.the patient contact areas of general equipment such as slitlamp, non-contact tonometer, autorefractor, and so on should be disinfected with 70% to 75% ethanol or isopropyl alcohol immediately after each use. instruments that had direct contact with patient's ocular surface such as goldmann applanation tonometer prisms and diagnostic contact lenses are disinfected by immersion in either 1:10 diluted bleach solution with sodium hypochlorite or 3% hydrogen peroxide for at least 5 minutes. surgical instruments are sterilized according to standard protocols.in non-contact tonometry, the air jet impacted on the tear film was reported to general micro-aerosols. 40, 41 since sars-cov-2 was reported to be present in tears and conjunctival secretions from covid-19 confirmed patients with conjunctivitis, extra caution shall be exercised when performing noncontact tonometry on patients with red eyes. alternative methods such as rebound tonometry could be considered. operators should wear proper face mask or respirator.surgical mask should be worn by all patients entering operating rooms, to prevent contamination from coughing or sneezing. adhesive tape could be applied across the nose bridge area to ensure complete coverage of patient's nose and mouth. in our center, we also require patients changing their clothes and putting on surgical caps to further reduce the risk. for patients with suspected respiratory infection or exposure risk, only urgent operations would be considered. they would be scheduled as last case of operation to allow thorough disinfection afterwards. all personnel should be cautious and vigilant against sharp needles or blades injury. it would be a good idea to refer high-risk cases to hospitals that have adequate facilities such as negative-pressure isolation rooms to provide proper care to patients.the outbreak of covid-19 has now spread to every part of the world. the key to successful reduction in morbidity and mortality during this pandemic relies on early identification, containment, prevention of transmission, and adequate supportive treatments. before safe and effective vaccines and specific treatments are available, the only way to control and contain covid-19 would be applying the basic principles and measures in the prevention of the transmission of the disease.covid-19 is an infectious disease following every rule in the field of infection control; therefore, as long as good infection control measures are implemented, prevention of disease spreading and zero new case in medical practices are not impossible. these are extremely important and relevant since there have been at least 3000 and 2600 medical professionals and healthcare workers infected in china and italy, respectively. in the midst of the current pandemic, everyone on this planet has to be highly vigilant and compliant to the precautions. we hope our answers to the frequently asked questions would help one be more fully equipped with the necessary knowledge and know how to protect oneself and the people around him/her.new coronavirus disease 2019 sars-cov-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 until recently, it was supposed, according to a world health organization report from february 2020 [1] , that the proportion of truly asymptomatic carriers of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection was relatively small and not a major driver of virus circulation, infection transmission, and new disease development. however, recently collected data seem to completely negate this statement. in a study carried out in an isolated village of approximately 3000 people in northern italy, it was shown that 50-75% of people with positive pharyngeal molecular tests were totally asymptomatic [2] . this finding was confirmed by a more recent evaluation carried out in china, where to avoid a new outbreak of new coronavirus disease 2019 , all the people arriving from overseas were rigorously tested [3] . it was found that among patients with newly identified infections, 78% were asymptomatic. although few, data collected in children seem to indicate that asymptomatic cases are common also in pediatrics. an observational cohort study enrolling 36 children aged 0-16 years (mean, 8.3 years) with laboratory confirmed covid-19 revealed that 10 of them (28%) were totally asymptomatic [4] . similar findings were reported in a study enrolling a greater number of covid-19 children (mean age, 6.7 years), in which it was evidenced that among 171 patients, 27 (15.8%) were asymptomatic [5] amount of viral load associated with sars-cov-2 transmission is not known and viral shedding increases with increasing covid-19 severity [6] , it seems likely that at least some asymptomatic people of any age can transmit the infection and become important sources of new covid-19 cases.in addition, cases of certain transmission of sars-cov-2 infection from an asymptomatic contact have been described [6, 7] . contrarily to adults and old people that frequently have moderate or severe clinical manifestations, about 50% of symptomatic children have a mild disease that tends to solve spontaneously and does not require medical intervention [8] . these cases are not recognized often as covid-19 but can contribute to increase virus circulation and new covid-19 case development.to reduce the role of asymptomatic or poorly symptomatic people in sars-cov-2 diffusion, the centers for disease control and prevention in the usa has modified previous recommendations, suggesting that, together with infected persons and health care workers, healthy people "should wear a cloth face cover when they have to go out in public, for example, to the grocery store or to pick up other necessities" [9] . the need for universal use of cloth face coverings or, when available, of surgical masks seems further suggested by the results of some studies that support the hypothesis that face masks are effective in reducing the presence of viral particles in droplets and aerosol generated by symptomatic sars-cov-2-infected individuals [10] .until some weeks ago, it was thought that the virus could be transmitted mainly by droplets that are coughed or sneezed out or by previously contaminated objects, with differences according to the initial load and surface characteristics [11] . airborne transmission of sars-cov-2 was considered possible only when care procedures that generate aerosols, such as intubation, bronchoscopy, and positive-pressure ventilation, are performed [12] . however, the results of some submitted but not yet peer-reviewed studies seem to indicate the opposite, i.e., the virus can be present in exhaled air produced by talking and breathing [13] . moreover, a potential role of aerosols in virus diffusion was evident in a complex laboratory study. aerosols containing a viral load quite similar to that observed in human respiratory samples were created to generate an aerosolized environment. sars-cov-2 was detected up to 3 h after the start of the study [14] . although these findings were not considered fully convincing by some authors [11] , they deserve attention and require further studies to establish whether and when airborne transmission of sars-cov-2 truly occurs and how it can be reduced. the maximal distance between persons that still allow airborne transmission, the size of aerosolized particles that are generated, the lowest infection dose, and how long a person must remain in a room containing aerosols with the virus to become infected are among the problems that must be solved to evaluate the real importance of air transmission problems and make decisions on preventive measures. answers to these questions are essential to establish whether surgical masks that are suggested for the prevention of infection due to asymptomatic subjects can also be effective for the prevention of airborne transmission. table 1 summarizes the different types of face masks and which could be good or not for children in the community. whereas the effectiveness of homemade cloth face coverings is debated, it is well known that surgical masks can prevent the inhalation of large droplets and sprays, although they have a poor ability to filter submicron-sized airborne particles [15] . as airborne transmission refers to particles < 5 μm in diameter, it cannot be determined whether they are always effective, at least when they are properly used. on the other hand, in some cases, such as those with very small particles and a high viral load, surgical masks could fail and allow infection diffusion. to solve the problem, the size of sars-cov-2 aerosolized particles produced by cough, sneeze, talking, and breathing should be determined. however, in favor of surgical masks, there are studies that were carried out in the prevention of influenza, a viral disease with some similarities with covid-19, and during the sars epidemic. a metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials comparing surgical masks and n95 respirators in preventing influenza-like illness and laboratory-confirmed influenza showed that these two preventive measures were similarly effective [16] . similar results were obtained in a retrospective study carried out in five hong kong hospitals in which the effect of surgical masks and n95 respirators in the prevention of sars among health care workers was compared. even in this case, no difference was evidenced between the two masks [17] . on the other hand, wearing n95 respirators that are designed to achieve a very close facial fit and that can block 0.3-μm particles is associated with an increased effort in breathing, leading to discomfort, tiredness, or headaches after few hours of use. this explains why the use of n95 respirators is recommended only for health care workers that must take care of infected patients and can be exposed to aerosolized particles of very small size [18] . however, protecting healthy children with a mask can be very difficult. it is recommended that children younger than 2 years of age do not wear any type of mask as they, having very small airways, can struggle to breathe. moreover, as they can be unable to remove the mask without assistance, they are at increased risk of suffocation [19] . for infants, particularly the youngest, social distancing remains, together with washing hands and avoiding licking things, the measure of choice to reduce risk of sars-cov-2 infection as highlighted by the american academy of pediatrics [20] . surgical masks of smaller size suitable for children from 3 to 12 years old are marketed. moreover, according to the us centers for disease prevention and control [19] , they can be prepared at home from common materials at low cost. however, in toddlers and children of the first school years, frequently masks do not fit snugly on the face with the risk that contaminated air can access or mask is poorly tolerated. moreover, as generally children do not like to keep the mask on and will likely try to remove it, as well as touch their face more, the use of mask can favor infection development. consequently, preparing the healthy child to use the mask is strongly needed if problems must be avoided. to obtain maximal compliance, reasons for mask wearing without attempts of removing it must be clearly explained. finally, child's will must not be forced.while waiting for the results of the abovementioned studies on the transmission of sars-cov-2, on the basis of clinical findings, we think that the universal use of facial masks seems necessary when people have to go out in their everyday lives. however, the use in children poses a whole series of problems that are not easily solved. in addition to the availability of masks of different sizes capable of adapting perfectly to the face, it is necessary that the use of masks in children is preceded by a strong parental work with the main aim to obtain child cooperation. this seems particularly important for healthy subjects that have to wear the mask for the first time. children with chronic respiratory disease, such as those with cystic fibrosis, that are used to use mask have less problems. if compliance is difficult, it is better that the child does not wear the mask, and other measures or reducing infection risk, including remaining at home, are practiced. a systematic adoption of face masks might have important implication for the opening of schools, and schools should focus some lessons on this issue to favor the use of masks among children and support parents in this work. on the other hand, in addition to face masks, the other measures of covid-19 prevention such as safety distance or hand washing, despite not always easy with children, should not be forgotten especially in schools.the global outbreak of coronavirus has become an international public health threat prevention is of paramount importance to contain its spread this study observes face mask wearing behavior and contact transmission problems in taiwan teachers track student status in class in addition to measuring body temperature and regular disinfection, classrooms require ventilation wear mask, provide alcohol spray and avoid sharing the microphone both questionnaire surveys and experimental were utilized a total of 160 adults residing in taiwan participated in the survey the dye simulated the possible virus area on the mask surface during usage subjects were required to complete a questionnaire and simulate the spread of contact transmission when using a computer eighty-one % of respondents reported consistent use of surgical masks several times a day they reported taking their masks off in relatively safe areas most people reported using one mask per day and storing the masks in their pockets as a result, masks surface become a contamination source in the contact experiment, ten adults were requested to don and doff a surgical mask while doing a word processing task the extended contamination areas were recorded and identified by image analysis the results show an average contamination area of the workspace is significant 530 cm(2) when the hand touches the surface of the mask, it may spread the virus to the subsequent contact areaadolescents' face mask usage and contact transmission in novel coronavirusthe world health organization (who) is charged with curbing the spread of diseases with public health concerns. 1 however, health promotion programs often based on narrowly conceived conceptual models. as reported by stokols 2 compares three distinct theoretical perspectives on health promotion: behavioral change, environmental enhancement, and social ecological models. health promotion programs enhance societal relationships. multidisciplinary perspectives focus and promote interventions on high-impact behaviors. ho 3 analyzed the effect of close contact on the spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and found that contact transmission can be limited through behavioral change.on jan 7, 2020, a novel coronavirus was identified by the chinese center for disease control and prevention (cdcp) from the throat swab sample of a patient and was subsequently named 2019-ncov. 4 the disease was of cluster onset, resulting in severe and even fatal infections. a lower respiratory tract predilection suggested that airborne transmission was possible. 5 in comparison, sars was transmitted by droplet, contact and airborne spread, including ventilation pipes between building floors.among the general public in china and other countries, the transmissibility of the epidemic might be reduced because of community-wide social distancing measures as reported by wu. 6 studies suggested that "hand hygiene and facemasks seemed to prevent household transmission of influenza virus and the nonpharmaceutical interventions are important for mitigation of pandemic". 7 investigation on spatiotemporal transmission patterns and intervention strategies are warranted. integrated interventions, such as the promotion of face mask use and reduction of travel, have been actively implemented. studies suggest that additional 10% decay in the transmission rate would reduce the peak infected population size by 20-47% as reported by shen. 8 experts suggest that people stay at home and use masks for personal protection as reported by kickbusch. 9 public health policy officials recommend that at least 70% of the population comply with face mask usage to avoid the breakdown of the healthcare system. 10 the worldwide spread of sars proceeded with rapidity, overwhelming many hospitals and public health systems. among infected cases of sars reported worldwide, about 17% to 30% were aged 50 or older. 11 in many locations, the disease spread to health care workers and household contacts. many infectious diseases spread through populations via the networks formed by physical contacts among individuals. the patterns of these contacts tend to be highly heterogeneous and illustrate the utility for assessing public health strategies as reported by meyer. 12 hospitals remind people to wear face masks at worksites and in public places. health care professionals also promote face mask usage to individuals in public areas to prevent spreading disease. 13 a casecontrol study was conducted in five hong kong hospitals with 241 non-infected and 13 infected staff during patient care. 14 and hand-washing as recommended under droplet and contact precautions. practice of droplet and contact precaution was found to be adequate in reducing the risk of infection. the health belief model has been proposed as a means of understanding an individual's volitional health behaviors. during the sars epidemic, wong et al. 1 found that only 54.8% of chinese adolescents practiced recommended habitual behaviors for preventing the spread of the disease. there was a significant correlation between perceiving a significant threat and compliance with habitual behaviors.through the school's regulation and auxiliary measures, taiwan's students still attended classes till june 2020. after the identification of 2019-ncov, taiwanese health authorities stepped up various prevention and intervention activities against the further spreading. schools and universities were suspended for prompt isolation of infected individuals in february 2020. quarantined individuals were required to wear surgical masks whenever they enter a communal area. at the individual level, suggested preventative behaviors included: i) maintaining good personal hygiene, ii) developing a healthy lifestyle with proper diet, regular exercise, and adequate rest, iii) ensuring adequate ventilation at home and in the office, and iv) wearing masks, especially for those with preexisting respiratory tract infections. people are warned to avoid close contact and the duration of time that the virus can survive on the surface of an object. contact tracking and family isolation were arranged to strengthen control. according to the literature, perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, and action cues are important predictors of wearing a mask. in this study, we investigated both young people's mask usage behavior and simulated experiment with possible contact area spreading.surgical masks are intended to protect the patient from the surgeon during surgery. ffp2 masks are intended to protect the user. 15 the outermost covering is an isolation layer intended to block larger dust particles. the second layer has a filter which removes fine dust and bacterium in the air. the outside of the mask is considered a contaminated area and should not be touched with the hands. when pulling the elastic band backward to remove the mask, the user needs to grasp the strap of the mask to avoid contact. the gap of the mask must be small, and it should be replaced after cumulative use. "masks are found to be useful with respect to both preventing illness in healthy persons and preventing asymptomatic transmission". "even very weak masks can still be useful." 16 the centers for disease control and prevention developed recommendations for respirators worn to minimize exposures to mycobacterium tuberculosis. 17 handling may increase the risk of infection if loaded organisms remain viable. li 18 assessed the antimicrobial activity of nanoparticles and nanoparticle-coated face masks to protect against infectious agents. nanoparticles have shown promise when applied as a coating to the surface of protective clothing in reducing the risk of transmission of infectious agents. lin et al. 19 sought a method for recovering loaded bacteria from filtering respirators and investigated the effects of artificial saliva (as) and artificial perspiration (ap) on the filter performance. ap was especially effective in n95 masks and as was especially effective in surgical masks.indirect contact infection caused by re-contact with hands should also be considered. for example, the chance of infection increases if medical personnel make contact with patients but do not disinfect their hands after adjusting their masks. people who wear masks may nevertheless be exposed to infection during drinking. donning and doffing a mask will also increase the chance of infection.both questionnaire surveys and experimental were utilized. the survey can understand the user's thoughts and expectations, and the experiment can observe the usage behavior and contact area.data for this study was obtained using a questionnaire survey of young adults aged 18-21 residing in taiwan. university students from four different departments took part in the survey (n=160).respondents were asked to indicate on a 5-point scale the degree to which they agreed that wearing face masks could induce problem or inconvenience (1 indicating ''strongly disagree,'' 5 indicat- ing ''strongly agree''). high scores indicated that respondents perceived significant problems or inconvenience in wearing face masks. five main problems of wearing face masks were listed: 1) discomfort with inhaling and exhaling, 2) excessive warmth and humidity, 3) unpleasant odor, 4) inconvenience with donning and doffing, and 5) tendency for glasses to fog up. 1) what kinds of masks do you prefer? 2) how many masks do you use per day? 3) how many hours per day do you use a surgical mask? 4) where do you store your mask when you remove it?this experiment intended to observe potential contact transmission spread to other surfaces during mask usage. the face mask's outer surface is a potential contamination source. in this contact area experiment, 10 adults were requested to don and doff a face mask while performing an office task. the contact areas associated with face mask handling were recorded by a camera. different colors of dye were placed on the outer surface of a face mask. the dye simulated the possible virus area on the mask surface during usage. contacting this area by hand or other parts of the body extended the contact area. participants' behavior while wearing face masks was recorded and image analysis was utilized to identify the extended contact area.experiments were performed in a preset environment with a computer and assorted stationery on the desk (figure 1 ). subjects were required to complete a questionnaire and simulate the spread of contact transmission when using a computer. the equipment the subjects touched included the computer tower, keyboard, mouse, screen, desktop, and assorted stationery. the researcher prepared powder toner (10 colors, one color for each subject), a face mask with powder coating, a 28-foot length of thin black cloth used to cover the workstation, and camera. the experimental procedure was as follows: 1) each subject donned a mask (the outer side of which was stained with toner and entered the experimental area. 2) the subject was instructed to take off their jacket and mask.3) the subject filled out the designated questionnaire within 5 minutes and without leaving their seat. 4) the subject was instructed to turn off the computer, don their mask, and leave. after all subjects had participated, pictures were then taken of the contaminated area and the black cloth was cleaned of powder. rhino software was used to remove the black background in each photo to calculate the contaminated area.behavioral surveys were collected and analyzed with spss. the results were selected for discussion below. the average total use time of mask was 5.306 hours. 63.8% of respondents said that they donned and doffed their masks several times because of work. masks were usually placed in the following locations: bags (60%), jacket pockets (17%), pants pockets, (15%), and desk surfaces (8%). masks that were carried around had a risk of indirect contamination. regarding the feeling of using the mask, the mean value of inconvenience of inhalation was 3.487, the average value of excessive warmth and humidity was 4.025, and the mean of inconvenience with donning and doffing the mask was 3.168. a high degree of agreement indicated that maintaining smooth breathing was a major problem when wearing a face mask. table 1 shows the mean scores and standard deviation values for those statements.there was a statistically significant positive relationship between participants feeling too hot and feeling discomfort with breathing and foggy glasses. the high mean scores ranged from 3.168 to 4.025 and the correlation coefficient values ranged from 0.426 to 0.387 ( ** p<0.01). the inconvenience of inhalation was significantly related to the feeling of excessive heat (pearson correlation coefficient γ is 0.426, p=0.000). this data reflects the feeling that the structure and use of the face mask could be improved.the mean value of unpleasant odor was 3.462, and that of glasses fogging up was 3.918. the distribution was skewed right and the maximum reported value was 5. a high degree of consensus indicated that respondents were concerned that face masks are vented upwards, which might infect their eyes. this might affect the mask's effectiveness in preventing disease transmission.the experimental environment and process are shown in figure 1 . after each test, a researcher took four photos of the subject (body front, back, left, and right). in addition, photographs of the contaminated locations on workspace were also taken. figure  2 shows that the contamination area varied with different users. the average contaminated area of the ten subjects was 530 cm 2 , with the maximum contamination area reaching three times that of the minimum.although surgical masks are considered a viable means of protecting individuals from disease during an epidemic, accidental transmission through direct and indirect contact still puts face mask users at risk of infection. the survey of mask usage revealed the usage per day during an epidemic prevention period was 5.306 hours. because most people repeatedly donned and doffed their masks, there was a high possibility of pollution during use. during the experiment, the subjects often had no specific place to store their masks, so they often stored the masks in their pockets, which might cause indirect contact transmission of pathogens. the average inconvenience of mask inhalation is high; and the mean value of hot and sultry is 4.025. a high degree of the agreement indicates that the smoothness of breathing is troublesome. the contact spread experiments show that the contaminated area varies considerably from user to user. the average polluted area of the ten subjects was 530 cm 2 . hand contact is one of the transmission paths; when the hand touches the surface of the mask, it may spread the virus to the subsequent contact area, which is worthy of attention for general users.masking seems inconsistent with our knowledge of the rate of asymptomatic infections and the risk of transmission from these individuals.the u.s. cdc has recommended a policy of cloth face covering in public where social distancing is hard to maintain, but this policy has been practiced in many different ways. 11 following this recommendation, mandatory universal masking for all hospital visitors, patients, and healthcare workers has been proposed 12 and implemented as a robust preventive strategy in many american healthcare facilities including massachusetts general hospital, the johns hopkins university and health system, the university of maryland medical system, the university of chicago medical center, the university of illinois hospital, the university of rochester medical center, the university of california san francisco, the university of virginia heath system, rochester regional health, and st. luke's university health network. this list is growing fast.outside of healthcare settings, for many people, the motivation for wearing a mask is primarily for their own protection, which unintentionally leads to protecting their community. we consider both protection of the wearer and of the community to be important, but we believe that source control is most important. in a systematic review before the sars-cov-2 pandemic, wearing face masks reduced the odds of contracting acute respiratory infections by 6% among casual community contacts and by 19% among household contacts if both the infected and healthy individuals wore masks. 13 masks have been shown to be effective in reducing respiratory virus shedding from droplets and aerosols of symptomatic individuals infected with coronavirus, influenza virus, and rhinovirus. 14 there is also laboratory evidence that homemade masks effectively stop droplets from infecting the wearer. 15 surgical masks are disposable and designed to protect healthcare workers, although surgeons used cloth masks to protect wounds from droplets many years ago. the barrier layer in cloth masks is usually two layers of cotton-woven fabric, compared with two to four layers of nonwoven polypropylene fabric with filtration holes in surgical masks. effectiveness of cloth masks compared with surgical masks needs further evaluation because some clinical studies have raised concerns regarding their effectiveness. 16 however, the wearing of cloth masks by asymptomatic individuals is justified by evidence that droplets and aerosols get trapped when they hit the weave of the fabric, with potentially better trapping than surgical masks. in any case, cloth masks have been adopted as an alternative when surgical masks are limited in supply. 17 moreover, cloth masks are cheap, washable, easy to make, and can be used by the general population without imposing extra cost to local governments while they are already overwhelmed by lack of resources.while the sars-cov-2 pandemic rages, most nations are not receiving clear and concise instructions about public masking from public health authorities. we call on who and country-level public health leaders to urgently consider revising their policies on mass masking to facilitate implementation of appropriate interventions in communities around the world. considering the close community contact in densely populated areas around the world and documented evidence of sars-cov-2 transmission from asymptomatic individuals, it is appropriate to consider masking as a robust tool to limit sars-cov-2 transmission. this is highly recommended in public places including public transportation, grocery stores, bakeries, pharmacies, hospitals, rehabilitation units, nursing homes, offices, places of religious worship, workplaces, or even crowded streets. in summary, laboratory data support both surgical and cloth masks, but real-world efficacy of cloth masks needs further evaluation. cloth masks are affordable globally and might be the only option in some areas with limited resources. based on our current level of evidence, we highly recommend mass masking around the world during the pandemic. whereas surgical masks are the preferred recommendation for the general public, cloth masks should be considered as a substitute if supplies are limited or surgical masks are not available.internet access has increased worldwide during the past decade, reaching 79.6% of the european population and 48% of the world population in 2017 [1]. in the united states, 90% of adults access the internet [2] and 53.1% look for health information online [3].as with previous epidemics such as ebola or zika infections, the internet has become a favored mechanism for the spread of misinformation [4,5]. this has implications for public health behavior and health-related decision making [6].at present, an outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has occurred and has spread throughout china and to dozens of countries [7]. as in other epidemics, people want to know what can be done to prevent and treat the disease [6]. since there is currently no vaccine or specific antiviral treatment, the application of preventive measures is essential.in this context, we aimed to conduct an infodemiological study [8,9] to investigate the information about the prevention of covid-19 available on the internet.on february 29, 2020, we performed a google search and selected the first 20 links [5] of the google search results, excluding advertisements. the search terms used were “prevention coronavirus,” “prevention covid-19,” “prevención coronavirus,” and “prevención covid-19”. two reviewers (hg-i and gj-t) viewed the links independently, and the following information was extracted from each link: type of authorship (official public health organizations, scientific societies, digital media, libraries, private health care system, articles from biomedical journals, or other), language, country of publication, and recommendations to avoid covid-19. the information was obtained by making up to four clicks on the different sublinks of each link, as has been done in other studies [10,11]. subsequently, the degree of adherence to the following world health organization (who) basic protective measures against the new coronavirus in force on february 29, 2020, was checked: wash your hands frequently; maintain at least 1 meter (3 feet) distance between yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing; avoid touching eyes, nose, and mouth; cover your mouth and nose with your bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze (then dispose of the used tissue immediately); stay home if you feel unwell; if you develop fever, cough, and difficulty breathing, seek medical advice promptly (call in advance and tell your provider of any recent travel); if you are healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you are taking care of a person with suspected covid-19; and wear a mask if you are coughing or sneezing [12].we performed a descriptive analysis of all the variables and evaluated the association of the independent variables (type of authorship and country of publication) with the degree of adherence to the who basic protective measures by means of a chi-square test or fisher exact test. when a significant association was found (p<.05), this was quantified with the odds ratio (or) and its 95% ci obtained from univariate logistic regression analysis. the agreement between the two reviewers regarding the adherence to the who basic protective measures was analyzed using the kappa index. all analyses were performed using spss v20.0 (ibm corp) and epiinfo (centers for disease control and prevention).in total, 80 weblinks were reviewed (textbox 1). most of them were produced in the united states and spain (n=58, 73%) by digital media and official public health organizations (n=60, 75%; table 1). there were no discrepancies between the authors regarding the degree of adherence to the who basic protective measures (kappa=1).in addition, information that was ambiguous or did not adhere to the who recommendations was found in 8 weblinks (5 from spain and 3 from the united states; 6 of the 8 were from digital media). in particular, 3 spanish links indicated “maintain a distance of approximately one meter between people.” one spanish link mentioned that “for people without respiratory symptoms a surgical mask is not required, although masks can be worn in some countries according to local cultural customs.” one link in spain and another in the united states specified that “someone should only wear a mask if a healthcare professional recommends it.” one link in the united states mentioned, “if you're going to around a lot of sick people, like if you're visiting a friend in the hospital, a mask might be a good idea,” and one link in the united states recommended, “stay three feet away from people when you talk to them.”univariate analysis by type of author (official public health organizations versus digital media) revealed statistically significant differences regarding the recommendation to wear a mask if you are healthy only if caring for a person with suspected covid-19 (or 4.39; table 2). the analysis according to country of publication (spain versus the united states) detected statistically significant differences regarding some recommendations such as “wash your hands frequently” (or 9.82), “cover your mouth and nose with your bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze” (or 4.59), or “stay home if you feel unwell” (or=0.31; table 3).this study is the first to evaluate the adherence of the information available on the internet to the who basic protective measures against covid-19. it shows a level of adherence that can be improved and a difficulty in obtaining such information, since it was only available in 32.5%-81.3% of the links.the difficulty of finding who-promoted measures to prevent other infectious diseases on the internet has also been described previously by other authors, such as covolo et al [13]. the authors, when studying the information on the internet about the pandemic flu vaccine, showed that only 80.3% (61/76) and 53.9% (41/76) of the websites they evaluated contained information on the indications and contraindications, respectively, of the vaccine that correctly adhered to the who guidelines [13].less than half of the weblinks provided information on the correct use of masks and, together with the fact that some of the links provided information that was ambiguous or did not adhere to the who guidance, may have contributed to the misuse of masks by the population and with the subsequent shortage of these devices that is occurring worldwide [14,15].as with other studies that evaluated information on the internet on preventive measures for other infections [11], our work shows that, in general, official public health organizations provide more correct information on measures to avoid covid-19, which confirms what other authors have said about the reliability of the information provided by such institutions [10,13]. however, the fact that only 34% (n=27/80) of the links referred to such organizations is an aspect that could be improved and shows the need to implement some interventions to increase the number of links of this type and their visibility on the internet. in addition, digital media must take responsibility for providing correct information and creating comprehension among citizens [16].according to the analysis by country, the spanish links provided more information on measures to prevent covid-19 that adhered to the who than did the links produced in the united states. the measures to prevent covid-19 by the centers for disease control and prevention [17] are the same as those of the who, and the proportion of links with information that was ambiguous or did not adhere to these guidelines is similar in terms of originating in the united states (n=3/30) and spain (n=5/28). therefore, an explanation for these differences could be that at the time of data collection, covid-19 was considered to pose a moderate risk to public health in spain (with 50 cases among 46 million people [18]), while in the united states, the problem was still far away (with 66 cases among 327 million people [18]). for this reason, the links from the united states did not provide as much information as the spanish links on how to prevent covid-19.one of the limitations of our study is intrinsic to the nature of internet, namely that information changes continuously; like others [5,10,11,13,19], this paper analyzed the information available at a particular time. on the other hand, as in previous studies on other infectious diseases [5], only the first 20 links obtained were evaluated, because it has been observed that internet users only use the first two pages of results [20]. likewise, the search was carried out only with the google search engine because it is the most popular search engine, covering nearly 90% of the total online searches [21]. finally, like other studies [11,13], the search terms were chosen by the authors assuming that an internet user would probably use one of them to perform simple searches on the web with respect to preventative measures for covid-19.in conclusion, it is necessary to urge and promote the use of the websites of official public health organizations (and specifically those originating from spain for spanish-speaking users) when seeking information on covid-19 preventive measures on the internet. in this way, they will be able to obtain high-quality information more frequently, and such websites’ accessibility and positioning may improve, given that search engines justify the positioning of links obtained in a search based on the frequency of access to them.facemasks are recommended for diseases transmitted through droplets and respirators for respiratory aerosols, yet recommendations and terminology vary between guidelines. the concepts of droplet and airborne transmission that are entrenched in clinical practice recently are more complex than previously thought. the concern is now increasing in the face of the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic [1] . the spread of respiratory viral infections (rvis) occurs primarily through contact and droplet routes. and new evidence suggests severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) can remain viable and infectious in aerosols for hours [2] . therefore, the use of masks as appropriate personal protective equipment (ppe) is often considered when preventing the spread of respiratory infections. experimental data shows that the micropores of mask block dust particles or pathogens that are larger than the size of micropores [3] . for example, the micropores of n95 masks materials are only 8 µm in diameter, which can effectively prevent the penetration of virions [4] [5] .although the aforementioned studies support the potential beneficial effect of masks, the substantial impact of masks on the spread of laboratory-diagnosed respiratory viruses remains controversial [6] . smith et al. indicated that there were insufficient data to determine definitively whether n95 masks are superior to surgical masks in protecting healthcare workers (hcws) against transmissible acute respiratory infections in clinical settings [7] .another meta-analysis suggested that facemask provides a non-significant protective effect (or=0.53, 95% ci 0.16-1.71, i 2 =48%) against the 2009 influenza pandemic [8] . xiao et al.concluded that masks did not support a substantial effect on the transmission of influenza from 7 studies [6] . on the contrary, jefferson et al. suggested that wearing masks significantly decreased the spread of sars (or=0.32; 95% ci 0.25-0.40; i 2 =58.4%) [9] . up to date, existing evidence on the effectiveness of the use of masks to prevent respiratory viral transmission contradicts each other.therefore, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of the use of masks to prevent laboratory-confirmed respiratory virus transmission.the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis (prisma) statement was consulted to report this systematic review. a comprehensive searching strategy was carefully designed to select eligible studies, published before march 2020, from multiple electronic databases, including pubmed, web of science, cochrane library, and chinese national knowledge infrastructure (cnki), vip (chinese) database. relevant chinese technical terms for the chinese databases were used to search for published articles (see appendix 1, for search details). furthermore, references of all relevant articles and reviews were retrieved to search for additional eligible studies with full-texts. after removing duplicates, all abstracts and titles were filtered independently by two reviewers (m.l.; l.g.) and the full texts were downloaded and meticulously appreciated. the two reviewers compared and discussed the results and consulted with the third reviewer (c.y.s.), if necessary, to reach a consensus.the studies meeting the following criteria were included: (1) concerning the relationship between the face mask and preventing rvis; (2) diagnosis of respiratory virus must have laboratory evidence, or the local clinical diagnostic criteria are applied during an acute large-scale infectious disease when laboratory evidence might be not available; (3) complete data available of both cases and controls to calculate an odds ratio (or) with 95% confidence interval (ci); (4) appropriate study design ; (5) no language restrictions applied. the exclusive criteria were as follows: (1) conferences/meetings abstracts, case reports, editorials, and review articles; (2) duplicate publication or overlapping studies; (3) studies with unavailable full texts.the newcastle-ottawa scale (nos) was used to evaluate the quality of the case-control study and cohort study: study ratings of seven to nine stars corresponded to high-quality, five to six stars to moderate quality, and four stars or less to low quality [10]. the jadad scale was used to evaluate the quality of randomized controlled study: study ratings of three to five corresponded to high-quality, and two or less to low quality [11] . three reviewers (m.l.; l.g.; c.y.s.) completed assessments independently and the disagreements were resolved by a panel discussion with other reviewers.the association of mask use with subsequent rvis was assessed with odds ratios (ors) with a 95% confidence interval (ci). p values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. considering the potential for inter-study heterogeneity, subgroup analysis were carried out based on stratification by occupations (hcws or non-hcws), countries, virus types, and study designs. sensitivity analysis was performed by omitting individual studies to assess the stability of the meta-analysis. the heterogeneity was assessed using the i 2 statistic.the heterogeneity was considered insignificance when p > 0.10 and i 2 < 50%. if the study lacked heterogeneity, the pooled or estimate was calculated using the fixed-effects model, otherwise the random-effects model was used [12] . begg's and egger's test were performed to quantitatively analyze the potential publication bias by stata (version 14.0; stata corp, college station, tx) software. the p values of begg's and egger's test more than 0.05 implied no obvious publication bias in this meta-analysis [13, 14] . the meta-analysis was performed using revman 5.3.5 (http://tech.cochrane.org/revman) [15] .following the literature search and screening (figure 1 ), a total of 21 studies which included 13 case-control studies, 6 cluster randomized trials, and 2 cohort studies met our inclusion criteria [4, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] (table 1) inter-rater agreement of the quality of included studies was strong. table 2 indicating that the meta-analysis was generally robust.the 21 studies, involving 8,686 participants, showed that masks were generally effective in preventing the spread of respiratory viruses. after wearing a mask, the risk of contracting rvis was significantly reduced, with the pooled or was 0.35 and 95% ci=0.24-0.51 (i 2 =60%, m-h random-effect model) (figure 3 ).in the subgroup of hcws, a more obvious protective effect was identified with the pooled or of 0.20 (95% ci=0.11-0.37, i 2 =59%) (figure 4) . in one study investigating covid-19, the or was 0.04 (95%ci=0.00-0.60) [35] . in the subgroup of non-hcw, also a protective effect was found with the pooled or of 0.53 (95% ci=0.36-0.79, i 2 =45%). a more detailed analysis found significant effects in both the household subgroup (or=0.60, 95% ci=0.37-0.97，i 2 =31%), and the non-household subgroup (or=0.44, 95% ci=0.33-0.59， masks had a protective effect against influenza viruses (or=0.55, 95% ci=0.39-0.76, i 2 =27%), sars (or=0.26, 95% ci=0.18-0.37, i 2 =47%), and sars-cov-2 (or=0.04, 95%ci=0.00-0.6, i 2 =0%) (table 4) . however, no significant protective effects against h1n1 was shown (or=0.30, 95% ci=0.08-1. 16 , i 2 =51%).in the subgroups based on different study designs, protective effects of wearing mask were significant in cluster randomized trials (or=0.65, 95% ci=0.47-0.91, i 2 =20%) and observational studies (or=0.24, 95% ci=0.15-0.38, i 2 =54%) ( table 4 ).this meta-analysis of the 21 studies provided the latest state-of-art evidence on the efficacy of masks in preventing the transmission of rvis. our data show that the protective effects of masks against rvis were not only significant for both hcws and non-hcws, but also consistent between asian and western populations.the physical barrier provided by a mask can effectively prevent the respiratory tract from contacting the outside virus, thereby reducing the risk of respiratory virus infections [36] .a recent study showed that sars-cov-2 can travel up to 4 meters (≈13 feet) from patients and be widely distributed on daily objects (e.g. floors, computer mice, trash cans) [37] .surgical masks are able to reduce influenza virus rna in respiratory droplets and coronavirus rna in aerosols [38] . the sars-cov-2 aerosol, mainly appearing in submicron region (d p between 0.25 to 1.0 µm) and supermicron region (d p > 2.5 µm) [39] , can be effectively filtered out from the inhaled air by either surgical masks or n95 masks [3, 40] . comparison of the incidence of covid-19 in hongkong, china with spain, italy, germany, france, u.s., u.k., singapore, and south korea showed that community-wide mask wearing may assist in controlling covid-19 with reduced emission of infected saliva and respiratory droplets from mildly symptomatic patients [41] .during the current covid-19 pandemic, hcws are facing the dangers inherent in close contact with index-patients [42] . in italy, more than 2,600 hcws have been infected by march 19, 2020, accounting for 8.3% of the country's total cases [43] . according to our analysis, wearing masks significantly reduced the risk of infection among hcws by 80%. it is noteworthy that, none of the 278 hcws wearing n95 masks in quarantined areas were infected by sars-cov-2 yet, 10 of the 215 hcws who did not wear masks in the open areas were infected [35] . therefore, universal masking of hcws at clinical settings is likely to provide great benefits for hcws. especially during current covid-19 pandemic. moreover, protective benefits were also reported in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (hsct) patients [33] . besides, sokol's study also found a reduced risk of hospital-acquired rvis by putting surgical masks on all workers and visitors in every patient room on the bone marrow transplant unit [44] . accumulative data showed that people with older age, immunosuppressed state and systematic commodities are at higher risk for severe covid-19 infection [45] [46] [47] , and therefore, should be protected with proper measures (e.g. prophylactic masking) during the current pandemic. in addition, those who have close contact with those populations at high risks of contracting rvis should consider wearing masks as well.more importantly, our data showed that masks worn by non-hcws can also effectively prevent the spread of respiratory viruses and reduce the risk of virus infection by 56% in non-household settings, indicating the potential benefits of wearing masks for the general public. moreover, significant protective effects were found in the study conducted in the general population [17], indicating the potential benefits of wearing masks for the general public. interestingly, a recent covid-19 dynamics modeling study suggested that broad adoption of even relatively ineffective non-medical grade "social" masks may meaningfully reduce the community transmission and decrease peak hospitalizations and deaths during the current covid-19 pandemic [48] . although laboratory-confirmed virus results show no difference between the mask group and the control group in a study investigating the wearing of masks by pilgrims, wearing masks reduced the risk of influenza-like illness when people gather [4] . this difference between laboratory-confirmed cases and clinically diagnosed influenza-like illness cases were likely due to an under-diagnosis of real cases caused by too few nasal swabs collected for laboratory confirmation. zhang et al. conducted a case-control study and found that none of the passengers always wearing masks on an international flight were infected with h1n1 [32] , and a recent case report [49] described a man who was wearing a mask at international flight and then tested positive for covid-19, while 25 other people closest to him on the plane and flight attendants were all tested negative, further demonstrating the benefits of wearing masks during public transportations [50] .protective effects were also found among household settings showing a 40% reduced risk of rvis. however, masking with prudent implementation and high compliance is a prerequisite to ensure the successful protection, which is practically challenging especially for non-hcws. two household studies included in our analysis reported low facemask adherence among household contacts [23, 24] , which might explain the poor protective effects from these studies. in contrast, suess et al. reported a good compliance, which showed a significant protective effect [29] . these findings implicated that proper use of masks has an impact on the effectiveness of preventing rvis. given that most people in household settings were unlikely to strictly follow hand hygiene and mask use recommendations [23], re-evaluating the home quarantine strategy might be essential during the current covid-19 pandemic [51, 52] .the risk of influenza, sars, and covid-19 infection were reduced by 45%, 74%, and 96% by wearing masks, respectively, which were consistent with previous meta-analyses during the sars outbreaks [9, 53] . the previous systematic review from xiao et al., though reporting non-significant protection of masks against the influenza virus [6], did not strictly follow the prisma statement and represented merely non-aggregated data. for example, there was one study [54] included by xiao et al. did not report a significantly protection by wearing masks. however, it should be noted that the result of this study was not convincing because the h1n1 pandemic broke out during the study period, and the national hygiene campaign implemented at this time influenced all participants to wear masks [54] .the insignificantly reduced risk of h1n1 infection following masking could be partially explained by the relatively small sample size and multiple confounding factors (e.g. prior vaccination, hand hygiene, age, gender, and culture). jeager et al. 2009 indicated that overall ppe use among hcws was low; as more than 25% of hcws in this study reported they never used ppe in any patient encounter, and only 17% reported wearing masks with every h1n1 patient encounter, which could significantly lower the sample size of data collected [27] . also, the same study [27] indicated that the majority of hcws had received regular seasonal influenza vaccination, which could play a role of confounding factor contributing to protective effects toward control group. additionally, during acute outbreak of h1n1, specific preventive measures were lagged behind h1n1 exposures. this could suggest that hcws might already have been infected before wearing masks, further decreasing the powers of data collected.due to current controversial guidelines between different countries and areas, regarding the general public wearing masks. we also analyzed its effects based on different geographic locations, showing that wearing masks does provide protective effects in both asian countries and western countries by 69% and 55%, respectively. among hcws, it reduced the risk in both asian and western countries. especially, for non-healthcare populations, reduced risk of 54% was found in western countries, and a reduced risk of 49% was found in asia. this would suggest that the proper use of masks might play a significant role in public health efforts to suppress the spread of rvis, regardless of the geographic locations, especially during an outbreak.the present meta-analysis still has several limitations. first, well-designed high-quality prospective studies and studies of masking in the general public are still insufficient. second, droplet-borne and airborne viruses are likely to cause large-scale transmissions among the passengers within closed transportation vehicles [55] . however, relevant studies are relatively rare [32] . third, this article included some studies of sars patients diagnosed according to clinical diagnostic criteria for sars due to a low detection rate of rt-pcr [56] . the lack of sufficient virologic evidence may affect our conclusions. however, this effect might not be significant, as 92% of patients with clinical sars for whom paired sera were available had a >4-fold rise in antibody titer to sars-cov [57] . fourth, control subjects without masking are generally lacking in studies conducted in healthcare settings mainly due to the ethical issue. future studies might choose hcws from departments without needs of masking as controls [26] . fifth, our study didn't have sufficient data for subgroup analysis of different mask types since our inclusion criteria mainly focused on masks versus no masks, which might inherently omit studies that focused on effectiveness of different mask types. though there were published studies that had shown different specifications of masks and different wearing methods may affect the protective effect of masks [17, 32] . and when the included studies divided the time/frequency of wearing masks, we only included the group of masks with the longest wearing/highest wearing frequency. this might also ignore effects of the short/infrequent mask-wearing. in addition, the studies we included were mainly conducted in asia, especially china, and more evidence from other countries is needed to support our views. last but not least, information about other confounding biases, such as vaccination, hand hygiene, age, gender, and culture, may affect the protective effect of masks.the present meta-analysis showed the general efficacy of masks in preventing the transmission of rvis. such protective effects of masking are evidentiary for both healthcare and non-healthcare workers and consistent between asian and western populations. more evidences are still needed to better clarify the effectiveness of masking in various circumstances.we declare no competing interests.this work was not supported by any funding. since the beginning of the 21st century, the outbreak of coronavirus has brought serious losses to society, the most serious of which are severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers). in december 2019, a new coronavirus was found in wuhan, hubei province, china, and spread rapidly across the country, attracting global attention. [1, 2] from the existing epidemiological data, the transmission speed of covid-19 is significantly faster than that of sars, but its pathogenicity is remarkably weaker than that of mers and sars. to control the epidemic, the chinese government has formulated a series of social alienation strategies. [3] because of the strict blockade and quarantine measures, the spread outside hubei province seems to be slowing down. [4] a large number of health care workers (hcws) from all over china rushed to hubei province to jointly fight against covid-19.because of the strong transmission of covid-19 and the uncertainty of the infection status of patients, hcws must provide personal protective equipment (ppe). [5] ppe, such as n95 masks, latex gloves, and protective clothing, will often be worn for hours at a time. there are not a few cases of adverse skin reactions related to the use of ppe by hcws. [6] however, existing research on poor skin reactions to the use of ppe by hcws is limited. the study collected the results of a survey of adverse skin reactions caused by the use of ppe by hcws in hubei province during the covid-19 outbreak. combined with these results, we can determine the prevalence and characteristics of adverse skin reactions caused by ppe among hcws in hubei province. the findings of this study will help to determine whether long-term use of ppe poses significant occupational health risks and suggest possible solutions.the purpose of this study is to explore the problem of adverse skin reactions among hcws who have been using ppe for a long period of time in hubei province. this study uses the method of quantitative descriptive research. as a descriptive research method, quantitative descriptive research can not only analyze the samples qualitatively but can also combine qualitative and quantitative data obtained by statistics. therefore, quantitative descriptive research is considered appropriate. in light of the fact that the purpose of this study is to explore the incidence of adverse reactions of hcws who have been wearing ppe for a long period of time, a comprehensive summary is generated through quantitative descriptive design, which clearly reflects adverse skin reactions.this study uses a purposeful sampling method to select qualified research objects. purposeful sampling methods can collect useful information needed for this study by identifying different participants. based on this method, we selected participants according to the following criteria: registered doctors or nurses; hcws fighting covid-19 in hubei province hospitals; those often wearing ppe, such as n95 masks, latex gloves, and protective clothing; staff who are contacted with patients directly; and those willing to participate in the questionnaire survey. according to this standard, we selected a total of 65 hcws who met the criteria. table 1 summarizes the population statistics of the participants.all participants signed an informed consent form before the study. the research scheme has been approved by the ethics committee of the first affiliated hospital of chongqing medical university and is based on the ethical principles of medical research involving human objects in the helsinki declaration.this survey was conducted by the distribution of questionnaires to participants who met the criteria. the questionnaire covers the duration of the use of masks, gloves, and protective clothing, as well as adverse skin reactions caused by their use. participants who agreed to participate in the study were asked to sign an informed consent form on the date of data collection. finally, a total of 61 valid questionnaires were collected. to facilitate subsequent data analysis, all questionnaires were collected and backed up to ensure that no data were lost during transcription and statistical analysis.spss21.0 software (spss inc, chicago, il) was used for statistical analysis. chi-square tests and two-sample t tests were used to compare the differences between groups. a p-value of <.05 was considered significant.trustworthiness is the criterion used to assess a study. the trustworthiness of this study is maintained by 4 main criteria: credibility, confirmability, transferability, and dependability. for credibility, the content of the study is discussed between researchers and authors to determine the conclusions. for confirmability, participants were asked to verify the survey contents to ensure that their ideas were accurately reflected in the study. for transferability, a vivid and detailed description of the results and the research process were recorded. the results and conclusions can be transferred to the study of similar fields. for the dependability, an in-depth and vivid description of the research methods was accurately recorded to show a comprehensive understanding of the research methods. therefore, future researchers can repeat this study.a total of 65 hcws were surveyed by questionnaire. sixty-one (93.8%) of them responded to the questionnaire. among them, there were 5 men (8.2%) and 56 women (91.8%), including 30 doctors and 31 nurses. these hcws are illustrated in table 1 .among the 61 hcws who regularly used the n95 mask, 58 (95.1%) reported adverse reactions, including nasal bridge scarring (68.9%), facial itching (27.9%), skin damage (26.2%), dry skin (24.6%), and rash (16.4%). seven workers had indentation and ear pain, and 1 had acne. six of them developed wheals on the bridge of the nose, jaw, and cheeks. all people with skin reactions developed these reactions after using the n95 mask for 12 hours a day over an average of 3.5 months. hcws using surgical masks, cloth masks, and paper masks did not report any adverse skin reactions. table 2 lists the adverse reactions reported by the hcws surveyed who were using the n95 mask. because of the strong transmission of covid-19, all 58 hcws continued to use the n95 mask despite their symptoms. only 5 hcws sought treatment from doctors. fifteen hcws took medicine on their own. the others did not take any measures. there was no significant difference in occupational adverse skin reactions. however, the proportion of women hcws with skin rash was significantly higher than that of men hcws. most hcws with skin rashes were between 20 and 29 years old. among hcws with skin damage, the proportion of women was significantly table 1 the population statistics of the participants.numbers percentage higher than that of men. most of the hcws with itching were concentrated in the age group between 20 and 29 years old.among 61 workers who regularly used latex gloves, 54 (88.5%) reported adverse skin reactions, including dry skin (55.7%), itching (31.2%), rash (23.0%), and chapped skin (21.3%). three people had skin soaked with sweat, and 1 had symptoms of edema. table 3 lists the adverse reactions of using latex gloves reported by hcws who were surveyed. for an average of 3.5 months, latex gloves were used for an average of 10 hours. no one reported that the use of plastic gloves and cloth gloves can cause adverse skin reactions. five people switched to plastic gloves because of wheals, while most of the participants continued to use latex gloves. among the 5 people, 1 switched to plastic gloves, and 4 wore plastic gloves under their latex gloves. of the 54 hcws, 10 people sought treatment from doctors, 5 people took medicine on their own, and the others did not take any action. there were no significant sex or occupational differences in adverse skin reactions. however, most of the hcws with dry skin were between 20 and 29 years old. most of the hcws with itching were 20 to 29 years old. hcws with chapped skin were older than those without chapped skin, and most of them were between 30 and 39 years old.of the 61 hcws who regularly wore protective clothing, only 37 (60.7%) reported adverse skin reactions, including dry skin (36.1%), itching (34.4%), rash (11.5%), and wheals (3.28%). one person reported that protective clothing was airtight and led to the development of sweat herpes. muggy heat was reported by other people. one individual reported dampness. table 4 lists the adverse reactions reported by hcws who used protective clothing. the protective clothing used is disposable and is worn for an average of 10 hours a day for an average of 3.5 months. given the strong transmission of covid-19, all hcws continue to use protective clothing regardless of symptoms. two of the 37 people sought treatment from a doctor because of the symptoms of wheals, while the others did not take any measures. there was no significant difference in adverse skin reactions caused by occupation. among the hcws with itching, the proportion of women was significantly higher than that of men, and the age of respondents was mostly between 20 and 29 years old. the proportion of women hcws with itching was higher than that of men hcws. in order to release itching and rash, we give some suggestions that are shown in the flowchart (fig. 1 ). these suggestions have been proved to be effective among hcws in hubei.due to the highly contagious and nationwide spread of covid-19, hcws across china who volunteer in hubei province are required to wear ppe, such as n95 masks, latex gloves, and protective clothing. [5] the use of ppe may cause adverse skin reactions. however, existing studies on adverse skin reactions due to the use of ppe by hcws are limited. in this case, it is possible to study the adverse reactions caused by the use of ppe to propose solutions, which can help hcws who are still fighting covid-19 to effectively reduce adverse skin reactions. in the future, this study may still be useful for hcws. therefore, i used a questionnaire to conduct a quantitative study to determine the incidence of adverse skin reactions caused by the use of ppe by hcws. ultimately, a total of 61 valid questionnaires were collected. the results of the study showed that the most common adverse skin reactions among hcws using ppe included nasal bridge scarring, facial itching, skin damage, dry skin, rash, chapped skin, and wheals.medical masks are a kind of ppe that are used to prevent the spread of respiratory tract infections. the mask can cover the seek help from a dermatologist mouth and nose of the wearer and, if worn properly, may effectively help prevent the spread of respiratory viruses and bacteria. [7] during the sars outbreak in 2003, the who and the centers for disease control and prevention of the united states issued preventive measures in the care of sars patients, suggesting that the time of exposure to air should be reduced to decrease the probability of airborne droplet transmission. [8] in particular, it is recommended to use protective masks that meet the certification of the national institute of occupational safety and health. "n" stands for the national institute of occupational safety and health, and "95" indicates its filtering efficiency. as a result, the mask has a 95% filtration efficiency in filtering particles with a size of ≥300 nm. the n95 mask can block 95% of the air particles and fits closely with the facial skin to prevent the inhalation of smaller infectious particles, which can travel long distances through the air after an infected person coughs or sneezes. diseases that require the use of the n95 mask include tuberculosis, chicken pox, sars, and measles. [9] the diameter of sars-cov-2 is between 80 and 120 nm, but when the virus is excreted from an infected person, it will be wrapped in saliva to form larger droplets. because the n95 mask can effectively filter out particles ≥300 nm in size, it can effectively block the spread of sars-cov-2. [6] hcws must wear masks for a long period of time every day because of the infectivity of covid-19. therefore, it is necessary to detect adverse skin reactions using the n95 mask. series of researches have explored the related adverse reactions of hcws wearing n95 mask. foo et al [6] reported the most common adverse skin reactions were acne, facial itching, and rash. furthermore, headache was highlighted in lim research. [10] however, there is no headache in the present study. it probably because the participants in lim research have been wearing n95 mask for >1 year and the long-term utilization could result in hypoxemia and hypercapnia which led to headache. in this study, we found that the most common adverse reaction of the n95 mask was nasal bridge scarring, followed by facial pruritus. because the medical staff must have adequate personal protection, they will tie the mask tightly and squeeze the metal clip hard to ensure the tightness of the mask. therefore, the scar on the bridge of the nose may be caused by the excessive pressure of the mask and the hardness of the metal clip. the cause of itching may be discomfort due to wearing a mask for too long a period of a time, combined with an excessively humid internal environment. itching may also result from irritating contact dermatitis attributed to an allergic reaction to the mask material. skin damage may be due to the excessive binding of the mask, such that the edge of the mask is in close contact with the skin, coupled with wearing the mask for a long period of time. [11] in light of the above situations, when wearing a mask, hcws can reduce the intensity of binding to achieve moderate tightness, gently pinch the metal clip at the bridge of the nose, and add a surgical mask to line the inside of the n95 mask, which can effectively reduce adverse skin reactions.it has been reported that covid-19 can be transmitted through contact, so hand protection is one of the most important ways of preventing covid-19 infection. [5] wearing latex gloves can effectively prevent the chance of contact infection among hcws. the most common adverse reactions to wearing latex gloves in this study were dry skin, itching, and rash. it was similar to the skin adverse reactions of wearing gloves during sars. [6] there may be 3 reasons why these situations occur. one is immunoglobulin e-mediated hypersensitivity to latex [12, 13] ; the second is latex allergy [14] ; and the third may be irritant contact dermatitis, [15] which arises from repeated hand washing with soap and detergent and not completely drying the hands. therefore, the inside of the glove will not be able to absorb air, resulting in irritation. if it is a dry powder glove, it is likely to be caused by the stimulation of talcum powder in the gloves. in this case, it is necessary to rinse off the soap or detergent before putting on gloves and dry one's hands before wearing gloves. if the gloves are dry, there should not be too much talcum powder inside. another solution is to wear a layer of plastic gloves inside the latex gloves. these measures can prevent the occurrence of irritant dermatitis. if the symptoms of irritant contact dermatitis cannot be resolved, latex allergy testing is necessary, and latex gloves should be avoided. [16] hcws must wear protective clothing for a long period of time every day to protect themselves. therefore, adverse skin reactions have emerged. the adverse skin reactions of hcws who have been using protective clothing are relatively less common. the most common symptoms were dry skin and itching. the main reason for these situations is probably due to the protective clothing being muggy and the need to wear it for a long period of time. the frequent replacement of protective clothing can effectively reduce the occurrence of the above symptoms.our study investigated the long-term use of ppe in hubei province and found that most hcws have adverse skin reactions when wearing masks, gloves, and protective clothing. these adverse skin reactions are usually mild because most hcws continue to use the equipment. therefore, the wearer will not seek the help of a dermatologist or self-medicate. in our study, skin adverse reactions using ppe were mainly concentrated in itching and rash. so, we suggest that after the occurrence of adverse skin reactions, second-generation antihistamines or glucocorticoids were recommended for hcws. if any serious adverse skin reactions to ppe occurred or medicine administration was ineffective, they should seek help from a dermatologist. to date, there have been no reports of adverse skin reactions caused by the use of ppe in covid-19. the adverse skin reactions of hcws reported in questionnaires cannot be verified by professionals, as they are the subjective assessment of hcws. nevertheless, the study provides a perspective on the incidence of adverse skin reactions that can be caused by the long-term use of ppe.there is no doubt that the threat of covid-19 worldwide remains uncontrollable, and the possible solutions proposed in this study can help hcws who are still fighting covid-19 to effectively reduce adverse skin reactions. this study may be useful to hcws in the future.personal protective equipment (ppe) is an article used to prevent the wearer from coming in contact with hazardous, infectious, chemical, radiological, electrical, and physical agents. it contains components illustrated in figure 1 [1] . the surge in demand and misuse of ppe has led to an acute shortage of protective gear, endangering the lives of healthcare workers [2] . more than 9,000 healthcare workers (hcw) in the united states (us) and more than 17,000 in italy have been infected with covid-19 [3] [4] . a total of 444 hcw in pakistan have been exposed to covid-19 as of april 29, 2020 [5] . many doctors are performing their duty without any ppe and are at high risk of becoming infected [6] . there have been peaceful protests all over the world by doctors, nurses, and other healthcare professionals demanding ppe. 1 2 3 4 5in the wake of the covid-19 pandemic, ppe plays a significant role, with face masks and gloves being the most essential. doctors, nurses, and other frontline healthcare responders are using them to minimize the risk of contaminated contact or droplet exposure. some studies suggest that the psychological impact of ppe is such that individuals using them might feel more protected than they actually are in reality [7] . it should be ensured that the wearer practices hand hygiene before wearing and after removing the protective gear. also, an appropriate method for its disposal should be considered.the primary mode of transmission of coronavirus is known to be droplet or contact-based. infected individuals are prone to spread the virus while coughing, sneezing, or speaking. this micro virus, when ejected, can travel up to a distance of six feet. wearing a face mask, along with other precautionary measures like hand hygiene and self-isolation, limits the transmission of infectious agents [8] [9] .initially, the usage of masks among the general public was highly controversial. experts discouraged healthy people from wearing masks due to the scarce supply. this equipment was reserved for those in direct contact with infected patients [10] . however, the rapid rise in the degree of local transmission has caused many countries to allow their citizens to wear nonmedical/cloth masks, along with practicing social distancing [9, 11] . evidence-based studies reveal that the concomitant use of household (non-medical) face masks, as well as using a proper handwashing regimen, reduces the probability of local transmission, thereby decreasing the death toll [12] . it should be noted that according to the world health organization (who) guidelines, medical masks and respirators should only be reserved for healthcare workers [10] . factors that determine the efficiency of face masks are listed in table 1 [13].the shape of the mask the main types of masks being used are respirators, medical masks, and non-medical/cloth masks.these are protective equipment which provides an almost accurate facial fit and effective filtration of airborne particles. they provide a proper seal around the mouth and nose, providing optimal protection. according to the recent who, cdc, and fda guidelines, such masks are only reserved for healthcare providers [10, [13] [14] . the fda has labeled these masks as single-use, disposable devices; however, in cases of shortage in supplies, these can be sterilized and reused [14] . while the respirator masks are highly efficient, they still do not provide complete protection. improper and misuse of these masks can lead to the spread of infection in the user [15] .these are thin, pleated, and disposable masks that protect the user from inhaling dust particles, contaminated liquid droplets, and bacteria. they are usually two layers thick and made from unwoven fabric. these masks only act as a physical barrier between the user's nose and mouth and the infected environment. they do not possess a proper seal and are less effective than respirators. these are loose masks, which allow comfortable breathing and reduce transmission probability [14] .according to recent studies, asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic carriers of the novel coronavirus have been detected and can transmit the virus. in the face of this discovery, cdc experts recommend that the general public uses non-medical/cloth coverings to shield their mouth and nose. these textile masks are made up of layers of cloth. some of them also possess a paper towel layer, which increases the filtration capability. they do not offer full protection but, along with other precautionary measures, are useful to slow down the spread of coronavirus [16] .as a general safety precaution, every frontline healthcare worker (hcw) should know which ppe needs to be used in different clinical settings [17] [18] .1) under any clinical setting where there is a risk of getting infected, the individual should don (put on) a medical face mask, gloves, gown, and eye protection, 2) if the hcw is more than 2 meters away from the patient, he/she should use a fluid-resistant medical face mask with or without eye and face protection, depending on whether there is exposure to flashes or droplets.3) in case of an ongoing aerosol-generating procedure (agp), all individuals present should wear a respirator, face and eye protection, gloves, and long-sleeved fluid-repellent gown.it is essential that every hcw should know the proper way to put on (donning) and remove (doffing) ppe. any mistake in doing so can render the individual exposed to infections agents. according to standard infection prevention and control (ipc) guidelines, ppe is a single-use, disposable item. however, due to the current shortage of ppe, health care providers are challenged to rationally use the limited supplies by decontaminating and reprocessing them. it should be noted that there is no proven effectiveness of these practices and priority is given to the rapid manufacture of protective items [21] . improper or inadequate decontamination of equipment before reuse is unsafe and can pose serious threats [22] . when disinfecting ppe, it is important to keep in mind the efficacy of the method used, check for any residual toxicity, and make sure that the functional integrity of the material is maintained.general strategies include following the manufacturer's guidelines to disinfect and reprocess the ppe. routine inspection of protective material should be carried out, along with the replacement of the equipment if the integrity is not maintained or it is damaged.1) usually cleaning prior to disinfection is required. respirators and medical masks lose their protective property when they undergo cleaning.2) considering the current conditions, these items can be worn by a single hcw for multiple shifts. factors, such as humidity and shelf-life, limit their use.3) medical masks can be reprocessed using the environment protection agency (epa)registered disinfectants.filtering facepiece respirators can be decontaminated using vaporous hydrogen peroxide, moist heat, and bleach solution.gowns 1) submerge in hot water and detergent, then thoroughly scrub the gown.2) afterward, soak in 0.05% chlorine solution for about 30 minutes.3) rinse in clean water and ideally allow drying in the sun. 4 ) gowns having small holes and tears could be mended whereas worn out gowns should be discarded.1) clean first the inside and then the outside surface of the visor using a detergent-soaked clean cloth.2) clean the outside of the visor with a clean cloth saturated with disinfectant.3) wipe the outside of the visor with clean water. 4) use towels or dry air to completely dry the visor.1) immerse in warm water and neutral detergent solution.2) rinse with clean water.3) wipe with disinfectant and then again rinse with clean water. 4) dry completely using towels or dry air.potentially infectious medical waste (pimw), such as covid 19 testing kits and ppe, have a serious risk of coming in contact with infectious bodily fluids. these materials should be kept safely on site (hospitals, testing centers) in secure containers. they should then transferred to storage facilities, where they are disinfected and disposed of off to landfill sites [23] . individuals responsible for waste management should take caution and should wear appropriate gear. it is extremely critical to properly decontaminate and dispose of any waste material that could infect people who come in contact with it.the escalating demand for ppe has given rise to new state and local strategies to ensure the careful optimization of available resources. this policy helps reserve the reduced amount of ppe for the most critical conditions. as the situation improves and the ppe supply is sufficient again, the state can return to its conventional ppe guidelines. the following strategies should be observed to overcome the shortage of ppe [24] .there is a difference in the demand and supply of ppe, with severe shortages in supply on all fronts. it is crucial that all the equipment is used with care to prevent wastage, to ensure a continuous supply of protective equipment despite limited production [1, 22] .1) the healthcare professionals who are working with patients of covid-19 and are in direct contact should have ppe consisting of gloves, gowns, masks, face shields, and goggles.2) the same respirator can be used while examining multiple patients at a time. since the shortage of supply is a fact in most places, it is recommended to keep wearing a single one for multiple patients than to not have any respirator on.3) hcw performing or assisting with invasive procedures should be wearing respirators, eye protection (like goggles), and a face shield aligned with the gown and gloves. if the gowns allow fluid to pass through, an additional layer of protective coverage like an apron should be worn.4) people who are taking care of the sick at home should be provided with medical masks at home for their own protection and to limit the spread of the disease. 5) individuals who remain asymptomatic or do not show any signs of illness can use nonmedical masks and should not opt for medical masks. inappropriate use of medical masks may increase the demand and can also impede the supply to professionals who need them the most.the need for ppe can be minimized by the following interventions [25] :1) limit patient contact and use alternate tools, such as telemedicine, for non-emergency cases.2) make sure that no personnel who is not immediately needed for the patients' care should enter the premise of the covid-19 ward that should be a separated and isolated area. the visitors should either not be allowed at all or should have minimal contact with the patients.3) all non-urgent procedures/appointments should be postponed.5) ppe should be used beyond their shelf life making sure they are not worn out or damaged.6) in the case of the absolute absence of ppe, alternate methods for barrier control (e.g., glass shields) should be employed.these practices do not guarantee the absolute safety of healthcare professionals, and their effectiveness is questionable. however, under the present circumstances, these crisis strategies given by the cdc should be duly addressed.the supply should be monitored and demand adjusted [21, 26] . this can be done using the following methods:1) use of rational quantification-based forecasts regarding ppe. this helps in rationing available supplies to meet the demand.2) the request for ppe from countries, as well as major responders, should be monitored and controlled. the distribution of ppe to healthcare institutions should be controlled and monitored.3) to avoid stock duplication, a centralized request management system should be applied that takes notice of whether the stock management rules are being followed or not. this helps in controlling the wastage and overstock.4) keep a check on the end-to-end distribution of ppe.due to the recent ease in lockdown measures and the commencement of the holy month of ramadan in the muslim world, an abrupt rise in public gatherings is feared. therefore, it is highly critical that ppe's should be used in all clinical and non-clinical settings. citizens should use a cloth barrier while stepping out of the house and public gatherings should be strictly avoided. the proper protocol should be followed when healthcare professionals consider reusing ppe.as pakistan is one of the major distributors of ppe throughout the world, it has set an exemplary approach during this pandemic. the pakistani government and national disaster management authority (ndma) have made tireless efforts to increase the manufacturing and distribution of ppe. moreover, many non-governmental organizations (ngos) and medical students have come forward to combat this deadly disaster and distribute ppe to those fighting on the frontline.disclosureswith the emerging outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic, millions of people throughout the world are staying at home to contain the spread of disease and contribute to flattening the curve associated with the rapid rise in the number of cases. however, healthcare professionals will not be staying home. indeed, they belong to a group of individuals who will be particularly vulnerable to contracting the infection (dave et al. 2020) , which has been reported to be as high as 29% in wuhan, china (wang et al. 2020) . in this context, the occupational safety and health administration (osha) within the department of labor, usa, has developed an occupational risk pyramid which defines the risk of healthcare providers based on exposure (https:// www.osha.gov/publications/osha3990.pdf; united states, department of labour). according to the osha, dental healthcare providers (dhcps) are classified as 'very high risk'. for this reason, the personal protective equipment (ppe) requirements for dhcps have been modified to include the wearing of impermeable gowns, goggles or face shields and n95 or better respirators in addition to standard precautions (meng et al. 2020) .the recommendation for a n95 respirator is unique for dentistry and requires a detailed discussion on, its types, alternatives, donning and doffing techniques and fit testing.according to the information available, the most common transmission routes for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) or covid-19 are through droplet transmission via direct face-to-face contact between patients and dental healthcare providers (dhcps), coughing or sneezing and indirect transmission by touching surfaces that were contaminated by the virus and then touching face, nose or eyes and through coarse or small droplets of saliva whilst performing aerosol generating procedures such as laryngoscopy or dental treatments (peng et al. 2020 , prati et al. 2020 . the sars-cov-2 virus has an affinity for the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace-2) receptor, which is in abundance in the respiratory tract and salivary gland duct epithelium, and therefore, the saliva is very likely to contain a high viral load (liu et al. 2011 ). micik and colleagues were the first to define aerosols in dentistry as particles of size less than 50 µm which were able to stay airborne for extended periods of time before eventually settling in the environment and or inhaled into the respiratory system (micik et al. 1969) . the particle size of 0.5-10 µm is of distinct importance as they are most likely to transmit infection (micik et al. 1969 ). this has been validated by numerous studies, and there is strong evidence which indicates that severe acute respiratory distress syndrome virus (sars) spreads through aerosol transmission. it would be completely logical to assume that covid-19, which is similar to sars, can likewise spread through aerosols (jones & brosseau 2015, centers for disease control and prevention: https://www.cdc.gov/sars/guidance/i-infection/ healthcare.html (accessed 21 april 2020)).since the outbreak, there is a lack of data comparing the efficacy of surgical mask versus respirators in mitigating the spread of covid-19 virus; however, there is an abundance of published data comparing the two against the influenza virus and sars (seto et al. 2003 , teleman et al. 2004 ).wen and colleagues tested the performance of various respirators and surgical masks against viral aerosols and demonstrated that the protection factor of n95 was thirty times greater than normal surgical masks (wen et al. 2013) . likewise, the superiority of n95 over surgical masks has also been demonstrated against sars in a number of case-control studies (seto et al. 2003 , teleman et al. 2004 .conversely, a recent systematic review and metaanalysis failed to demonstrate the superiority of n95 respirators over surgical masks during influenza pandemics (long et al. 2020) . the reasons suggested by the authors for the conflicting results were the high risk of bias in the randomized control trials, low compliance of wearing the n95 respirator and frequent doffing as the respirator was uncomfortable to wear for longer periods of time (long et al. 2020) . to sum up, faced with the emergence of a virulent disease such as covid-19 it would be logical to use a respirator as it offers resistance to fluid penetration and forms a seal around the mouth and nose in contrast to surgical masks that provide barrier protection only against droplets including large respiratory particles. most surgical masks lack an adequate face seal and do not effectively filter small particles from the air or aerosols, allowing for leakage around the mask and subsequent exposure (wen et al. 2013) . furthermore, the american dental association (ada) recommends an isolation of 14 days for both the dhcp and the patient if an aerosol generating procedure was performed using only a surgical mask and/or a covid test be performed on the patient (https://www.ada. org/en/member-center/coronavirus-resource-toolkitfor-ada-members).there is a range of respirators including full-and half-mask types. the common types of respirators that are used in healthcare settings include half-mask filtering facepiece respirators (ffrs) and powered airpurifying respirators (paprs). since all dental guidelines recommend using ffrs, they are discussed in greater detail (chughtai et al. 2020). the most widely used ffrs are the n95 respirators, which are disposable filtering facepiece respirators (ffrs) that tightly fit to provide optimum face seal and have a 95% or above particle filtering efficiency for a median particle size of 0.3 µm (bergman et al. 2015) .the prefix n is a description of the filter material (n = oil nonresistant, r = some resistance to oil and p = oil proof) and suffix 95 describes its protective properties (95 would filter 95% particles whilst 99 filters 99% particles) (bollinger 2004).they come in a variety of shapes, for example cupshaped 1860 (3m tm , st. paul, mn, united states), flatfold 1870 (3m tm ) and duckbill pfr95-270 (kimberly clark corp., dallas, tx, united states). these variations allow for better fit and comfort for different face types. some masks have exhalation valves that tend to keep the face cooler and prevent moisture build-up. the masks with an exhalation valve should not be used when working under sterile conditions (bollinger 2004).the respirators mentioned below according to 3m tm are equivalent in performance to n95 (united states niosh-42cfr84) and may be considered as viable alternatives to n95 (https://multimedia.3m.com/ mws/media/957730o/respirators-and-surgical-maskscontrast-technical-bulletin.pdf). fit testing is needed to determine whether a particular size and model of respirator provide an acceptable fit. the benefit of the ffr will be negated if it does not form a tight seal around the face and nose; therefore, a process of individual fit testing is required (osha respiratory protection standard 29 cfr 1910.134) and this should be repeated periodically (bergman et al. 2015) . there are two types of fit tests available, which include qualitative and quantitative tests.the qualitative test is graded as adequate if the test subject does not detect the sweet or bitter taste of saccharin or bitrex (a solution containing 95% water, 5% sodium chloride and < 0.1% denatonium benzoate), respectively, whilst performing a series of test exercises. whilst the quantitative fit test is done by using ambient aerosols to numerically estimate how well the n95 fits the user by measuring the aerosol particle ratio outside (c o ) and inside (c i ) the device. nonetheless, studies demonstrate that fit testing with either method provides the expected levels of protection (shaffer & janssen 2015) . studies have shown that varying pass rates for fit tests range from 10% to 80% indicating that one size does not fit all (mcmahon et al. 2008 , winter et al. 2010 , huh et al. 2018 .to date, there have been hundreds of approved n95 models that are available and it is difficult to predict which type of respirator will be the best fit in a given population. a fit testing programme is recommended for dental healthcare providers, in which the selection of the most suitable model should be made by an experienced fit tester who would determine the best fit based on facial dimensions, ethnicity and appearance of fit. these recommendations have proven to be useful in the past (mcmahon et al. 2008 , wilkinson et al. 2010 , danyluk & hon 2011 .correct donning and doffing procedures are the key to use of ppe, and all efforts should be made to prevent contamination during wearing and removal of respirators. therefore, stringent surveillance on proper ppe use is critical for preventing disease transmission to healthcare workers. previous studies show poor adherence with donning and doffing protocols lead to self-contamination (beam et al. 2011 , casanova et al. 2016 . there are no universally accepted donning and doffing sequences but having a check list or instructions (figs 1 and 2) are useful. having full body mirrors for self-assessment and external observers have also proven to be helpful in preventing selfcontamination (aguilar & linsuwanont 2011).respirators are meant for single use only; however, reuse may be allowed in a crisis situation to conserve resources. the covid-19 virus is able to survive on plastic, stainless steel and cardboard for up to 72 h (van doremalen et al. 2020). therefore, there is a chance that the outer surface of respirators could become contaminated with aerosol, which can later be transferred to the user during donning and doffing procedures. ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (uvgi), vaporous hydrogen peroxide (vhp) and moist heat are the most promising decontamination procedures, but there are is no literature which supports their efficacy against covid-19. nevertheless, caution is advised as decontamination procedures can have negative impact on the respirator performance as well as the fit of the respirator. it is also recommended to contact the vendor for best decontamination practices it is essential to use ffrs during the pandemic of covid-19 to prevent aerosol and droplet transmission as they are proven to offer resistance against fluid penetration and forms a seal around the mouth and nose better than surgical masks. the success of any ffr in preventing the inhalation of contaminant particles is also subject to an acceptable fit test and proper donning and doffing. the most commonly used ffr is the n95 respirator to prevent the transmission of disease.the rapid global spread of the coronavirus disease (covid-19) has compelled national governments to issue guidance on the use of face masks for members of the public. growing evidence of transmission from asymptomatic and presymptomatic individuals makes the development of these guidelines increasingly pressing [1-3]. recent research suggests that surgical masks could help prevent transmission of human coronaviruses by reducing emissions of coronavirus rna in respiratory droplets and aerosols [4]. although n95 respirators have the potential for even greater protection when compared to surgical masks [5,6], they also require fit testing that make them unsuitable for the public at large [7]. currently, both surgical masks and n95 respirators are in short supply, with health care workers continuing to face shortages of personal protective equipment (ppe). in light of this, fabric masks have become a third masking option, although current evidence on their efficacy is limited. prior studies suggest that fabric masks are significantly less effective than surgical masks, both for protecting health care workers and for reducing spread among the general public [8,9]. even with lower efficacy, however, all masking options appear to hold value. recent modeling suggests that widespread public adoption of even relatively ineffective masks would be able to help curtail community transmission of covid-19, although more effective masks yield greater reductions in mortality [10].despite growing evidence on the value of masking and calls for public use of masks as part of a broader strategy that also includes social distancing and hand washing [10,11], recent commentary suggests that public guidance on masks may be inconsistent across nations [12], and the world health organization (who) maintains, as of may 2020, that masks are only needed for healthy individuals when they are taking care of someone with suspected covid-19 [13]. given the pandemic status of covid-19, it is critical to establish a baseline understanding of current government guidelines on mask use for the general public. to date, no studies have conducted a systematic analysis of mask guidelines aimed at the public. public-facing guidelines are critical to compliance since government provision of cues is an important driver of mask use [14]. agency websites are a particularly critical way to disseminate these types of guidelines, as the public increasingly turns to the internet for health information.to inform this discussion and help health agencies to “adopt rational recommendations on appropriate face mask use” [12], this paper presents a content analysis of health agency mask guidelines in march 2020 among countries and regions with large numbers of covid-19 cases.the 25 countries and regions with the highest number of confirmed covid-19 cases were drawn from the johns hopkins center for systems science and engineering coronavirus covid-19 global cases tracker on march 9, 2020 [15]. these countries and regions are listed in table 1. to replicate the experience of someone looking for guidance, we visited national health agency websites for each country and region seeking mask guidelines (medical, surgical, and unspecified mask types) aimed at the public. given limited evidence for their efficacy relative to surgical and medical masks [8,9], we considered fabric masks separately. specifically, we sought to find both recommendations for or against fabric masks for primary use and recommendations for fabric masks only when other more effective masks are unavailable. a content analysis approach was used [16], and a codebook was developed in excel (microsoft corporation) to track guidance on when masks are recommended or not recommended. initial coding suggested that several nations indicated that masks were not recommended because they may increase risks or create a false sense of safety. a code was also added to track these statements. countries were assigned across the coding team by language proficiency, with google translate used as needed. when available, both the original and english language version of guidance were reviewed. all relevant webpages and documents were downloaded to create a static record. websites were coded between march 13 and march 23, 2020, with all coding verified by a second coder the following week. any coding discrepancies were discussed among authors and resolved. all websites were revisited a final time on march 30 to look for updated materials, and coding was updated as needed.all 25 countries and regions had some form of publicly available information about masks on their health agency websites aimed at the public. format and level of detail ranged greatly and included infographics (eg, malaysia) and short responses in a frequently asked questions format (eg, netherlands). iraq had the vaguest guidance, which the coding team inferred from news stories and press releases about mask use rather than the existence of a formal page or document with public covid-19 prevention guidance. a total of 4 (16%) countries and regions lacked recommendations for wearing surgical, medical, or unspecified masks when symptomatic, and 12 (48%) countries did not mention use by individuals providing care during home quarantine (table 1). although 9 (36%) countries and regions recommended surgical, medical, or unspecified masks in public or poorly ventilated places, 16 (64%) explicitly recommended against the general public wearing masks. a total of 7 (28%) also noted that surgical, medical, or unspecified masks were not recommended because they could increase health risks to the wearer or give a false sense of security.with regard to fabric masks, no countries or regions recommended this mask type as preferable to surgical or medical masks in the table 1 scenarios. out of the 25 countries and regions, there was a country and a region (n=2, 8%) that explicitly recommended against them due to their protective capacity being either unknown (italy) or inadequate (hong kong). south korea and mainland china recommended fabric masks as part of a broader guidance of different mask types being appropriate for different risk scenarios. south korea, for example, noted: “in cases where there is not a high risk of infection or there is no health mask, it is helpful to use a cotton mask (including replacing the electrostatic filter) to avoid droplets directly from coughing or sneezing.” germany, the united states, and japan recommended some form of fabric mouth covering (including scarves and handkerchiefs) only when other options were unavailable. austria was the only country or region at the time of analysis to recommend fabric masks interchangeably with other types of masks, noting that a “textile mouth-nose guard can also be used” as part of guidance on mask use in public spaces. the remaining 17 (68%) countries and regions did not explicitly address fabric masks in their guidance.in some cases, countries or regions updated their guidance during the study period. for example, iranian guidance initially recommended asymptomatic individuals not wear masks. by march 29, 2020, additional guidance was posted recommending masks at the park, gym, or when engaging in urban travel. on march 30, austria removed guidelines referencing the who that stated that “disposable face masks are not an effective protection” and instead recommended “protective mask[s] in public spaces where there may be close contact with other people, e.g. in supermarkets.” by contrast, sweden scaled back guidance during the study period, removing language that masks could help prevent spread from symptomatic individuals.as of late march 2020, there was little consistency in guidance on face mask use for the public, despite covid-19 being declared a global pandemic. although the countries and regions analyzed were chosen in light of having the highest number of confirmed cases in early march 2020, per-capita rates varied considerably. accordingly, some of the variation in guidance could be due to countries or regions being in different stages of pandemic response. guidance may also be informed by strategic considerations related to ppe shortages and a desire to reserve masks for health care providers. however, variation in statements regarding mask risks suggest a more fundamental difference in assessments of masks as an appropriate approach for reducing community spread of covid-19. many differences also appear to be regional. with the exception of austria, only asian and middle eastern nations and regions recommend masks of any type in public as of march 30, 2020. this is also broadly consistent with greater mask use in asian nations during previous outbreaks such as h1n1 and severe acute respiratory syndrome [17,18]. several european countries also failed to outline guidelines consistent with the who recommendation that symptomatic individuals and those who care for them should wear masks.the united states in particular has struggled with face mask guidelines. in early march 2020, the us surgeon general issued a strongly worded tweet indicating that members of the public should not purchase masks in response to the spread of covid-19, suggesting both that masks would be ineffective and that they are needed by health care providers [19]. the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) also consistently advised the public not to use face masks unless sick or caring for someone sick and denied that any updated mask guidance was scheduled as of march 28, 2020 [20]. on april 3, 2020, the cdc updated its website guidance to recommend that the public wear fabric masks in public settings where social distancing is a challenge [21]. the following day the us surgeon general posted a video on twitter demonstrating how to make a face mask out of a t-shirt [22]. guidelines also specify that they are not recommending surgical masks, as these “are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for health care workers and other medical first responders” [21]. at the time of writing, us states continue to face shortages of ppe [23], and the cdc recommends medical use of bandanas and scarves as a last resort [24]. the united states should monitor the efficacy of its guidelines relative to those in other nations and regions.as illustrated by the us example, guidelines are constantly evolving in light of new risk information and mask availability. although the ability to shift guidelines is critical to ensure that they reflect current evidence, changes also pose distinct health communication challenges. for example, some members of the public may struggle to understand why universal mask use is encouraged if the previous message focused on masks posing a health risk. misinformation about mask use already appears to be circulating on social media [25]. research on understanding and receptivity to mask guidance will be critical. most recently, several countries in addition to the united states appear to be rethinking the value of fabric masks. for example, both iran and greece now provide online instructions for how to create a fabric mask at home [26,27]. it will remain important to maintain awareness of developments in mask guidelines across regions and nations given that covid-19 is not bound by political and legal borders. it is also imperative that mask guidelines are clearly communicated to the public with messages explaining any guideline changes.findings on mask guidance should be interpreted in the context of their limitations and recognition that the sample focused on countries and regions with high levels of covid-19 in early march 2020. although we sought to assign coding based on language proficiency, some countries and regions necessitated more reliance on google translate than others. this may have introduced some translation errors. some nations and regions may have communicated information via social media that was not present on their website and, therefore, not included in this analysis. finally, mask guidance does not necessarily imply mask access, and the availability of masks for public use is a separate question that warrants significant attention from researchers and policy makers.although covid-19 was declared a pandemic by the who on march 11, 2020 [28], guidelines for face mask use to prevent covid-19 in the public remained broadly inconsistent across nations and regions at the end of march 2020. efforts should be made to continue to monitor mask recommendations and create greater standardization based on scientific evidence. furthermore, there is a strong need for additional research on the efficacy of different mask types in community settings. although not the primary focus of this study, the clarity of guidelines was also a source of concern, with some guidelines spread across multiple pages and sometimes not specifying the type of mask recommended. further, as mask use begins to increase in nations and regions where face masks have not experienced “cultural assimilation”[18], it will be critical to expand guidelines to include not just when masks should be worn but also how they should be worn. future research should consider how to best communicate such guidelines to the public, particularly as guidelines continue to change over time.in january 2020, the chinese center for disease control and prevention identified multiple patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology in wuhan, hubei, as cases of coronavirus disease 2019(covid-19) [1] . common clinical symptoms of patients with covid-19 include fever, fatigue and dry cough, occasionally accompanied by nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat, and diarrhea [2, 3] . covid-19 is mainly transmitted through respiratory droplets or direct contact [3e5] , and shows strong human-tohuman transmissibility. covid-19 was classified as a class b infectious disease and should be implemented prevention and control measures applied to class a infectious diseases [6, 7] . as this epidemic broke around the chinese new year when population mobility is high, it resulted in a high risk that a large number of people may become virus carriers, which led to difficulties in identifying and controlling the source of infection. therefore, the lack of effective prevention and control measures for nosocomial infections in crowded areas of general hospitals, such as outpatient clinics or wards, can easily give rise to nosocomial outbreaks. the hospital had clear standards for the protection and management of fever clinics and isolation wards, but there were no clear standards and procedures for the protection of non-isolated areas in hospitals. refined management is both a management concept and a management method based on digitization, wherein information technology is professionally and systematically employed to achieve the goal of improving management efficiency and management quality [8, 9] . to ensure the safety of patients and healthcare professionals, our hospital adopted refined management strategies for the prevention and control of nosocomial infections in nonisolated areas, and no hospital-acquired infections were found.under the guidance of the infection control department, the nursing department and the medical department have jointly formulated protection measures for different types of staff for prevention and control of covid-19, as well as the prevention and control measures for the outpatient clinic, the emergency department, wards and administrative office areas (table 1) .infrared temperature screening was performed on all personnel, including patients, families, and staff, at the nine major entrances to the hospital. mask-wearing was checked for all personnel and masks would be issued if necessary. rapid hand sanitizer stations were installed to encourage hand hygiene. individuals with an infrared body temperature >38 c or ear temperature >37.5 c were accompanied by staff to the fever outpatient clinic.outpatient appointments were scheduled to control the flow of patients. further, nosocomial infection control was strengthened, including triage management and disinfection before and after each contact with patients. triage nurses checked whether patients and their families wore masks correctly, and assisted to correct if necessary. a form was used to screen patients' epidemiological history of covid-19 (whether the patient had been to hubei province or had come into contact with someone from hubei in the last two weeks) and fever/respiratory/gastrointestinal symptoms. patients with an epidemiological history and fever/respiratory/ gastrointestinal symptoms, and patients with fever alone were escorted by staff to the fever outpatient clinic for further examination. patients with an epidemiological history but without fever/ respiratory/gastrointestinal symptoms went to designated clinics, and maintained a distance of at least 1 meter from each other. medical equipment, such as stethoscopes, thermometers, sphygmomanometers, etc., was disinfected following each use. the surfaces of hospital beds, treatment tables and chairs, treatment carts, etc., and the floor were wiped and disinfected with 1000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant once every 4-hour. visible contamination was disinfected and wiped immediately with 1000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant. the respiratory outpatient clinic was moved to a separate, well-ventilated area with the same screening procedures at other outpatient clinics.education related to prevention and control of covid-19 was carried out. educational materials were posted at the prehospitalization preparatory center, entrances towards and within each ward. emphasis was placed on informing patients to reduce and control the number of visitors, practice proper hand hygiene and wear the mask correctly. a screening form was used to screen inpatients' epidemiological history of covid-19, and respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms. patients with an epidemiological history, accompanied by fever/respiratory/gastrointestinal symptoms were transferred to the fever outpatient clinic. patients with a positive epidemiological history but without fever/respiratory/ gastrointestinal symptoms underwent proper droplet isolation. visitors were not allowed to enter wards. necessary accompanying persons should be fixed after passing screening of the epidemiological history, wearing a mask and practicing hand hygiene during the accompanying period, and avoid eating or sharing tableware with patients. the distance between the beds of admitted patients was more than 1 meter.a screening station was set up at the entrance to the emergency department. nurses checked and guided patients and their families on proper mask-wearing and recorded the epidemiological history of them. triage nurses evaluated whether patients had fever/respiratory/gastrointestinal symptoms. for patients with an epidemiological history accompanied with fever/respiratory/ gastrointestinal symptoms, it was determined whether they needed emergency rescue. if emergency rescue was needed, the patient was immediately sent to the isolation room in the emergency department. otherwise, the patient was escorted by a designated person wearing a surgical mask to the fever outpatient clinic.all hospital staff received screening and completed the recording of epidemiological history related to covid-19. staff with an epidemiological history had to be quarantined at home, followed up by the healthcare department until being confirmed without infection. everyone entering the hospital administrative offices should be checked on wearing masks correctly and screened body temperatures using infrared thermometers by security staff. the head of each administrative department checked twice a day if any member within the department showed fever/respiratory/gastrointestinal symptoms. all suspected status was reported to the healthcare department.the nursing department formed three functional groups for training, education, and supervision, and employed the grid-based management in the entire hospital. the hospital was divided into 108 units based on the geographical area gridding, including the wards, outpatient clinics, the emergency department, administrative offices, canteens, and other logistics service areas. each unit was assigned a person in charge such that there were no blind spots in the hospital and no omissions in personnel management.the training team consisted of one head nurse and fourteen backbone members for nosocomial infection prevention and control. the team produced systematic training materials, including covid-19-related information, videos on the use of protective equipment, and labels for different hospital areas. they also collected the latest information on covid-19 and its prevention and control measures. video conferences were held to deliver group teaching in the form of live interactive network classrooms, which were combined with on-site guidance to achieve better outcomes [10] . participants in the training were registered in realtime through the office system, and it was mandatory for all staff to participate and pass the entire course. personnel trained included doctors, nurses, administrative and logistics staff, cleaning and delivery staff, and security staff.the education group consisted of one head nurse and four charge nurses who were responsible for producing educational material for patients and their families. the educational materials included a version for patients and their families in general wards, a version for fever clinic and isolation ward patients, and an ipad version of the covid-19 prevention manual. the nursing units posted notices and posters, distributed covid-19 prevention manuals, used multimedia tools such as videos and ppts, combined with demonstrations, on-site inspections and error corrections to educate the patients and their families.the supervision team consisted of one head nurse and six senior nurses who were responsible for formulating the audit forms for different areas, and conducting daily on-site audits, supervision and guidance of nursing units to implement the various prevention and control measures. in addition, through analysis and feedback of existing problems, the team also made timely improvements to the prevention and control measures to achieve a systematic management process. the supervision team developed an audit plan and audit content form; conducted daily on-site spot checks to ensure the prevention and control measures were being implemented by personnel in the gridded areas; strengthened on-site training for existing problems and analyzed and recorded the causes; provided feedback for improvement via the office software group. the supervision ways included a daily 10-min on-site audit of infrared temperature measurement and mask-wearing at each hospital entrance and recording the number of audited people and the existing problems; on-site audits to check whether covid-19 prevention notices have been clearly displayed in all areas, and to record the concentration of disinfection solution, frequency of disinfection, and compliance; on-site audits to check whether patients and their families were aware of proper mask-wearing technique, hand hygiene practice, and covid-19 prevention measures, and to record the frequencies of patients wearing masks correctly, complying with hand hygiene instructions, and being aware of covid-19 prevention measures when outpatients and their accompanying persons leave the outpatient clinics and when inpatients and their accompanying persons leave the wards; spot checks on completion of the covid-19 epidemiological history screening form in each outpatient clinic and all wards.when faced the epidemic, a lot of work of communication, coordination, and reporting has to be done in hospitals. due to the transmission characteristics of the covid-19, our hospital canceled centralized staff meetings. the hospital's office software was used to form groups at different levels, such as a core group of the nursing department for covid-19 prevention and control, a group for heads of nursing units, and groups for nursing unit members, such that everyone could take responsibility and communicate effectively. as closed-loop communication of important information was required, video conferences were held when necessary. collective sessions for patient education were canceled. instead, educational material was distributed via wechat, while ipads and televisions in the ward were used to disseminate information on covid-19 prevention and control measures.the workload of the emergency department, clinics and inpatients wards, the status of personnel screening, the workload of each functional group, and audit results were reported in the form of digital data. the nursing department summarized these results to analyze the existing problems and make improvement of quality.as of january 31, 2020, there was no hospital-acquired covid-19 infection among hospital staff. the audit results are shown in table 2 . the rates of mask-wearing, screening of epidemiological history, and disinfection of environmental and medical supplies were all 100% in the hospital. the accuracy rate of mask-wearing by patients and their families was 73.79%, while their compliance rate with hand hygiene was 40.78%.for prevention and control of covid-19 in non-isolated areas of the hospital, it is important to follow the concept of refined management. refined management is a concept but also a management approach, to achieve "precision" for the professional formulation of management standards, "refinement" for systematic and comprehensive implementation, "stringency" for rapid and effective communication to reduce the deviation in the implementation process, and "accuracy" for digitized results.epidemiological screening is the first step in epidemic prevention and control, and cutting off the transmission route is one of the key steps. nurses are the windows through which patients seek medical treatment, as well as the main source of information for patients and their families, and in charge of environmental disinfection. thus, nurses play an important role in epidemiological screening of covid-19 and implementing the control measures to cut-off the transmission of covid-19. the audit results indicate that the screening rate of epidemiological history for inpatients and outpatients was more than 95%; the patients' and their families' awareness of covid-19 prevention and control measures was up to 97.5%; the rate of mask-wearing at hospital entrances, education and notification of patients and their families, and the rate of environmental and medical supplies disinfection was 100%. this indicates that the refined management method applied in our hospital ensured the effective implementation of covid-19 prevention and control measures.proper mask-wearing and hand hygiene are key points to cut off the transmission of covid-19. the audit results indicated that the rate of proper mask-wearing in medical areas was only 73.70%. the main problem was that the mask hung from one ear or shifted downwards. the hand hygiene compliance rate when exiting clinics or wards was only 40.78%. an analysis of the causes revealed that this was highly associated with the public's daily habits, and some patients reported chest tightness and discomfort when wearing a mask. therefore, it is necessary to increase publicity and supervision efforts around mask-wearing and hand hygiene practice.the prevention and control of the covid-19 epidemic are still ongoing, and the majority of healthcare professionals are putting in their greatest efforts. scientific and effective prevention in the nonisolated areas of general hospitals, coupled with strict control and treatment in the fever isolation department are the two vital aspects to win this battle.ethical approval or individual consent was not applicable.none. to the editor-the covid-19 pandemic caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) has sounded danger alarms across the globe. according to a report by the world health organization (who), >292,142 confirmed cases had been identified worldwide as of march 21, 2020. 1 although some differences in the real-world mortality rate and the mortality rate were reported in a few published clinical series, a total of 1,772 deaths with an average mortality rate of 2.5% was reported by the chinese center for disease control and prevention on february 16, 2020. 2 with the rise in global anxiety, the who declared covid-19 the sixth international public health emergency on january 30, 2020. this pandemic could have devastating outcomes across the world if the viral spread is not controlled by public health efforts.the origin of coronavirus, a single-stranded enveloped rna virus, dates back in 1960s. the first coronaviruses discovered caused infectious bronchitis in chickens. two other viruses obtained from nasal secretions of human patients with common colds were named human coronavirus 229e and human coronavirus oc43. overall, the clinical features of covid-19, caused by sars-cov-2, correspond to common influenza. the clinical manifestations of covid-19 pneumonia, as demonstrated by some studies, have varied among cases. fever is the predominant symptom followed by cough, dyspnea, myalgia, headache, and diarrhea. 1 an effective cure of covid-19 by antiviral therapy and vaccination is currently being developed. however, considering previous management plans for mers and sars infections, the who has recommended preventive measures to inhibit the transmission of acute respiratory infections. these interventions include (1) avoiding close contact with people suffering from common cold; (2) frequent cleaning of hands with running water or alcohol sanitizers; (3) avoiding excessive touching of eyes, nose, and mouth; and (4) avoiding unprotected contact with animals. in addition, people with acute respiratory infections should practice respiratory hygiene regularly, which includes maintaining a distance of 1 m from healthy people to avoid spread of airborne droplets, covering coughs and sneezes with clothing or disposable tissues, and frequent hand washing. 1 since the emergence of sars-cov-2, various international bodies have debated the use of n95 respirators and surgical masks. in their review on the use of masks and respirators for prevention of influenza transmission, reza et al 4 reported that effectiveness of masks is likely linked to their early, regular, and correct use; most studies have reported a reduced risk of upper respiratory infections with masks and respirators. similarly, jefferson et al 5 reviewed the clinical effectiveness n95 respirators (95%) and masks (68%) in reducing the spread of respiratory viruses. in a debate organized by the singapore infection control association, dr lin proposed the adequacy of surgical masks for prevention of mers-cov transmission in addition to personal and environmental hygiene. moreover, during sars outbreak, n95 respirators were perceived to be difficult to tolerate by healthcare workers due to their association with impaired mental performance and headache. according to professor seto, the who has recommended the use of surgical masks for people living with infected patients and n95 respirators for aerosol-generating procedures. in 2009, the us cdc recommended the use of n95 respirators in all circumstances; however, with evolution of coronavirus pandemics, the guidelines were revised in 2010 and n95 respirators were recommended only for aerosol-generating procedures. 6 with increasing global apprehension concerning the spread of coronaviruses, people are rushing to amazon and local pharmacies to buy surgical masks and n95 respirators, resulting in a shortage. different social media celebrities are also promoting a dangerous myth by unnecessarily using these masks. considering that n95 respirators filter out 95% of small particles, medical professionals need to wear these masks during close contact with patients. however, they are of no use for general public because these heavy particles can be transmitted through surfaces and, to a limited extent, through air. in a recent press conferences, alex azar issued a statement that the united states needs~300 million n95 respirators for healthcare workers due to the rapid increase in prevalence of this infection. 7 the paucity of masks and respirators has led to significant price escalation. some businesses in united states are completely sold out of masks despite evidence that healthy people do not need to wear them. 8 according to the centers for disease control and prevention, frequent hand washing with running water and soap for at least 20 seconds, using hand sanitizer, avoiding large gatherings and crowds, and disinfecting fomites may primarily protect others from the virus. however, the eminent global shortage and high prices of masks cannot be overstated. the respective authorities and governments need to develop and implement the proper guidelines and preventative strategies and make sure that the general public is adhering to the proposed protocols. governments should also provide accurate information and should clarify misinformation spread by social media to help the public face this pandemic.since the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus that caused coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), the use of face masks has become ubiquitous in china and other asian countries such as south korea and japan. some provinces and municipalities in china have enforced compulsory face mask policies in public areas; however, china's national guideline has adopted a risk-based approach in offering recommendations for using face masks among health-care workers and the general public. we compared face mask use recommendations by different health authorities (panel). despite the consistency in the recommendation that symptomatic individuals and those in health-care settings should use face masks, discrepancies were observed in the general public and community settings. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] for example, the us surgeon general advised against buying masks for use by healthy people. one important reason to discourage widespread use of face masks is to preserve limited supplies for professional use in health-care settings. universal face mask use in the community has also been discouraged with the argument that face masks provide no effective protection against coronavirus infection.however, there is an essential distinction between absence of evidence and evidence of absence. evidence that face masks can provide effective protection against respiratory infections in the community is scarce, as acknowledged in recommendations from the uk and germany. 7, 8 however, face masks are widely used by medical workers as part of droplet precautions when caring for patients with respiratory infections. it would be reasonable to suggest vulnerable individuals avoid crowded areas and use surgical face masks rationally when exposed to high-risk areas. as evidence suggests covid-19 could be transmitted before symptom onset, community transmission might be reduced if everyone, • face masks play a very important role in places such as hospitals, but there is very little evidence of widespread benefit for members of the public.• there is not enough evidence to prove that wearing a surgical mask significantly reduces a healthy person's risk of becoming infected while wearing it. according to who, wearing a mask in situations where it is not recommended to do so can create a false sense of security because it might lead to neglecting fundamental hygiene measures, such as proper hand hygiene.*people at moderate risk of infection include those working in areas of high population density (eg, hospitals, train stations), those have been or live with somebody who is quarantined, and administrative staff, police, security, and couriers whose work is related to covid-19. †people at low risk of infection include those staying in areas of high population density (eg, supermarket, shopping mall), who work indoors, who seek health care in medical institutions (other than fever clinics), and gatherings of children aged 3-6 years and school students. ‡people at very low risk of infection include those who mostly stay at home, who do outdoor activities, and who work or study in well-ventilated areas.including people who have been infected but are asymptomatic and contagious, wear face masks.recommendations on face masks vary across countries and we have seen that the use of masks increases substantially once local epidemics begin, including the use of n95 respirators (without any other protective equipment) in community settings. this increase in use of face masks by the general public exacerbates the global supply shortage of face masks, with prices soaring, 9 and risks supply constraints to frontline healthcare professionals. as a response, a few countries (eg, germany and south korea) banned exportation of face masks to prioritise local demand. 10 who called for a 40% increase in the production of protective equipment, including face masks. 9 meanwhile, health authorities should optimise face mask distribution to prioritise the needs of frontline health-care workers and the most vulnerable populations in communities who are more susceptible to infection and mortality if infected, including older adults (particularly those older than 65 years) and people with underlying health conditions. people in some regions (eg, thailand, china, and japan) opted for makeshift alternatives or repeated usage of disposable surgical masks. notably, improper use of face masks, such as not changing disposable masks, could jeopardise the protective effect and even increase the risk of infection.consideration should also be given to variations in societal and cultural paradigms of mask usage. the contrast between face mask use as hygienic practice (ie, in many asian countries) or as something only people who are unwell do (ie, in european and north american countries) has induced stigmatisation and racial aggravations, for which further public education is needed. one advantage of universal use of face masks is that it prevents discrimination of individuals who wear masks when unwell because everybody is wearing a mask.it is time for governments and public health agencies to make rational recommendations on appropriate face mask use to complement their recommendations on other preventive measures, such as hand hygiene. who currently recommends that people should wear face masks if they have respiratory symptoms or if they are caring for somebody with symptoms. perhaps it would also be rational to recommend that people in quarantine wear face masks if they need to leave home for any reason, to prevent potential asymptomatic or presymptomatic transmission. in addition, vulnerable populations, such as older adults and those with underlying medical conditions, should wear face masks if available. universal use of face masks could be considered if supplies permit. in parallel, urgent research on the duration of protection of face masks, the measures to prolong life of disposable masks, and the invention on reusable masks should be encouraged. taiwan had the foresight to create a large stockpile of face masks; other countries or regions might now consider this as part of future pandemic plans.we declare no competing interests. globally, countries have utilized precautionary measures against this pandemic. however, 30there is a lack of consensus across cultures on whether wearing face masks is an effective 31 physical intervention against disease transmission. this study aims to illustrate 32 transmission routes of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-332), address the controversies surrounding mask wearing, and provides suggestions for the 34 use of facial masks during the covid-19 pandemic. 35the references search was conducted on march 11, using three databases (pubmed, 36 cnki, and web of science) with the search terms "covid-19", "2019-ncov", "novel 37 coronavirus", or "sars-cov-2" and "mask", "facial mask", or "face mask". the team 38 members individually assessed the relevance and validity of each study. non-peer 39 reviewed manuscripts from preprint servers were not considered. we also searched the another important feature of the covid-19 is that asymptomatic cases proportion 86 is high. it is estimated approximately 60% of all infections convert from cases with mild 87 symptom or asymptotic cases and might be passing the virus on to others (qiu, 2020 however, global spread of sars-cov-2 is far greater than mers and sars, which 107 might be associated with cases with mild symptom or asymptomatic cases. according to 108wrapp et al., the binding of sars-cov-2 to the obligate receptor of angiotensin 109converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is of higher affinity than that of sars-cov (wrapp et al., 110 2020) , indicating that those with medical comorbidities may be at higher risks. this may 111 also indicate a higher time to infection, even in the absence of masks (pung et al., 2020) . avian influenza, influenza, and haze events. hence, wearing masks has become a 154 pervasive in society as a way to prevent exposure. this is for good reason, as the 155 population density in asian countries is generally higher than that in western countries, 156 and the crowding in a confined place will increase the infection risk or exposure. 157 therefore, during the covid-19 pandemic, the public is encouraged to wear masks in 158 public places and people often comply as a form of health-seeking behavior (greenhalgh 159 et al., 2020) . 160however, in many western advanced economies, those wearing masks are often met 161 with suspicion in public, even causing panic in certain situation. universal mask use in 162 the community has been discouraged by some health authorities with the argument that 163 masks provide no effective protection against coronavirus infection (feng et al., 2020) . effectiveness studies is mainly due to different study contents, study designs, evaluation 177 methods and endpoints. understandably, good evidence on this topic is difficult to assess. 178many studies used self-reported questionnaire to quantify mask uptake status, which may 179 introduce subjective bias because the description depends on perception of participants 180 suppose if only symptomatic cases wore masks, we would miss those asymptomatic 261 cases, which increases the possibility of spreading the virus before realization that they 262 carry the virus. however, we should note that requiring the general public to wear masks 263 would put high pressure on mask supply, and insufficient guidance would even trigger a 264 run on medical protection products creating a lack of ppe for medical professionals. 265 therefore, scientific strategy and strategic guidance should be established, and enough 266 mask supply should be guaranteed under the frame of inter-or intra-national cooperation. 267 268as tedros adhanom ghebreyesus, the who director-general, mentioned on 270march 18, 2020, "do not assume you will not be infected, prepare as if you will die" 271 (ghebreyesus, 2020) . the government of china has implemented a risk-based mask use 272 strategy for general public, people in public congregated places and confined congregated 273 places, confirmed/suspected cases and close contacts, and occupational exposed workers 274 under various scenarios, which could be used as a reference ( table 1) . as an example, 275 during the covid-19 pandemic, it is suggested to wear the mask in congregated places 276 such as offices, shopping malls, restaurants, conference room, etc. or relatively confined 277 environments such as elevators, transportation vehicles, etc. the mask is generally used 278 by general public, while the respirator or a filtering face piece, which is designed to 279 protect the wearer from exposure to airborne contaminants, is mainly used by health care 280 workers especially during agp (european centre for disease prevention and control, 281 2020). the exhalation valve is sometime used in the respirator in order to reduce the 282 breathing resistance. however, the inhalation valve closes and the exhalation valve opens 283 of the mask when the wearer breathing, implying that the exhaled gas is not filtered and 284 directly discharged into the surrounding environment. as a result, the respirator 285 recommended for suspected cases, confirmed cases, asymptomatic carriers, and close 286 contacts must not contain the valve (cdc, 2020c). moreover, considering the probable 287 insufficient mask production, masks could be repeatedly used under the prerequisite of 288 public health protection in areas with middle to low risks. 289 there is not a single measure that could provide complete protection to the public. 300therefore, mask use must be combined with hand hygiene, ventilation improvement, 301 reduction of gatherings, and social and physical distancing. to inform the public, the 302 government could 1) invite mainstream press such as tv stations, broadcasts, 303 newspapers, etc. to participate in mask education; 2) spread relevant knowledge via social 304 media (e.g. twitter, facebook, and instagram) or display screens and billboards in public 305 places; 3) hand out mask instruction materials to the public; and 4) carry out training and 306 seminars in places such as hospitals, schools, kindergartens. 307 308as the use of masks during the covid-19 pandemic would contribute to the rapid 310 consumption of masks in limited time, two essential countermeasures should be taken 311 into consideration. the government should timely stimulate mask production. many 312 countries have been facing a severe shortage of medical resources, including medical 313 masks. in this circumstance, the mask price increased sharply, and the public stole or 314 fought for masks in some regions; in addition, diplomatic disputes even arose. to solve 315 this problem, the government could 1) procure surgical masks globally through different 316 channels and means; 2) distribute masks in accordance with risk level; and 3) explore 317 prospects of local production. research on mask reuse should also be encouraged. for 318 example, song et al. has proposed an approach for medical mask use using hairdryer, and 319 they are still working on further improvement . after the treatment, the 320 medical mask could be used by the public, but the reuse in a hospital settings is still 321 unexplored. 322 323the face mask distribution priority should be given to healthcare workers providing 326 care services (e.g. front-line healthcare workers, nursing staff in institutions, and 327 healthcare personnel in private clinics); personnel who provide essential services and 328 who are required to have contact with the public at work (e.g. those providing public 329 transport, emergency services and immigration services); and vulnerable groups in the 330 society (e.g. unaccompanied children, elderly people without family support, and 331 disabled persons). 332the globe is more interconnected than ever; if the countries with weaker health 333 systems fail to control the pandemic, other countries would be re-exposed by the covid-334 19 for the foreseeable future. if the countries with weak health systems fail to control the 335 pandemic, other countries would be exposed in the danger of being harassed by the 336 covid-19 for the long term. as chief of u.n. claimed, "we must create the conditions 337 and mobilize the resources necessary to ensure that developing countries have equal 338 opportunities to respond to this crisis in their communities and economies" (united 339nations secretary-general, 2020). in mid-february, france took early action to help 340china, sending 17 tons of similar supplies. under the well control of covid-19, china 341 has sent supplies to italy, the hardest hit among european countries, and to spain (us 342 news, 2020a). case in point, lvmh, the world's biggest luxury goods group, has also 343 ordered 40 million health masks from a chinese supplier to help france coping with this 344 pandemic (us news, 2020b). it could be seen that international cooperation, with 345 manufacturing and distribution logistics may optimize mask resource allocation. 346in each country, the most vulnerable group should be paid more attention when in the context of rapid spread of covid-19 globally, there is a lack of consensus on 361 the mask use as a npi amide the pandemic. this study summarized that: 1) main 362 transmission routes of sars-cov-2 include droplet, contact transmissions, and possible 363 airborne transmissions, which is characterized by high proportion of cases with mild 364 symptom or asymptomatic cases, strong infectivity, and a large number of clusters; 2) 365the necessity of wearing masks by the public during covid-19 pandemic has been 366 under-emphasized; and 3) a risk basis mask use strategies and compliance improvement 367 are suggested. 368 369jw and xs had the idea for and designed the study. jw and lp drafted the paper, and all 371 authors critically revised the manuscript for important content and gave final approval for 372 the version to be published. all authors agree to be accountable for all aspects of the 373 work in ensuring that questions related to any part of the work are appropriately 374 investigated and resolved. jw and lp contributed equally to this work. 375we declare no competing interests. 377the authors would like to acknowledge all health-care workers involved in the diagnosis 379 and treatment of patients during the pandemic in the globe. the present perspective has 380 not been subjected to the peer and policy review from china cdc, and therefore does not 381 necessarily reflect the views of the china cdc and no official endorsement should be 382 this article is a narrative review. zoonotic diseases constitute a large group of infections that can be transmitted from animals to humans, regardless of the presence of vectors [1] . approximately 80% of viruses, 50% of bacteria, and 40% of fungi are capable of generating a zoonotic infection [2] . bats are considered important reservoirs and vectors for the exponential spread of zoonotic infectious diseases; they are associated with sars and ebola, the latter of which was responsible for an epidemic with its epicenter in sub-saharan africa in 2014 [3] . sars coronavirus in 2003 and 2019, and h1n1 flu in 2009 have demonstrated how a zoonotic infection can spread rapidly among humans, causing potentially irreversible global repercussions, from an economic, social, and health-related standpoint [2] . compared to previous eras, globalization and the intensification of international movements have greatly facilitated the spread of viruses [1] [2] [3] [4] .coronaviruses are a subfamily of viruses [5] . all viruses contain nucleic acids, either dna or rna, and a protein coat which encases the nucleic acid. some viruses are also enclosed by an envelope of fat and protein molecules [5, 6] .towards the last week of december 2019, cases of abnormal pneumonia with unknown etiology were recorded in wuhan, the capital of the hubei province, in the geographical heart of the people's republic of china [11] . in the second half of january, the chinese competent authorities confirmed 6000 cases of patients infected with sars-cov-2, although 80,000 cases were estimated at that time [21] . however, unlike sars-cov-1, sars-cov-2 has shown a greater tendency for rapid human-to-human transmission, with an r0 varying between 1.4 and 6.5, and an incubation period ranging from 2 to 14 days, with an average of 7 days [10] . on 31 january 2020, 213 deaths had been confirmed globally in 19 different countries [11] . according to the data of 14 march 2020, italy was the most affected european country, followed by spain [22] . on 3 may 2020, the number of people currently positive in italy was 100,179, with 28,884 deaths [23] . the average age of people who died of covid-19 was 78.5 years, while, the average age of diagnosis was 65 [22] . the age group with the highest mortality rate was 80 to 89 years, with a male predominance (67%). the mortality rate in the male population increased by 10% (77%) in the 70-79 age group [22] . forty-eight percent of patients deceased from sars-cov-2 exhibited three or more comorbidities, two comorbidities (26%), one comorbidity (23%) and no comorbidity (1.2%). hypertension, diabetes, and ischemic heart diseases are among the main preexisting pathologies. only 1% of deaths from covid-19 occurred in patients under the age of 50 years. lombardy was the most affected region, accounting for 68% of the national cases, followed by emilia romagna (16.4%) and veneto (4.3%) [24] . these data prompted authors to investigate the existence of a possible link between the exponential transmission of covid-19 in certain italian regions and the pollution of atmospheric particulate matter, the latter acting as a vector of the virus [25] . however, this is a spurious association because there are systematic errors that determine the lack of correlation between these two factors.according to that reported by the new york times [26] , dentistry is one of the most exposed professions to the covid-19 contagion. it is necessary to establish a clinical protocol to be applied in the working environment to avoid new infections and progressive virus spread. in daily clinical practice, the patient's oral fluids, material contamination, and dental unit surfaces can act as sources of contagion both for the dentist and the assistant, and for the patient himself or herself. saliva and blood droplets that are deposited on the surfaces or aerosol inhalation generated by rotating instruments and ultrasound handpieces constitute a risk for those who occupy or will occupy those environments. therefore, the use of disinfectants and personal protective equipment (ppe) remain essential for the proper development of the dental profession [27] .the sudden spread of sars-cov-2 has determined the need to modify both preventive and therapeutic protocols in dental practice. consequently, the need to analyze the available sources in the literature to update clinical practice is crucial.the aim of this narrative review is to investigate preventive measures in dental practice by assessing the operator and patient health protection during the new covid-19 emergency by considering past experiences in terms of prevention, as the virus was only recently discovered.special attention is devoted to personal protection equipment, such as respirators and surgical masks, due to the major exposition of dental workers to the coronavirus.the authors carried out a narrative review and not a systematic review, as the topic is based on a recent event, and there are still several aspects pending to be analyzed.the process of selecting scientifically valid sources took place over five weeks, between 1 april and 4 may 2020.the search engines used were pubmed, scielo, and google scholar. the boolean operators used "and" and "or".the mesh terms for the research were: "dental care", "dentistry", "dental offices", "masks", "coronavirus", "dental equipment", and "disinfectants". non-mesh words were "sars-cov-2" and "ppe" the following terms were used with boolean operators to combine searches: "covid-19" or "sars-cov-2" or "coronavirus" and "dental care" or "dental office" or "dentistry" with no limitation to the year of publication. in addition, a second search was made: "masks" or "disinfectants" or "ppe" or "dental equipment" and "covid-19" or "coronavirus" or "sars-cov-2".included in the study were bibliographic reviews, systematic reviews, meta-analyses, randomized controlled trials, cohort studies, case reports, and studies in english, italian, spanish, and portuguese. the exclusion criteria were as follows: articles not related to the topic, animal studies, full-text not available, and articles in other languages. no time limits were applied during the screening phase of the scientific articles ( figure 1 ). given the heterogeneous results, the selected articles were divided into two main groups according to the treated topic: sars-cov-2 guidelines in dentistry ( table 1 ) and analysis of preventive masks used for protection against sars-cov-2 (table 2) . a third group, on disinfectants, was analyzed. the results obtained demonstrate compliance and homogeneity between the authors.in studies done by rabenau et al. [37] and kampf et al. [38] , ethanol proved to be one of the first-choice disinfectants in percentages ranging from 80 to 95% (used as a hand rub gel) [37] or 62 to 71% (used as a surface disinfectant) [38] . the coronavirus is reduced to below recording levels in a variable lapse of time between 30 and 60 s.in the study by rabenau et al., similar results were observed with disinfectant based on 45% iso-propanol, 30% n-propanol, and 0.2% mecetronium ethyl sulfate. furthermore, the use of surface disinfectants such as mikrobac forte (containing benzalkonium chloride and laurylamine), khorsolin ff (containing benzalkonium chloride, glutaraldehyde, and didecyldimonium chloride), and dismozon (containing magnesium monoperphthalate) can be valid options, even if the desired effect is obtained after 30-60 min [37] . with all tested preparations, sars-cov-2 was inactivated to below the limit of detection, regardless of the type of organic load (0.3% albumin, 10% fetal calf serum, and 0.3% albumin with 0.3% sheep erythrocytes).kampf et al. in carrier tests demonstrated the disinfectant action of ethanol at 62-71% against the sars coronavirus in 60 s, of sodium hypochlorite between 0.1-0.5% in one min, and glutaraldehyde at 2%.in contrast, 0.04% benzalkonium chloride, 0.06% sodium hypochlorite, and 0.55% ortho-phtalaldehyde were less effective [38] .the percentages varied in the suspension tests, where ethanol (between 78 and 95%), 2-propanol (70-100%), the combination of 45% 2-propanol with 30% 1-propanol, glutardialdehyde (0.5-2.5%), formaldehyde (0.7-1%) and povidone iodine readily inactivate the coronavirus; hypochlorite is effective at a concentration greater than 0.21% [38] .fundamentally, the authors agree ( table 1 ) that it is essential to perform an accurate telephone triage, a subsequent triage in dental clinics, and a complementary questionnaire to collect as much information as possible about the patient and his or her family members, specifically regarding symptoms and movements in the previous 14 days [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . temperature measurement is recommended when the patient enters the dental office; if the body temperature exceeds 37.3 • c, it is suggested the treatment be postponed [30] . in patients with a cured covid-19 infection, the american dental association (ada) guidelines propose to reschedule dental treatment at least 72 h after the resolution of the symptoms, or 7 days after the appearance of initial symptoms, such as fever controlled without antipyretics and spontaneous improvement of breathing [39] . meng et al., in a precautionary way, set the necessary recovery period to 30 days before performing non-deferrable dental care in patients who have been infected [28] . for medical-legal issues, a patient's self-certification is also required with regard to what he/she claims during the telephone and clinical triage phase.the ada and the centers for disease prevention and control (cdc) recommend keeping the waiting room empty, without magazines, and avoiding the overlap of two or more appointments. if this is not possible, the minimum distance between one patient and the other must be 2 m (6 feet) in each direction.in extreme situations, for health protection, it is reasonable to ask patients to wait in their vehicle, if possible, or nearby to the dental clinic, and advise them by telephone call or message when it is their turn [40] .as far as pediatric dentistry is concerned, persons accompanying minor age patients are asked to come to the appointment in the smallest possible number, wear a protective mask, wait in the waiting room, and not attend the patient's treatment to avoid the risk of aerosol inhalation [27] .further accurate studies have been carried out to demonstrate the importance of oral rinses just before dental treatment; costa et al., in a study in 2019, highlighted how the use of chlorhexidine at 0.12% and 0.20% alters the amount of bacteria, viruses, and fungi present in the oral biofilm, reducing the risk of cross-contamination due to aerosol [29] . since covid-19 is sensitive to oxidation, peng et al. proposed rinsing with 1% hydrogen peroxide or, alternatively, with 0.2% povidone-iodine [30] . this must be interpreted with caution: saliva is constantly and cyclically renewed by the salivary glands, making the virus available again.regardless of the type of treatment planned, healthcare professionals, especially dentists, hygienists, and dental assistants, must follow rigid protocols related to dressing and personal protective equipment. hair caps, protective goggles, surgical masks or n95, disposable surgical gowns, special footwears, and protective visors are essential [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . according to the "en iso 374-5.2016" regulation, for medical protection gloves to be considered functional against microorganisms, such as bacteria and fungi, must pass the penetration test, which analyzes air and water transition through material pores, seams, holes, and other structural imperfections [41] . "iso 16604: 2004 method b" is an additional test that is necessary to certify the specific protection of the gloves against viruses [42] .the ppe should be used as asserted in the instructions in the user manual and must be disposed of as special waste. it is always recommended to check the integrity of the ppe, and if any negative findings, eliminate the ppe immediately [43] .there are several articles in the scientific literature on the effectiveness of surgical masks in comparison to respirators ( table 2 ). the distance and length of time in which particles remain suspended in the air are determined by particle size, settling velocity, relative humidity, and air flow [36] .the european standard classifies filtering facepiece respirators (ffp) into three categories: ffp1, ffp2, and ffp3 with minimum filtration efficiencies of 80%, 94%, and 99%. consequently, ffp2 respirators are approximately equivalent to n95, and therefore recommended for use in the prevention of airborne infectious diseases in the us and other countries [44, 45] .both long et al. [32] and radonovich et al. [34] , in their respective analyses did not find significant differences between the n95 and surgical masks in terms of protection from the influenza virus. similar results were also observed in the study by offeddu et al., which was performed two years before the current covid-19 health emergency. on one hand, there is an equal effectiveness between the two types of masks on the influenza virus. however, compared to nonspecific respiratory tract infections, the n95 masks give slightly better results [33] . macintyre et al. instead obtained diametrically opposing results; they showed, through a randomized controlled clinical study on 3591 subjects, that health workers who used n95 masks continuously during the shift or in situations considered to be at high risk, presented an 85% chance of not contracting a viral infection transmitted via droplets [36] .in addition, the n95 mask group compared to the control group was associated with a significantly lower risk of contracting influenza, as confirmed by the laboratory. the authors suggest updating the classification of infectious transmissions; they consider that focusing only on aerosols and droplets is an oversimplification.in a recent study, ma et al. analyzed the degree of protection of surgical masks, n95, and home masks (four layers of paper and polyester) against the virus; n95 masks showed greater reliability [35] .lee et al., focused on particles between 0.093 and 1.61 µm, and demonstrated that the ffp respirators provided better protection than the surgical masks, suggesting that such surgical masks are not a good substitute for ffp respirators in the case of airborne transmission of bacterial and viral pathogens [44] . the principal limitation of surgical masks is due to the poor face fit and the consequential possibility of aerosol aspiration [43] .in spain, the dentists council (consejo de dentistas) reports a maximum of 4 h of use, and if kept in good condition, ffp2 or n95 masks can be sterilized through various techniques: hydrogen peroxide vapor, dry heat at 70 • c for 30 min, or in humid heat at 121 • c; however, not for more than 2-3 times [45] . the who protocol recommendations suggest the use of ffp3 masks according to the european nomenclature or n100, according to the united states nomenclature [46] .hand hygiene is considered the first step in limiting the spread of the virus; who guidelines impose scrupulous hand-washing before and after any contact with the patient [46] . being previously considered an essential tool for correct operating practice, the rubber dam has become even more so after the viral epidemic of 2020. various authors underline the utility of the rubber dam on containment and protection from oral fluids; it reduces the particles present in the aerosol by 70% [30] and also drastically reduces the risk of cross-infection [27, 28, 30 ]. if it is not possible to position it, peng et al. recommend the use of the carisolv and an excavator for conservative treatments [30] .high-speed rotating instruments, such as the turbine and the contra-angle, must be equipped with an anti-retraction system, which prevents the release of debris and fluids that can accidentally be inhaled by healthcare professionals during clinical procedures [29, 30] . meng et al. suggests minimizing the use of these tools; if this is not possible, the last appointment of the day should be intended for those patients who need dental treatments requiring the use of high-speed rotating instruments [28] . they also recommend not to use intraoral radiographs; therefore, they propose the use of orthopantomography or ct if strictly necessary. the authors agreed on the need for four-handed work to reduce the risk of spreading the virus in the dental care unit, to manipulate the water-air syringe with extreme caution, and to use large-volume aspirators [27, 28, 30] . concerning potentially deferred dental emergencies, luzzi et al. recommend remote telephone or assistance support from the dentist. in the case of pulp pain, therapy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen, and antibiotics, such as beta-lactams, are recommended, if the patient does not have allergies [27] .alharbi et al. classified therapeutic dental procedures into five groups: emergencies, emergencies manageable through invasive or non-invasive procedures (minimum aerosol), non-emergencies, and elective treatments, depending on the dentist. among the emergencies, the authors highlight maxillofacial fractures that compromise the respiratory tract, uncontrolled post-operative bleeding, and bacterial oral soft tissues infections with intra-or extra-oral swelling that negatively affect the patient's respiratory capacity [47] .orthodontists are suggested to stop activating the rapid palate expander; parents are instructed to reposition the ni-ti arch if it should go off-axis and cause a contact ulcer on the oral mucosa. any non-urgent treatment must be postponed; if this is not possible, the dentist must follow strict protocols to avoid contagions. peng et al., advise the elimination of waste using special yellow double-layer bags for special waste and mark them to facilitate their elimination [30] .various disinfectants available on the market, can effectively inactivate the sars-cov-2. the italian dentists association recommends covering all surfaces, where possible, with polyethylene wrap [48] . the results obtained demonstrate compliance and homogeneity between the authors.rabenau et al. [37] and kampf et al. [38] illustrated that various groups of disinfectants, such as propanol, sodium hypochlorite, and ethanol, in percentages ranging from 80 to 95% (as a hand rub) [37] or 62 to 71% (as a surface disinfectant) [38] , can reduce sars-cov-2 load to below recording levels in a variable lapse of time. pertinent papers on this topic are limited.the who guidelines recommend the use of 5% sodium hypochlorite, with a 1:100 dilution, to be applied on surfaces for an average action time of 10 min; constant ventilation of the dental surgery room is also recommended [46] . studies have shown that other biocidal agents such as 0.05-0.2% benzalkonium chloride or 0.02% chlorhexidine digluconate probably have lower efficiency [49] .the spanish dentists council suggests the use of 1% sodium hypochlorite for the disinfection of the impressions. the action time of the disinfectant varies depending on the material used: 10 min for alginate, and 15-20 min for elastomers [45] .as reported by kyun-ki et al., it is necessary to establish preventive policies in clinical and hospital settings to avoid the high risk of nosocomial infections, as with mers [50] .sabino-silva et al., starting with the assumption that covid-19 may be present in saliva through major salivary gland infection or through the crevicular fluid, suggest more accurate studies in order to evaluate the possibility of early and non-invasive virus diagnosis using saliva samples [51] . the possibility of the role of salivary gland cells in the initial progress of the infection and as a source of the virus should be considered and validated [8] .dentistry remains one of the most exposed professions to sars-cov-2; each individual clinical situation must be adequately controlled and pondered by the healthcare professional; defaults in protocols cannot be tolerated. however, there are indications in the literature on how to deal with emergencies.currently, the swab represents the only system of diagnosis, and it requires a laboratory procedure that cannot be implemented in the dental clinic. however, rapid immunoglobulin tests, which are not considered for diagnosis, can report whether a healthcare professional has had the disease and been immunized. the development of new diagnostic tools will provide a reasonable hope for greater protection from the virus in the future. two types of rapid tests are currently being developed for covid-19: the first one directly detects sars-cov-2 antigens by nasopharyngeal secretions, while the second indirectly records the antibodies present in the serum as part of the autoimmune response against the virus [52] .ahmed et al. conducted a cross-sectional study on 699 dental practitioners from 30 different countries using an online survey between the second and the third weeks of march 2020; 87% of participants were afraid of becoming infected with covid-19 from either a patient or a co-worker. a considerable number of dentists (66%) wanted to close their dental cabinets until the number of covid-19 cases declined [53] .the fear that dentists have regarding becoming infected by covid-19 could be less if dentists and dental healthcare workers conscientiously follow the relevant recommendations [53] . looking ahead, it is necessary to increase research efforts in aerosol control during dental treatments, including improving engineering control in dental office design. the covid-19 pandemic has exposed important gaps in the collective response of global healthcare systems to a public health emergency [54] . dentistry as an integral part of the health care system should be prepared to play an active role in the fight against future emerging life-threatening diseases.preventive measures against covid-19 in dental practice include telephone and clinical triage supported by a questionnaire on recent symptoms and movements, body temperature measurement, oral rinses with 1% hydrogen peroxide, and the use of specific ppes.pragmatic and technical recommendations for correct clinical practice are the implementation of anti-retraction dental handpieces, four-handed work, the use of a rubber dam, and large-volume cannulas for aspiration.ffp2 (or n95) and ffp3 respirators, if compared to surgical masks, provide greater protection to health workers against viral respiratory infections.ethanol between 62% and 71% and sodium hypochlorite between 0.1% and 0.5% are considered to be the best among the surface disinfectants.this narrative review has some limitations. as there is a current emergency, in the literature there is a limited and heterogenous number of primary sources directly related to the repercussion of sars-cov-2 on the dental discipline. further studies are needed in the future.author contributions: authors equally contributed to conceptualization, methodology, validation, investigation, writing-original draft preparation, writing-review and editing, supervision. all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.background: recommendations on masks for preventing coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) vary. purpose: to examine the effectiveness of n95, surgical, and cloth masks in community and health care settings for preventing respiratory virus infections, and effects of reuse or extended use of n95 masks. data sources: multiple electronic databases, including the world health organization covid-19 database and medrxiv preprint server (2003 through 14 april 2020; surveillance through 2 june 2020), and reference lists. study selection: randomized trials of masks and risk for respiratory virus infection, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), and observational studies of mask use and coronavirus infection risk were included. new evidence will be incorporated by using living review methods. data extraction: one reviewer abstracted data and assessed methodological limitations; a second reviewer provided verification. data synthesis: 39 studies (18 randomized controlled trials and 21 observational studies; 33 867 participants) were included. no study evaluated reuse or extended use of n95 masks. evidence on sars-cov-2 was limited to 2 observational studies with serious limitations. community mask use was possibly associated with decreased risk for sars-cov-1 infection in observational studies. in high- or moderate-risk health care settings, observational studies found that risk for infection with sars-cov-1 and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus probably decreased with mask use versus nonuse and possibly decreased with n95 versus surgical mask use. randomized trials in community settings found possibly no difference between n95 versus surgical masks and probably no difference between surgical versus no mask in risk for influenza or influenza-like illness, but compliance was low. in health care settings, n95 and surgical masks were probably associated with similar risks for influenza-like illness and laboratory-confirmed viral infection; clinical respiratory illness had inconsistency. bothersome symptoms were common. limitations: there were few sars-cov-2 studies, observational studies have methodological limitations, and the review was done by using streamlined methods. conclusion: evidence on mask effectiveness for respiratory infection prevention is stronger in health care than community settings. n95 respirators might reduce sars-cov-1 risk versus surgical masks in health care settings, but applicability to sars-cov-2 is uncertain. primary funding source: agency for healthcare research and quality.masks for prevention of respiratory virus infections, including sars-cov-2, in health care and community settings: a living rapid reviewunavailable. 2,3 n95 respirators are used to prevent users from inhaling small airborne particles and must fit tightly to the user's face. surgical masks are designed to protect wearers from microorganism transmission and fit loosely to the user's face. 5, 6 although surgical masks cannot prevent inhalation of small airborne particles, both of them can protect users from large droplets and sprays. 7, 8 there are conflicting recommendations for severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and pandemic influenza: the world health j evid based med. 2020; 1-9. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jebm organization (who) recommends using masks in low-risk situations and respirators in high-risk situations, but the centers for diseasecontrol and prevention (cdc) recommends using respirators in both low and high-risk situations. 9 however, n95 respirators may play a limited role in low-resource settings, where there are a finite number of n95 respirators, or it may be unaffordable. 9 also, previous metaanalyses concluded there was insufficient evidence to determine the effect of n95 respirators due to a small number of studies that is prone to lack of statistical power. 10, 11 additionally, these meta-analyses were limited by the small number of included randomized control trials (rcts). more rigorous rcts of comparing n95 respirators with surgical masks against influenza published in recent years were not included in previous meta-analyses. [12] [13] [14] in light of the growing number of rcts of masks use for protecting against influenza, this systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to assess the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus surgical masks for prevention of`influenza.this meta-analysis was conducted based on the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines. 15 inclusion criteria were (1) study type: rct (including clusterrandomized trial) and nonrandomized controlled study; (2) we searched pubmed, embase, and the cochrane library databases from inception to january 27, 2020, to identify published systematic reviews on evaluating the use of masks for preventing influenza.search strategy in pubmed could be found in table 1 , and the strategy was adequately adjusted to use in other databases. then, primaryrcts included in the systematic reviews were identified. additionally, we conducted an additional search to identify rcts published in the past five years from january 27, 2015, to january 27, 2020, using the databases and search strategies described above. we also two reviewers independently screened the articles based on the titles, abstracts and full texts. then, two reviewers independently exacted the following data from included studies: first author, publicationyear, country, disease, details of study population and intervention, study design, sample size, settings, and results. all disagreements were resolved by discussion.two reviewers independently assessed the risk of bias of the selected rcts using the cochrane risk of bias tool, 16 which includes domains on random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and personnel, blinding of outcome assessors, incomplete outcome data, and selective reporting. for each rct, every domain was judged among 3 levels: high risk, unclear risk, and low risk. disagreements were resolved by discussion.all statistical analyses were performed using review manager (revman) version 5.3. comparable data from studies with similar interventions and outcomes were pooled using forest plots. relative risk (rr) with 95% confidence intervals (cis) for dichotomous data was used as the effect measure. between-study heterogeneity was assessed using the i 2 for each pooled estimate. 17 we adopted a random-effects model for heterogeneity p < . 10 macintyre et al 2015 30 this trial did not have eligible interventions.cowling et al 2014 31 this study developed mathematical models of transmission of influenza and is not a trial in the real world.macintyre et al 2015 30 this trial did not have eligible interventions.wang et al 2015 32 this study is a protocol.ambrosch et al 2016 33 this is a prospective cohort study.chughtai et al 2016 34 this trial focused on compliance with the use of medical and cloth masks.macintyre et al 2016 14 this trial did not have eligible interventions.sokol et al 2016 35 this is a retrospective study.macintyre et al 2017 36 this study is a pooled analysis of two trials.zhang et al 2018 37 this study developed mathematical models of transmission of influenza, and is not a trial in the real world.glatt et al 2020 38 this is a letter.simmerman et al 2011 39 this trial did not have eligible interventions.this trial is duplicated.this trial did not have eligible interventions.available for each pooled estimate, we failed to assess publication bias.the details on the literature search and screening process can be found in figure 1 . excluded studies and reasons for exclusion were shown in the results of the risk of bias assessment can be found in figure 2 . five studies reported the computer-generated random sequences, while only one mentioned randomization. all studies did not mention allocation concealment. participants and trial staff were not blinded in two studies, and the other two studies failed to mention the blinding of participants and personnel. four studies did not report whether the out-come assessors were blinded. all studies had complete outcome data or described comparable numbers and reasons for withdrawal across groups and prespecified outcomes. this meta-analysis showed that there were no statistically significant differences in preventing laboratory-confirmed influenza, laboratory- through the course of influenza pandemics, large numbers of facemasks may be required to use in long periods to protect people from infections. 23 using n95 respirators is likely to result in discomfort, for example, headaches. 23 a previous study 3 reported that there was an inverse relationship between the level of compliance with wearing an n95 respirator and the risk of clinical respiratory illness. it is difficult to ensure high compliance due to this discomfort of n95 respirators in all studies.the reason for the similar effects on preventing influenza for the use of n95 respirators versus surgical masks may be related to low compliance to n95 respirators wear, 23 which may lead to more frequent doffing compared with surgical masks. 13 although n95 respirators may confer superior protection in laboratory studies designing to achieve 100% intervention adherence, 24 the routine use of n95 respirators seems to be less acceptable due to more significant discomfort in real-world practice. 11 therefore, the benefit of n95 respirators of fitting tightly to faces is offset or subjugated. 13 however, it should be noted that the surgical masks are primarily designed to protect the environment from the wearer, whereas the respirators are supposed to protect the wearer from the environment. 25 there are several limitations to this study. first, some rcts had a high risk of bias due to lack of allocation concealment and blinding;although it is impractical to blind participants who would know the type of masks they are wearing. second, the number of included studies focusing on the community was small. consequently, the results of the subgroup analysis might be unreliable. third, we identified rcts from published systematic reviews, which may result in the omission of relative rcts. finally, there might be publication bias, and we cannot assess it due to an insufficient number of included rcts.in conclusion, the current meta-analysis shows the use of n95 respirators compared with surgical masks is not associated with a lower risk of laboratory-confirmed influenza. it suggests that n95 respirators should not be recommended for the general public and nonhigh risk medical staffs those are not in close contact with influenza patients or suspected patients.results of meta-analysis to determine the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus surgical masks against laboratory-confirmed influenza f i g u r e 4 results of meta-analysis to determine the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus surgical masks against laboratory-confirmed respiratory viral infections f i g u r e 5 results of meta-analysis to determine the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus surgical masks against laboratory-confirmed bacterial colonization f i g u r e 6 results of meta-analysis to determine the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus surgical masks against laboratory-confirmed respiratory infectionlaura r garcia godoy , 1 amy e jones , 1 taylor n anderson , 1 cameron l fisher , 1 kylie m l seeley , 1 handling editor soumyadeep bhaumik ► current who practice guidelines for preventing respiratory transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) include the use of n95 respirators for aerosol-generating procedures and surgical masks in other patient contact settings.what are the new findings?► compared with surgical masks, n95 respirators perform better in laboratory testing, may provide superior protection in inpatient settings and are equivalent in outpatient settings; conservation strategies result in inferior protection but include extended use, reuse, decontamination of medical-grade masks or the use of improvised cloth masks, both of which may be combined with a face shield. ► limitations of this scoping review include the relative scarcity of covid-19-specific studies and exclusion of non-english language articles.► there is not much evidence on conservation strategies that could help conserve personal protective equipment during emergency shortages. ► further research regarding the safety and efficacy of these practices is required in order to establish evidence-based guidelines for healthcare workers.abstract background the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic has led to personal protective equipment (ppe) shortages, requiring mask reuse or improvisation.we provide a review of medical-grade facial protection (surgical masks, n95 respirators and face shields) for healthcare workers, the safety and efficacy of decontamination methods, and the utility of alternative strategies in emergency shortages or resource-scarce settings.methods we conducted a scoping review of pubmed and grey literature related to facial protection and potential adaptation strategies in the setting of ppe shortages (january 2000 to march 2020). limitations included few covid-19-specific studies and exclusion of non-english language articles. we conducted a narrative synthesis of the evidence based on relevant healthcare settings to increase practical utility in decision-making. results we retrieved 5462 peer-reviewed articles and 41 grey literature records. in total, we included 67 records which met inclusion criteria. compared with surgical masks, n95 respirators perform better in laboratory testing, may provide superior protection in inpatient settings and perform equivalently in outpatient settings. surgical mask and n95 respirator conservation strategies include extended use, reuse or decontamination, but these strategies may result in inferior protection. limited evidence suggests that reused and improvised masks should be used when medical-grade protection is unavailable.conclusion the covid-19 pandemic has led to critical shortages of medical-grade ppe. alternative forms of facial protection offer inferior protection. more robust evidence is required on different types of medical-grade facial protection. as research on covid-19 advances, investigators should continue to examine the impact on alternatives of medical-grade facial protection. 4 for healthcare workers providing direct inpatient care for patients with covid-19, a medical mask, gown, gloves and eye protection in the form of goggles or a face shield should be used. 4 if aerosol-generating procedures are being performed, healthcare workers should also wear an apron and use an n95 respirator in the place of a surgical mask. 4 in outpatient settings, providers examining patients with respiratory symptoms should wear a medical mask, gown, gloves and eye protection. 4 a different set of ppe requirements for healthcare workers not involved in direct care of patients with covid-19 and for the general public have been outlined by the who and vary based on circumstance. if medical-grade ppe is not available or in short supply, the who recommends appropriate and minimised use of ppe according to clinical setting and personnel. 4 the purpose of this scoping review is to compile existing evidence on the use and efficacy of medical-grade and alternative forms of facial protection for healthcare workers amidst the growing global shortage. for the purposes of this review, 'facial protection' refers to surgical masks, n95 respirators and face shields (table 1). in studies that did not specify the category of protection, the term 'ppe' is used.we conducted a scoping review and present our findings in accordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis extension for scoping reviews reporting standards. 5 a scoping review was most appropriate due to the broad nature of this subject and range of potential adaptation strategies in the setting of a medical-grade mask shortage secondary to the covid-19 pandemic. furthermore, due to the recent emergence of sars-cov-2, it was necessary to conduct a wide search encompassing studies that examined alternative pathogen models.we sought to define and characterise the state of global medical-grade mask shortages that have resulted from the covid-19 pandemic. in order to be included in the review, records needed to focus on transmission or prevention of sars and other respiratory illnesses; strategies for extended use, reuse and decontamination of medical-grade masks; or the efficacy and safety of alternative and improvised masks with regard to materials, design and decontamination strategies. our review was intended to evaluate the evidence pertaining to medicalgrade facial protection currently in use. as a result, we limited our search to records published or most recently updated between 1 january 2000 and 24 march 2020 to ensure that the results would be applicable to current ppe standards. records were included if they were written in english and described an aspect of covid-19 transmission prevention or the usage of ppe. preclinical and quantitative studies were included, in addition to grey literature, in order to consider different aspects of disease transmission and protective equipment.the scope, methodology and timeline of this review were restricted as a result of the pandemic and time-sensitive nature of the information. peer-reviewed documents were identified using a single database, medline via pubmed. the full electronic search strategy for pubmedand google is included in online supplementary file 1. due to the novel nature of the covid-19 pandemic, the review included grey literature such as preprint publications, product descriptions, guidelines, guidance documents and news articles in addition to peerreviewed publications. we initially used grey literature to define best or recommended practices, then analysed peer-reviewed documents. this diverse array of sources was included with the intention of capturing a more complete picture of the rapidly developing nature of the covid-19 pandemic, need for medical-grade ppe and global responses. a search of google with no date restrictions was conducted between 15 march 2020 and 24 march 2020 and the first 20 hits were screened. we also considered additional resources we knew existed or were recommended by colleagues, including an independent reviewer (n=2).the identified grey literature was reviewed by at least one author and records were selected if eligibility criteria were met. at least one author reviewed titles initially generated from the pubmed searches, selecting those that were available in english and relevant to one of the components addressed above. the relevant titles were exported and duplicates were excluded. next, the selected records, including both grey literature and peer-reviewed articles, were reviewed by at least two authors according to the following criteria: (1) the record defined or characterised the state of current ppe shortages; defined or characterised the mode of transmission or prevention of covid-19; examined evidence for the extended use, reuse and decontamination methods for medical grade masks; or addressed the efficacy and safety of alternative and improvised masks, and (2) the record was available in english. this initial search was further refined to exclude articles that were not applicable to healthcare settings, concerned product design at the industrial level, or focused on ppe other than n95 respirators, surgical masks or face shields (figure 1). published systematic reviews and meta-analyses were excluded, as meta-analysis was beyond the scope of this scoping review. we resolved disagreements on record selection and data extraction by discussion with other authors as needed. based on the rapid nature of this review in the setting of a global pandemic, our scoping review required process tailoring. we did not prepare or register a protocol for screening titles and abstracts, and our primary literature search was limited to one database. formal critical appraisal of the quality of individual sources was not performed, as this was beyond the aim of this scoping review.data charting each article was tagged by its focus and data charting was performed by at least one author. extracted data were shared with all authors and used to synthesise the available evidence.we grouped the records by topic and setting, and when possible, summarised the study designs, measures used and broad findings. the included records are described in online supplementary file 2, with a description of studies' place of origin, setting, population or product studied, intervention and outcome measures. when a systematic review or meta-analysis was identified, we counted the number of studies included in the review that potentially met our inclusion criteria and noted how many studies had been missed by our search (n=0).this research was done without patient involvement. patients were not invited to comment on the study design and were not consulted to develop patientrelevant outcomes or interpret the results. patients were not invited to contribute to the writing or editing of this document for readability or accuracy.we retrieved a total of 5462 articles using the search strategy, of which 269 were accessed in full text, and 48 met the inclusion criteria (figure 1). of these, 35 were basic research, 9 were clinical research and 4 were secondary research. additionally, a total of 41 grey literature sources were identified through targeted website searching, and 19 met the inclusion criteria (table 2). in total, 48 of the articles were peer reviewed. the full list of included studies is presented in online supplementary file 2.evidence with regard to efficacy of medical-grade facial protection is summarised by setting: laboratory/ controlled, inpatient and outpatient.laboratory/controlled settings in experimental settings, n95 respirators demonstrate efficient filtration of nanoparticles and bioaerosols. [6] [7] [8] [9] when compared with surgical masks in this setting, n95 respirators provide superior protection against aerosols and viruses similar in size to influenza, especially when combined with eye protection. 6 8 10-12 in one study, layering of up to five surgical masks improved in vivo filtration efficiency, though fit factor scores using this strategy remain markedly inferior to the minimum required for n95 respirators (13.7 vs 100). 13 nevertheless, isolated surgical mask material protects against >95% of viral aerosols under laboratory conditions, while surgical masks are able to reduce aerosolised influenza exposure by an average of sixfold, depending on mask design. 14 15 mask fit is another important component in the functional efficacy of n95 respirators. untrained individuals without proper fit testing can often achieve federal drug administration (fda) minimum fit factor standards, but fewer than 25% achieve the score of 100 expected bmj global health in workplace settings. 16 addition of a peripheral vaseline barrier has been shown to prevent peripheral air leakage and reduce exposure to airborne viral particles, making this a potential compensatory strategy when fit testing is not feasible. 17 further evidence regarding mask fit in the inpatient setting is presented in the next section.the use of face shields as an adjunct to medicalgrade masks has been employed during the covid-19 pandemic. face shields provide barrier protection from splash and splatter contamination, as well as acutely expelled aerosols generated during procedures such as bronchoscopy, airway suctioning and intubation. 18 however, the evidence for the effectiveness of face shields in preventing transmission of viral respiratory diseases is minimal, as highlighted in a recent narrative review. 19 our scoping review identified only one study that evaluated face shields for respiratory protection. using cough simulation, researchers demonstrated that face shields were shown to reduce the risk of inhalation exposure up to 95% immediately following aerosol production. however, protection was decreased with smaller aerosol particles and 30 min after cough simulation, due to persistence of airborne particles and particle flow around the sides of the mask. 20 because they lack a peripheral seal, face shields should not be used as primary protection for preventing respiratory disease transmission, but can be used as an adjunct to other facial protection.several studies have been conducted examining the efficacy of medical-grade masks in the inpatient setting. a small randomised controlled trial (rct) found that incidence of upper respiratory infection symptoms was similar between groups of inpatient healthcare workers who wore surgical masks and those who did not wear masks. 21 however, studies comparing efficacy of different types of medical-grade masks in the inpatient setting have conflicting results. one non-inferiority rct of nurses working in medical and paediatric inpatient units found that use of a surgical mask compared with a fit-tested n95 respirator resulted in non-inferior rates of laboratoryconfirmed influenza. 22 several other rcts found that rates of respiratory infection illness were lower in healthcare workers who used fit-tested n95 respirators compared with those who used surgical masks. [23] [24] [25] similarly, n95 respirators have been shown to provide superior protection against respiratory bacterial infections or bacterial-viral coinfections when compared with surgical masks. 26 the literature regarding mask fit in the inpatient setting is limited to one study. an rct comparing fit-tested and non-fit-tested n95 respirators found no significant difference in ability to protect against respiratory illness, despite in vitro evidence of significant reduction in filtration efficacy with peripheral air leakage. 24 27 furthermore, non-fit-tested n95 respirators were significantly more protective than surgical masks. 24 in the context of covid-19, a recent case report identified 41 healthcare workers exposed to sars-cov-2 through aerosol-generating procedures. among these providers, 85% were wearing surgical masks at the time of exposure, and the remaining 15% were wearing n95 respirators. 28 none of the exposed providers contracted covid-19. 28 our scoping review did not identify any other studies comparing the efficacy of medical-grade masks during aerosol-generating procedures.although extended use and reuse of n95 respirators have been suggested as conservation strategies to meet pandemic-level demands, the safety and effectiveness of these practices remain unclear. 29 these devices maintain function for 8 hours of continuous or intermittent use. 30 manufacturers recommend disposal of n95 respirators after close contact with a patient with an infectious disease, after use during an aerosol-generating procedure or on contamination with bodily fluids. 30 however, extended use in combination with appropriate hand hygiene and contamination-limiting practice is considered minimal risk in the context of typical patient interactions. 31 in one study, continuous use of n95 respirators by healthcare workers in the inpatient hospital setting was more effective for prevention of respiratory illness than targeted use only during high-risk procedures. 23 addition of a cleanable face shield or surgical mask over an n95 respirator has been proposed as a method of extending respirator use, though this approach lacks epidemiological evidence and can exacerbate user discomfort due to increased respiratory resistance. 32 although the maximum number of potential reuse cycles before respirator compromise has not been defined, one laboratory study demonstrated a decrease in fit factor below the acceptable limit after five consecutive donnings. 33 the evidence comparing the efficacy of n95 respirators to surgical masks in the outpatient setting is minimal. one rct conducted in the outpatient setting found no difference in rates of respiratory illness between healthcare workers who used n95 respirators compared with those who used surgical masks. 34ideal n95 respirator decontamination methods should preserve integrity and filtration properties, appropriately disinfect and not harm the user. 35 studies using sars-cov-1 models have observed the persistence of infectious particles for up to 24 hours on n95 respirators and suggest that reuse without interim decontamination could result in a compounded viral load. 36 37 a number of trials have evaluated n95 respirator function and stability after various decontamination procedures. although they may be effective for viral inactivation, methods using microwave irradiation, microwave-generated steam and moist heat incubation can compromise the physical integrity of respirator components. [38] [39] [40] [41] treatment with bleach results in residual odour, release of chlorine gas on exposure to moisture and, in one model, partial nose pad dissolution without an associated increase in aerosol penetration. 38 39 decontamination with hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, autoclave, 160°c dry heat, 70% isopropyl alcohol and soaking in soap and water may cause significant loss of filtration efficiency. 39 42 although ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (uvgi) has previously been shown to inactivate sars-cov-1 and preserve n95 performance after three cycles of exposure (totalling 45 min at 1.8 mw/cm 2 ), one study found that increasing uvgi doses could compromise the strength of n95 respirator material and straps. 39 43-45 a recent analysis of n95 decontamination methods using escherichia coli as a surrogate model for sars-cov-2 found that application of chlorine and alcohol-based methods led to a significant decrease in the efficiency of n95 filtration media due to loss of microfibre static charge, while bmj global health use of ultraviolet light, boiling water vapour and dry oven heating maintained filtration efficiency and successfully decontaminated n95 respirators. 46 overall, strategies involving the use of uvgi, ethylene oxide, dry oven heating and hydrogen peroxide vapour may be most promising for preservation of mask function and integrity. 38-40 42 decontamination with uvgi, moist heat incubation and microwave-generated steam does not appear to significantly affect n95 respirator fit or comfort. 47 until application of these methods has been adequately investigated in the hospital setting, their safety and effectiveness in the particular context of the sars-cov-2 outbreak is unknown. although decontamination and reuse of n95 respirators could help conserve facial protection during emergency shortages or in lowresource settings, additional research is required to understand the impact of these methods on mask fit and function, as well as their effectiveness against sars-cov-2.previous outbreaks and estimations of ppe shortages sparked a call for further research to assess the effectiveness of improvised masks, but the current evidence is minimal. 35 48 one rct including inpatient nurses and doctors found incidence of respiratory illness to be significantly higher in healthcare workers with continuous use of two-layer, cotton cloth masks compared with those who wore surgical masks (relative risk=13.00, 95% ci 1.69 to 100.07). 49 particle penetration was approximately 97% for cloth masks versus 44% for surgical masks. however, the authors were unable to determine the relative efficacy of cloth masks compared with no mask use since the study lacked a no-mask control arm. 49 outside of the inpatient hospital setting, the evidence on the effectiveness of improvised masks is limited to laboratory or controlled settings. 50 51 one in vitro study analysed the protection that an n95 equivalent, a surgical mask and an improvised tea cloth mask conferred on the wearer and individuals surrounding a simulated infectious patient. 50 the n95 equivalent respirator provided the best protection, followed by the surgical mask, then the home-made tea cloth mask. though this study did not have an unmasked control group, cloth masks were found to have a protection factor greater than one, and the authors concluded that cloth masks were superior to no masks for decreasing exposure and infection risk on a population level. 50 in another study comparing surgical masks and home-made masks crafted from cotton t-shirts, surgical masks were found to be three times as effective for reducing micro-organisms expelled by the wearer, with a fit factor double that of the homemade masks. 51 however, both masks significantly reduced droplet dispersal.cloth masks are a low-cost alternative but appear to provide inferior protection against respiratory illnesses for several possible reasons. because cloth masks can retain moisture, be reused and require cleaning, they may increase the infection risk for hospital care workers. 49 the number of layers may also contribute to the mask's ability to prevent viral transmission. cloth masks usually have one to two layers of protection compared with the fourlayered n95 respirator. 52 similar to medical-grade masks, fit is an important factor in the effectiveness of improvised masks. 27 52-54 peripheral air leakage can expose the wearer to airborne viral particles. studies have shown that air leakage from an improvised mask can be reduced when the discussed materials are used in combination with additional measures to improve facial fit (e.g., nylon hosiery). 35 although household fabrics are not intended for respiratory protection, these materials may still have limited capacity for small-particle filtration. 48 an in vitro study found that a sweatshirt made of 70% cotton/30% polyester had the greatest resistance to penetration by various uniform and non-uniform nanosized particles compared with other household materials. researchers also found that the particle filtration performance of certain cotton and polyester household fabrics may compare to some surgical masks. 48 55 however, this study did not evaluate the effectiveness of these fabrics for protecting against droplets or liquids and overall concluded that filtration efficiency varied greatly by fabric. 48 other investigators found that tea towels and a cottonblend fabric captured 0.02 μm particles with respective effectiveness of 73% and 70%, while the scarves tested were shown to be less than 50% effective. 51 in the same study, vacuum cleaner bags were shown to be 89% effective in capturing 0.02 μm-sized particles, but were not recommended due to their poor breathability. 51 based on filtration efficacy and breathability, the authors concluded that pillowcases and 100% cotton t-shirts were the best readily available household options for improvised masks, with the t-shirt preferred due to its potential for superior fit. 51 this inconclusive evidence for the best choice of material may be partially explained by the heterogeneity of factors in fabric construction, including fibre density and the influence of tensile strength, air permeability and flexural rigidity of the fabric. 35 improvised mask design is another variable of unknown significance. for example, in one study, a cloth mask with an exhaust valve and a conical tetrahedral shape outperformed the filtration ability of other cloth masks with most particle sizes. unfortunately, the material composition of each cloth mask was unknown. 56 the use of surgical sterilisation wrap has been proposed as medical and community groups organise to make improvised masks in light of facial protection shortages. 57 this material is a component of surgical instrument packaging used to maintain sterility. some surgical wraps are made using a spunbond/meltblown/spunbond nonwoven polypropylene fabric, which may be similar to the non-woven, meltblown fabric used in medical-grade masks. [58] [59] [60] sterilisation wrap is also made to meet fda standards of bacterial filtration efficiency (bfe), a test performed on materials designed to protect against aerosols, and some report a bfe of 98.9%-99.9%. [61] [62] [63] surgical sterilisation wrap is widely used and readily accessible in many healthcare settings. however, we could find no evidence on the applicability of sterilisation wrap for masks or data on their protection against respiratory viruses. use of sterilisation wrap as material for improvised masks or as filter insert in cloth masks should take this lack of evidence into account.as previously discussed, adding layers to a cloth mask could theoretically increase its effectiveness. however, there are little to no data available regarding effectiveness of a two-layer cloth mask with a middle filter and only one study that may guide the choice of said filter. even with this scarcity of evidence, some may choose to add a filter to improve the effectiveness of an improvised cloth mask. when considering incorporation of a filter material, it is important to consider durability, breathability and the need for replacement. 51 recently, some have proposed using heating, ventilation and airconditioner filter inserts with particle size filtration properties similar to those of n95 respirators. 64 electrostatic cotton and non-woven, meltblown fabric are both known components of medical-grade masks and may also serve as useful filters. however, availability, access and costs of these materials are likely to be prohibitive. 65 of note, a news report from south korea mentions an innovative washable electrostatic cotton which can serve as a more durable, insertable filter. 66 further research is needed to assess the effectiveness and safety of these materials for preventing respiratory infection and penetration of viral particles. this information may be particularly useful in low-resource settings if effective materials are inexpensive and readily accessible.while guidance for handling contaminated laundry in households with suspected or confirmed covid-19 cases exists, our scoping review did not identify any literature regarding reuse and decontamination of improvised masks. if improvised masks with filters are made, our scoping review again found no evidence regarding their appropriate use and decontamination. however, it may be reasonable to treat the insertable filter as a single-use material and frequent change should be considered.evidence supports the superiority of medical-grade masks for protection against respiratory viruses. in cases when medical-grade masks are not available, the summarised research indicates that protection offered by certain improvised or reused masks is better than no protection at all. 50 improvised masks may be helpful in emergency situations, supply shortages, low-resource settings or for citizens in low-risk environments in order to preserve medical-grade facial protection for healthcare workers. however, there is a lack of evidence regarding optimal improvised mask design and material, and whether combination with a face shield enhances protection.scientific research on sars-cov-2 is rapidly progressing and more information about proper ppe, improvised facial protection and effective decontamination methods may be forthcoming. there are many opportunities for future research in this field. additional evidence regarding the safety and effectiveness of alternative facial protection is required in order to better equip individuals to make improvised facial protection when necessary. specifically, further research on the effectiveness of an improvised cloth mask with an added filter versus cloth alone is warranted. in addition, comparisons of different possible filter media are warranted and should include discussion about accessibility of materials and the creation of guidelines for reuse. finally, development of effective and safe decontamination methods that do not compromise the integrity or filtration properties of facial protection is needed.this review has several limitations. the literature included in this review is limited in scope, design, sample size and population diversity. articles written in languages other than english were excluded, which particularly limited the evaluation of recent articles related to the covid-19 pandemic. studies on sars-cov-2 have been performed in settings experiencing the early phases of the pandemic, which does not lend easily to standardised rcts or uniform study planning and execution. additionally, studies performed prior to the covid-19 outbreak were not specific to sars-cov-2, and it is unknown whether those results are applicable in the current context. our review also included a number of small rcts and observational studies, which have less statistical power, as well as non-peer-reviewed articles.the covid-19 pandemic has led to a massive medical ppe shortage. alternative forms of facial protection are less effective, but may serve as an intermediary in emergent situations. based on the literature, the safest approach to address this shortage is to ensure provision of a sufficient quantity of medical-grade facial protection for healthcare workers. considering the limited evidence, reused and improvised masks should be used as a last resort, but may be beneficial when medical-grade facial protection is unavailable. face shields should not be used as primary protection, but rather as an adjunct to improvised masks. public health and medical institutions should be prepared to ensure the safety of healthcare workers in all stages of crises. therefore, it is necessary to continue research and the publication of evidence-based emergency protocols that include recommendations for improvised protection.twitter laura r garcia godoy @laurargarciag, amy e jones @amyjonespdx, taylor n anderson @tayloander, kylie m l seeley @kylie_seeley, erynn a beeson @erynnbeeson, jaime w peterson @jaimewildman and peter d sullivan @petesullivanpdxmany countries are battling with the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic because of the absence of effective antiviral medications and vaccines. to control the spread of covid-19, social distancing, wearing of face masks, and washing of hands, which are transmission-reducing behaviors, are being recommended as some of the most important measures. 1-3 because early transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is caused by pre-symptomatic-or pauci-symptomatic-infected individuals, these non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors are getting more attention for the containment of the covid-19 pandemic. 4-6 these attempts at behavioral change are aimed at slowing down the spread of emerging infectious diseases and to flatten the epidemic curve. thus, the healthcare system resource capacity can be conserved while allowing time for the development of drugs and vaccines. social distancing (or spatial distancing), including avoidance of outdoor activities, public transportation, healthcare facilities, and crowded places with potential for physical contact between individuals, reduced the number of infections. 2, 3 wearing of face masks and washing of hands are also associated with reduced propensity of transmission. [5] [6] [7] [8] periodically, korea has experienced outbreaks including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), influenza h1n1, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), and covid-19 outbreaks in 2003, 2009, 2015 , and 2020, respectively. 9-11 differences occurred in epidemiologic outcomes (number of cases, fatality rates) of these novel infectious disease outbreaks in korea. only 3 confirmed cases and no death during sars, more than 100,000 confirmed cases and 260 deaths during influenza h1n1, and 185 confirmed cases and 36 deaths during mers-cov occurred. 9 since diagnosing the first covid-19 case in korea on 20 january, 2020, 10,738 cases have been confirmed, 243 deaths occurred, and 3,246 patients were isolated until 27 april, 2020. 12 in february 2020, korea became the worst affected country, aside from china, for a while, and had several surges in the number of cases. 13 however, the korea epidemic curve flattened without coercive restrictions following rapid interventions beginning in march 2020. 14 one possible explanation for the mitigation of the surge was the strong efforts implemented by the korean government and the citizens of korea to practice social distancing and transmission-reducing behaviors.resurgence in the emerging infectious disease provides opportunity for comparing individual's levels of practicing non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors. however, no study has compared the proportion of practicing non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors between covid-19 and 2015 mers-cov outbreaks. 2,3,7,15-18 the current study aimed to quantify and compare the individuals' adherence to social distancing and transmission-reducing behavioral practices during the covid-19 and mers-cov outbreaks in korea. factors influencing these practices were also determined. we hypothesized that there would be differences in the rate of adherence to the non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors and the factors affecting these behaviors between the 2020 covid-19 and 2015 mers-cov outbreaks. the 95% confidence interval (ci), 0.025 desired margin of error, 0.2 behavioral response proportion of population. the 4,011 participants included 2,009 participants older than 19 years who were monitored during the mers-cov outbreak between june 2 and 25, 2015; and 2,002 participants, older than 18 years, who were investigated during covid-19 outbreak between february 4 and april 2, 2020. all surveys were conducted using mobile (85%) or landline (15%) random digit dialing numbers in 8 regions (nationally representative). participants were selected post-stratification by sex, age, and province and chosen independently by each survey. the total number of weighted cases in this survey equaled the total number of unweighted cases at the national level. the weights were normalized to calculate the proportions and ratios but not for estimating the subtotal populations. trained interviewers conducted all interviews using computer assisted telephone interviewing. surveys 3 and 4 began approximately 2 weeks after the index case occurred, while surveys 1 and 2 were conducted approximately a month after surveys 3 and 4. survey 1 was conducted just 10 days before the last confirmed patient of mers-cov on july 4, 2015. however, survey 2 was conducted when there were more than 100 confirmed cases. the surveys were conducted by gallup korea, an affiliation of gallup international. details, including period, number of respondents successfully interviewed, and response rate for each of the four surveys are provided in table 1 .sex, age, occupation, self-reported household economic status, residential area, presidential job approval rating, party identification, and affective risk perception as participants' characteristics, were investigated to identify factors influencing non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors. age was classified into 5 levels (19-29, 30s, 40s, 50s, and 60 years and older). occupation was classified into five levels (unemployed, self-employed including farming/ forestry/fishery, blue-collar worker, white-collar worker, and full-time homemaker or student). self-reported household economic status was classified into five levels (lower, lower middle, middle, upper middle, and upper). participants were classified as either metropolitan or non-metropolitan residents. presidential job approval rating was assessed using the following options: "approval," "disapproval," or "no opinion." support for party identification was assessed based on alignment either with the ruling party, opposition party, or no opinion. affective risk perception was assessed using the options "worried" or "not worried." 19the interviews were conducted on the two aspects of the non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors, which are social distancing measures and transmission-reducing practices ( supplementary data 1 and 2) . social distancing was assessed using the following four questions: 1) "did you reduce or avoid outdoor activities or attend meetings this week because of mers-cov or covid-19?"; 2) "did you reduce or avoid using public transportation such as the bus or the subway this week because of mers-cov or covid-19?"; 3) "did you reduce or avoid using healthcare facilities such as the hospitals or public health centers this week because of mers-cov or covid-19?"; and 4) "did you reduce or avoid visiting crowded markets, departmental stores, or large discount stores this week because of mers-cov or covid-19?" transmission-reducing practice was assessed using the following two questions: 1) "do you wash your hands more often than usual because of mers-cov or covid-19?" and 2) "have you ever worn a face mask because of mers-cov or covid-19?" all the questions about the non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors required "yes/no" responses. the development of the questionnaires on preventive behaviors had not gone through a validity procedure due to the urgency of the outbreak. we also imposed the survey items on existing questionnaire developed by gallup korea, an affiliation of gallup international.response rates according to preventive behaviors were calculated according to participants' characteristics. univariable analyses using χ 2 test were performed in the four surveys, entirely and respectively, to identify the relationships between practicing preventive behaviors and each demographic variable. missing values of any outcome variable were ≤ 3.6%. multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to explore factors influencing preventive behaviors in the four surveys, entirely and respectively. we performed multivariable logistic regression model adjusted for sex, age, occupation, selfreported household economic status, residential area, presidential job approval, and party identification. 15 affective risk perception was excluded from survey 1 and survey 2 logistic regression models to attain comparability because no data existed for it in survey 2. on the avoidance of outdoors activities, extremely large number of events made the odds ratios (ors) in survey 2 logistic regression model unstable; therefore, surveys 1 and 2 logistic models were not reported. using logistic regression analysis for transmission-reducing measures and social distancing measures, "y = 1" was used when "yes" for preventive behaviors, otherwise "y = 0" was used. we analyzed with a 2-sided p value of less than 0.05 considered significant using sas version 9.4 (sas institute inc, cary, nc, usa).this study was reviewed and approved by the institutional review board (irb) of seoul metropolitan government-seoul national university boramae medical center (irb no. 20200403/07 -2020 -12/043). the need for informed consent was waived by the board.differences in participants' general characteristics between surveys 1 and 2 are shown in table 2 . overall, the practice rate of avoiding outdoor activities in survey 2 increased 1.7-fold compared to that in survey 1. depending on the general characteristic, avoiding outdoor activities' practice rate differed by as little as 28.2% (upper economic status) and as much as 54.6% (presidential job approval). overall, avoiding public transportation practice rate in survey 2 increased 2.1-fold compared to that in survey 1. depending on the general characteristic, avoiding public transportation' practice rate differed by as little as 29.3% (aged 30-39 years) and as much as 57.6% (no opinion of presidential job approval). overall, avoiding healthcare facilities' practice rate in survey 2 increased 1.6-fold compared to that in survey 1. depending on the general characteristic, avoiding healthcare facilities' practice rate differed by as little as 22.7% (opposition party identification) and as much as 49.9% (presidential job approval). overall avoiding crowded places' practice rate in survey 2 increased 1.8-fold compared to that in survey 1. depending on the general characteristic, avoiding crowded places' practice rate differed by as little as 4.4% (upper economic status) and as much as 49.3% (presidential job approval). there were no statistically significant differences between surveys with participants' characteristics except with occupation, self-reported household economic status, presidential job approval rating, and party identification. with occupation, higher proportions occurred in the unemployed and blue-collar workers in survey 2, while lower proportions occurred in white-collar workers and home makers or students. of the self-reported household economic status, survey 4 had higher proportions in the 'upper middle' and 'middle' status, while lower proportions occurred in 'low middle' and 'lower' status. with respect to the presidential job approval rating, the percentage of participants who reported obtaining 'approval' increased in survey 2 compared to survey 1. of the party identification, the proportion in the 'ruling party' in survey 2 were higher than that in survey 1. comparison of the general characteristics of the participants between surveys 3 and 4 are shown in table 3 . overall, wearing of face mask rate in survey 4 had increased by more than 5-fold compared to that in survey 3. depending on the general characteristic, the wearing of face mask rate differed by as little as 39.2% (upper economic status) and as much as 71.3% low middle economic status). overall, the washing of hands rate in survey 4 increased by 1.3fold compared to that in survey 3. depending on the general characteristic, washing of hands rate differed by as little as 12.0% (aged 19-29 years) and as much as 37.5% (upper economic status). there were definitively, statistically significant differences in the wearing of face masks rate in all subgroups between surveys 3 and 4. no significant differences occurred in participants' proportions between surveys, except with occupation, self-reported household economic status, presidential job approval rating, and party identification. with occupation, survey 4 had higher proportions of the unemployed and blue-collar workers, while had lower proportions of the self-employed and home makers or students. of the self-reported 6/11 https://jkms.org https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e220 household economic status, survey 4 had a higher proportion of those in the 'middle' status, while had a lower proportion of those in the 'low middle.' with respect to presidential job approval rating, the percentage of participants who reported 'approval' increased when survey 4 was compared with survey 3. of the party identification, the proportion in the 'ruling party' in survey 4 were higher than that in survey 3. table 4 reports the association between variables and non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors, social distancing and transmission-reducing behaviors.of social distancing behaviors, generally, none of the factors (characteristics) consistently affected any kinds of social distancing behaviors (avoiding public transportation, healthcare facilities, and crowded places) in both surveys 1 and 2. the results showed that sex, presidential job approval rating, and party identification were significantly associated with social distancing behaviors in survey 1, but not in survey 2. those aged 30 years and older were more likely to avoid public transportation in both surveys 1 and 2. participants aged 30-39 years were more likely to avoid healthcare facilities in survey 2 only. those aged 30-49 years were more likely to avoid crowded places in survey 1 only. only in survey 2 were residents of metropolitan cities identified to have practiced avoidance of public transportation behaviors less.in transmission-reducing behaviors, both surveys 3 and 4 reported that females were more likely to practice preventive behaviors (adjusted or [aor], 1.57-2.43; 95% ci, 1.04-3.78), which tended to be stronger in survey 4. the association of affective risk perception with transmission-reducing behaviors was also observed in both surveys 3 and 4. participants who reported being 'worried' were more likely to practice both the wearing of face masks and handwashing (aor, 3.24-4.81; 95% ci, 1.76-6.96). those living in metropolitan cities more frequently wore face masks in both surveys 3 and 4. participants aged 50 years and older practiced less wearing of face masks in survey 4 only. the results showed that presidential job approval rating and washing of hands were significant in survey 3, but not in survey 4.possibly, the current study is the first to explore changes in individuals' non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors during two different consecutive emerging infectious disease outbreaks in korea. 2,3,7,15-17,20-22 first, our study showed a marked increase in non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors such as social distancing, wearing of face masks, and washing of hands, evenly, across all subgroups during covid-19 compared to 2015 mers-cov. during the previous 2003 sars outbreak in hong kong, the level of preventive behavioral practice increased over time, but differences in level was not compared between outbreaks. 23 a possible explanation for the increase of preventive behavioral practices during covid-19 in korea could be due to previous experience of emerging infectious disease epidemic, intensifying the practice. 24 additional study is needed to examine why the preventive behavioral practice increased during covid-19 outbreak, and to understand how differences in preventive behavioral practices affected the transmission during repeated and different emerging infectious disease outbreaks. 25 however, there is need to investigate for further understanding, the association between risk perception (affective and cognitive) and preventive behaviors. 19 third, our results, showing that low level of trust in the president and identification of opposition party influenced preventive behavioral practice during 2015 mers-cov but not during 2020 covid-19 are inconsistent with those of previous studies. 15,17 differences in the korean government's responses to the two different emerging infectious disease epidemics could have affected how the public perceived the image of the president and the ruling party, as well as the trust in the government. 9,14,19,26-32 further research is needed to understand the conditions of trust in the president and identification of a party that could affect preventive behavioral practices.however, this study has some limitations. first, that this study used surveys on self-reported practices could mean that the data could be different from those obtained through observed practices. therefore, there could have been measurement errors. (i.e., social desirability bias, 'yes-saying' bias) however, surveys of observed practices are difficult to conduct during health crisis. second, this study used a cross-sectional design; hence, it could not establish causal relations. third, risk perception (affective and cognitive reactions) was not fully surveyed during the outbreaks, limiting the interpretation of findings. fourth, the current study could not evaluate the intensity of the preventive behaviors. finally, because of the unexpected rapidly evolving outbreak, this study could not examine the validity of the questionnaire using a test-retest design.in conclusion, the present study suggests, for the first time, the level of the practice rate of non-pharmaceutical preventive behaviors and influencing factors during 2020 covid-19 and 2015 mers-cov in korea. affective risk perception can increase practicing reducing transmission measures and it can be used to prevent the failure of preventive behavior management. to understand the mechanism of behavioral immunity, further exertions are needed behind the citizens, the governmental public health sector, as well as the academic society. strategic interventions to suppress the spread of infectious diseases based on preventive behaviors works through cooperation of individuals with regulations and will be a salient contribution to a quick end to covid-19 pandemic. thus, policies to guide such strategic interventions need to be developed.wuhan, the capital of hubei province in china, reported an outbreak of atypical pneumonia caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) on december 31, 2019, which was then named the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by the world health organization (who). [1] [2] [3] [4] cases spread to other chinese cities, as well as other countries and regions. the number of cases in wuhan and other cities in china increased rapidly. [5] [6] [7] on february 29, authorities reported more than 66,000 confirmed cases and 2727 deaths in hubei, with most occurring in wuhan. the outbreak was controlled through the implementation of control policies after january 23. however, the situation has deteriorated outside of china; cases have surfaced in more than 100 countries, [8] with outbreaks in many nations. [9] some articles have reported the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 in wuhan, [10] [11] [12] [13] but the epidemic characteristics in other cities have rarely been reported. clinical manifestations do not vary widely, but the epidemiology may differ from region to region. wuhan once seemed completely out of control: thousands of people were waiting to see doctors, and many people died while waiting for hospital beds. more than 30,000 medical workers nationwide were sent to wuhan relieve the shortage of medical resources. the situation in jingmen was quite different, and strict control measures were put in place when the outbreak began, a successful example of controlling covid-19.editor: oliver schildgen.qg and yh are contributed equally to this work. this study was supported by the major program of technological innovation of hubei province.the authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.the datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are not publicly available, but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. the datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are publicly available.we analyzed the epidemiology of 219 confirmed covid-19 patients admitted to the first people's hospital of jingmen (jm1ph), which admitted all the confirmed patients within the municipal districts of jingmen, a city in hubei located about 250 miles from wuhan.for this retrospective study, we recruited patients in the jm1ph from january 12 to february 29, 2020. all the covid-19 patients diagnosed in the municipal districts of jingmen were enrolled in this study. the government closed all city entrances on january 26, but before that, some patients arrived from other locations. the study was approved by the jm1ph ethics committee. oral consent was obtained from patients.epidemiological data were collected from patients' medical records. if more information was needed, we communicated with attending health care providers, patients, and their families. throat-swab specimens from the upper respiratory tract were obtained for real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). the wuhan institute of virology provided the rt-pcr detection reagents.we described epidemiological data and observed the impact of control measures on the epidemic.statistical analysis: statistical analysis was performed with spss 19.0. continuous variables were described using mean, median, interquartile range (iqr) values and categorical variables were described as frequency rates and percentages.the 219 patients were aged 2 to 88 years old with 50.2% of the sample being men. the median age of the patients was 48 years (iqr, 35-60, fig. 1 ). including 33 patients in the intensive care unit (icu), the median age of the patients in icu was 66 years (iqr, 57-76), ranging from 33 to 82 years old, with 22 (66.7%) being men and 19 (57.5%) patients having chronic diseases, including hypertension, diabetes, heart failure, stroke, and renal insufficiency. by the end of january 29, 11 patients had died (6 patients had uremia with long-term dialysis), and 6 of them were men. the average age of the patients who died was 58.3, with a range from 35 to 78 years old.the covid-19 patients were divided into 3 groups:wuhan group (88 cases): patients with a history of exposure to wuhan. sixty-one worked or lived in wuhan, 22 had short-term exposure by staying in wuhan for about 2 days, and 5 patients only visited a wuhan railway station or airport for about 2 hours. these people were free to move around until january 23, and many subsequent cases of infection were caused by the wuhan group.family group (62 cases): patients who had not been to wuhan within 20 days before the illness started and were infected by acquaintances, mainly family members and other relatives, friends, and colleagues. some of them only had brief contact with infected people, such as talking or eating together.stranger group (69 cases): patients who had not been to wuhan within the 20 days before the illness started and had been infected by strangers (most of them in a public place). the first patient was a bus driver infected by his passengers; he began to cough and have a fever on january 4. one female patient, who had never been to wuhan, was a sales clerk in a shopping center. twenty-three patients were infected in hospital; 12 had uremia and were on dialysis in 2 hospitals. one citizen was infected only because she went to the supermarket a few times and, since she could not buy a new mask, had been continually wearing the same mask for several days without disinfecting it. eight medical staff in the non-infected ward were infected by confirmed patients. these staff worked in the gastroenterology department, intensive care unit, emergency department, joint surgery department, and dialysis room. seven of them became ill between january 21 and 25, and one became ill on january 29.the number of confirmed patients was analyzed according to the date of symptom onset; for asymptomatic patients, the date of admission was used instead (fig. 2) . the number peaked on january 21, which was followed by a gradual decline. most patients had a history of exposure to wuhan before january 25, and the number of locally infected cases peaked on january 26. the last patient from wuhan began to have symptoms of coughing and fever on february 8, after having left wuhan on january 22. the incubation period was more than 17 days. most of the patients after february 8, 2020 were family members of confirmed patients. all patients admitted after february 9, 2020 were family members of confirmed patients.sars-cov-2 is a newly discovered and named single-strand, positive-sense rna coronavirus that can cause respiratory disease. [14] it is related to the other two highly pathogenic viruses, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), that have emerged as major global health threats since 2002. sars-cov caused 8422 infections and 800 deaths and spread to 37 countries, [15, 16] and mers-cov infected 2494 individuals and caused 858 deaths worldwide. [17, 18] the number of confirmed covid-19 patients rose to 70,000 in china by february 20, 2020, with over 44,000 of these in wuhan. these numbers indicate that sars-cov-2 is more contagious than sars-cov, [19] and without protection, people can be infected easily when eating together, shopping, meeting, talking, and staying in crowded places. most confirmed patients were between the ages of 27 and 68, and there was no difference between genders. these findings are similar to the total cases in china, [20] which suggests that all humans are sensitive to covid-19; however, older males and those with comorbid conditions are more likely to have more severe symptoms and potentially die. this is consistent with a previous descriptive study of patients in jingyintan hospital, which was responsible for the treatment of serious cases in wuhan. [10] no antiviral treatment for covid-19 has been proven to be effective so far. [21] the best way to fight the virus is to block its spread. in order to cope with the outbreak of covid-19, the government of jingmen has implemented several preventative measures since january 23 (fig. 3) . local residents were advised to stay at home in order to contain the virus spread and were ordered to wear masks in public areas. all markets except supermarkets were closed and all public transportation was suspended. subsequently, most roads into the city of jingmen were blocked.the benefits from these measures are seen in that the number of locally infected cases peaked on january 26, followed by a gradual decline. most patients were infected in wuhan before january 25, and so they could not be controlled. local infections from strangers were the most dangerous and the hardest to control, since no one knew they were infected before onset of symptoms. there were no new cases infected from strangers after 15 days of the implemention of the control measures, indicating that most of them were infected before the control measures were implemented. the last few cases were family members of confirmed patients, which are hard to prevent when one is living in a home with an infected individual.more than 20 patients were in the non-infectious ward before their diagnosis. these patients were spread across seven departments, and only 8 medical staff members were infected. moreover, most of them were infected before january 20, when many doctors did not wear masks. thirteen patients were in the respiratory department before diagnosis; none of the respiratory medical staff had been infected and they had been wearing surgical masks all the time, suggesting that masks can prevent most transmission of covid-19. supermarkets started to limit the number of customers on february 9 and closed on february 17. however, the epidemic had been under control before february 9 (fig. 2) , while there were few people infected as everyone wore masks, even though many of them wore only one mask repeatedly without disinfection. this indicated that as long as masks were worn, social gatherings would not cause an outbreak of covid-19.since the time of infection of most patients could not be determined, we did not analyze the incubation period. it was reported that the incubation period was 4 to 7 days. [22] based on the sars experience, the maximum incubation period is currently considered to be no more than 14 days, but one case in our study was significantly longer at 17 days. a recent study reported the longest incubation period to be 24 days. [11] the maximum incubation period is unclear.the asymptomatic case is a challenge to disease control, and 1.2% of cases are asymptomatic in china. [20] four asymptomatic cases were diagnosed during screening because they were close contacts. if they were infected by strangers, they will not be found until some people around them being infected and diagnosed.there were 3 limitations in this study. first, only 219 patients diagnosed with covid-19 were included. second, the unconfirmed suspected cases in the early stages were excluded in the analyses. some patients were discharged as suspected patients after one negative nucleic acid test. many patients had a second or third check before being diagnosed. third, most of the data were from patients' medical records, with the potential of a few of them not being accurate enough.in conclusion, all people are susceptible to covid-19, and older males and those with comorbid conditions are more likely to become severe cases. even though covid-19 is highly contagious, control measures have proven to be very effective, particularly wearing masks, which could prevent most infections.the study was designed by qg and zd; fx, jw, jw and qg collected the epidemiological and clinical data and processed statistical data. qijun gao drafted the manuscript. yh contributed to critical revision of the report.the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is an unprecedented situation that we have never experienced during the last century. 1 to cope with this situation in the absence of curative treatment or vaccine, we must turn to universal infection control resources; hand hygiene, environmental control, personal protective equipment (ppe) and quarantine. 2 all of these resources are limited and should be used rationally. 2 the global supply chains of ppe have collapsed, so that ppe is not available for the person, place and time requiring it the most, while it is overused than needed elsewhere. public use of ppe should be prudential when long-term reign of covid-19 pandemic with multiple waves is expected.here i purposed to break the myth of a high efficiency particulate air (hepa) mask for everyone-mask-wearing policy based on previous reports and one simple experiment. how to prevent the spread of common cold and flu are well understood from plentiful resources. 3 first, the respiratory viruses are transmitted more commonly via contact than droplet. secondly, the control measure to reduce spread of respiratory viruses should therefore focus on contact precaution. the single most important protective measure is hand washing, rather than mask wearing. lastly, the person who wear a face mask to prevent the droplet transmission is the one who have respiratory symptoms.because covid-19 is an infection caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, the seventh coronavirus to infect human 4 all above mentioned measures are applicable for covid-19 too. unlike other respiratory virus infections, covid-19 has shown many cases with mild or no presenting symptoms, who are highly infectious during asymptomatic period. 5 consequently, new policy has been implemented in the covid-19 pandemic era, that everyone in public area wears masks not to transfer their germ to others. long-term implementation of such policy might be difficult without the threat of a looming pandemic. although proper assessment on the feasibility of this policy has not been made, it appears to settle in as the 'new normal' these days. therefore it is important what type of mask is appropriate for the policy.the most important factor in choosing mask type will be how well it can contain usergenerated droplets. indeed, hepa mask filters can collect particles more efficiently than surgical mask filters, only when the mask fits to the face sealing the boundary ( table 1) . 6 however, the compliance will be affected by how comfortable is mask-wearing, 3 especially for a long-term use. hepa masks such as kf94 or n95 are more uncomfortable, such as demanding tedious cautions ( table 1) . surgical masks are used to protect the operation field from droplets generated from body fluids of users' nasal and oral mucosa by talking or coughing ( table 1) . 7 its effectiveness has long been proven in practice, although it is loosefitting, allowing possible leakage of aerosol droplets through open boundaries. 8 homemade masks made of cotton also have significantly reduced droplet and particle transmission when coughing, but their efficiency is only one third of surgical masks. 9 the surgical mask is a pleated rectangular three-layer mask, efficiently preventing wetting to the outer surface by user generated droplets (fig. 1) . hepa filters are affected by the moisture in the exhaled air 10 and it is not recommended to use single mask for longer than 4 hours. 2 when the more tightly the hepa mask fits to the face, droplets will be better contained inside it and will break the mask filter faster. 10 if symptomatic patients wear the hepa mask properly-fitted, they are possibly suffocated by own secretions, otherwise the mask will be unsealed and useless.in conclusion, a surgical mask is the best type for a person wearing a mask to prevent the droplet transmission, with or without symptoms. a cotton mask rather than a hepa mask can be the last resort for the person without respiratory symptoms. to protect the patient from large particles expelled from the wearer-such as spit and mucous.to avoid touching nose and mouth.to help reduce the wearer's exposure to fine dust particles.to help reduce the wearer's exposure to fine dust particles and infectious airborne particles.to use as a fluid barrier. to help contain spit or mucous expelled by the wearer, similar to covering a cough or sneeze with a face tissue.filter efficiency 80%, small and large particles.filter efficiency 95%, small particle aerosols to large droplets.fits loosely, leaving gaps between face and the mask.fits loosely, leaving gaps between face and the mask.designed to fit tightly, creating a seal between face and the mask.designed to fit tightly, creating a seal between face and the mask. background: during respiratory viral infection, face masks are thought to prevent transmission (1) . whether face masks worn by patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) prevent contamination of the environment is uncertain (2, 3) . a previous study reported that surgical masks and n95 masks were equally effective in preventing the dissemination of influenza virus (4) , so surgical masks might help prevent transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). however, the sars-cov-2 pandemic has contributed to shortages of both n95 and surgical masks, and cotton masks have gained interest as a substitute.objective: to evaluate the effectiveness of surgical and cotton masks in filtering sars-cov-2.methods and findings: the institutional review boards of 2 hospitals in seoul, south korea, approved the protocol, and we invited patients with covid-19 to participate. after providing informed consent, patients were admitted to negative pressure isolation rooms. we compared disposable surgical masks (180 mm × 90 mm, 3 layers [inner surface mixed with polypropylene and polyethylene, polypropylene filter, and polypropylene outer surface], pleated, bulk packaged in cardboard; km dental mask, km healthcare corp) with reusable 100% cotton masks (160 mm × 135 mm, 2 layers, individually packaged in plastic; seoulsa).a petri dish (90 mm × 15 mm) containing 1 ml of viral transport media (sterile phosphate-buffered saline with bovine serum albumin, 0.1%; penicillin, 10 000 u/ml; streptomycin, 10 mg; and amphotericin b, 25 μg) was placed approximately 20 cm from the patients' mouths. patients were instructed to cough 5 times each onto a petri dish while wearing the following sequence of masks: no mask, surgical mask, cotton mask, and again with no mask. a separate petri dish was used for each of the 5 coughing episodes. mask surfaces were swabbed with aseptic dacron swabs in the following sequence: outer surface of surgical mask, inner surface of surgical mask, outer surface of cotton mask, and inner surface of cotton mask.the median viral loads of nasopharyngeal and saliva samples from the 4 participants were 5.66 log copies/ml and 4.00 log copies/ml, respectively. the median viral loads after coughs without a mask, with a surgical mask, and with a cotton mask were 2.56 log copies/ml, 2.42 log copies/ml, and 1.85 log copies/ml, respectively. all swabs from the outer mask surfaces of the masks were positive for sars-cov-2, whereas most swabs from the inner mask surfaces were negative (table) .discussion: neither surgical nor cotton masks effectively filtered sars-cov-2 during coughs by infected patients. prior evidence that surgical masks effectively filtered influenza virus (1) informed recommendations that patients with confirmed or suspected covid-19 should wear face masks to prevent transmission (2) . however, the size and concentrations of sars-cov-2 in aerosols generated during coughing are unknown. oberg and brousseau (3) demonstrated that surgical masks did not exhibit adequate filter performance against aerosols measuring 0.9, 2.0, and 3.1 μm in diameter. lee and colleagues (4) showed that particles 0.04 to 0.2 μm can penetrate surgical masks. the size of the sars-cov particle from the 2002-2004 outbreak was estimated as 0.08 to 0.14 μm (5); assuming that sars-cov-2 has a similar size, surgical masks are unlikely to effectively filter this virus.of note, we found greater contamination on the outer than the inner mask surfaces. although it is possible that virus particles may cross from the inner to the outer surface because of the physical pressure of swabbing, we swabbed the outer surface before the inner surface. the consistent finding of virus on the outer mask surface is unlikely to have been this article was published at annals.org on 6 april 2020. alternatively, the small aerosols of sars-cov-2 generated during a high-velocity cough might penetrate the masks. however, this hypothesis may only be valid if the coughing patients did not exhale any large-sized particles, which would be expected to be deposited on the inner surface despite high velocity. these observations support the importance of hand hygiene after touching the outer surface of masks. this experiment did not include n95 masks and does not reflect the actual transmission of infection from patients with covid-19 wearing different types of masks. we do not know whether masks shorten the travel distance of droplets during coughing. further study is needed to recommend whether face masks decrease transmission of virus from asymptomatic individuals or those with suspected covid-19 who are not coughing.in conclusion, both surgical and cotton masks seem to be ineffective in preventing the dissemination of sars-cov-2 from the coughs of patients with covid-19 to the environment and external mask surface.background: coronavirus disease 19 (covid-19) is a global health threat with significant medical, economic, social and political implications the optimal strategies for combating covid-19 have not been fully determined and vary across countries methods: by the end of february 2020 in taiwan, 2,150 patients received diagnostic covid-19 testing and 39 confirmed cases were detected this is a relatively lower rate of infection compared to other asian countries in this article, we summarize the epidemiological characteristics of the 39 infected patients as well as public and hospital responses to covid-19 results: thirty-nine covid-19 cases and one death have been confirmed in taiwan seventeen of these patients were infected by family members or in hospital wards, emphasizing how covid-19 is mostly spread by close contact we examined how hospital have responded to covid-19, including their implementation of patient route control, outdoor clinics, hospital visit restrictions and ward and staff modifications we also studied the public's use of face masks in response to covid-19 these strategies may reduce the spread of covid-19 in other countries conclusion: the emergence and spread of covid-19 is a threat to health worldwide taiwan has reported lower infected cases and its strategies may contribute to further disease prevention and controlcovid-19: taiwan's epidemiological characteristics and public and hospital responsesthe novel coronavirus, 2019-ncov, emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019 and has rapidly spread across the world (gates, 2020; zhu et al., 2020) . in february 2020, the world health organization (who) renamed this epidemic disease coronavirus disease as it is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the number of covid-19 cases has rapidly increased worldwide (who, 2020; del rio & malani, 2020) . as of 29 february 2020, there were 85,403 confirmed covid-19 cases and 2,924 fatalities across 49 countries (who, 2020; dong, du & gardner, 2020) . although the emerging threat of covid-19 has drawn global attention, the optimal strategies to reduce the spread of disease remain largely undetermined (day, 2020) .several studies have investigated the virology, transmission, risk factors and protection associated with covid-19 (chen et al., 2020a; guan et al., 2020; huang et al., 2020; wu & mcgoogan, 2020; yang et al., 2020) . covid-19 spreads by human-to-human transmission, primarily through respiratory droplets and direct contact with groups of infected family members, friends, colleagues, or medical health workers. however, even asymptomatic patients can be a source of infection. covid-19 has dramatically higher rates of transmission compared to sars and middle east respiratory syndrome, but an observed lower fatality rate. the median age of covid-19 patients ranged from 47 to 56 years old; approximately 65% of patients were male and 35% were female. approximately 23.7% of adult covid-19 patients have at least one of the following coexisting underlying chronic illnesses: cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or chronic obstructive lung disease. the most common reported symptoms are fever (43.8% on admission and 88.7% during hospitalization), dry cough (67.8%), dyspnea (18.7%), myalgia (14.9%), headache (13.6%), diarrhea (3.8%), sore throat (13.9%), nasal obstruction (4.8%) and fatigue (38.1%). the optimal infectious control measurements for covid- 19 have not yet been established (razai et al., 2020) .covid-19 is continuing to dramatically spread across many countries (who, 2020). however, taiwan has a relatively lower rate of infected cases. after the first diagnosed case in taiwan on 21 january 2020, 39 cases were confirmed as of 29 february 2020. some cases were imported by travelers and others were within families. we conducted this study to summarize the epidemiological characteristics of the 39 cases and to propose technological advances and infectious control measurements that may contribute to reducing disease spread (chen et al., 2020b; wang, ng & brook, 2020) . we also discuss some of the taiwanese public health's and hospital's responses to covid-19.we conducted this retrospective observational study at the end of february 2020 to investigate the epidemiological characteristics of the first 39 confirmed covid-19 cases in taiwan. the taiwan centers for disease control (tcdc) enforced many policies to combat the spread of covid-19 (taiwan centers for disease control, 2020). the epidemiological data of the confirmed cases were released to the public. although the identifiable data were encrypted, the clinical presentations and epidemiological relationships were reported, and data regarding demographics, clinical symptoms, contact history, and onset dates were extracted. we summarized the public data to show the clinical characteristics of the 39 cases.since covid-19 is considered a communicable disease in taiwan, all suspected cases are required to be reported to the tcdc. the clinical covid-19 diagnostic criteria include a history of travel or residence in endemic areas, contact with confirmed cases, contact with cases of fever or respiratory symptoms, radiological image characteristics of pneumonia, and clinical manifestations of fever or respiratory tract symptoms. early diagnosis and timely containment are important. the tcdc's diagnostic testing criterion included: (1) patients from endemic areas with respiratory symptoms; (2) patients with unexplained pneumonia or community pneumonia and poor responses to antibiotic treatment; (3) patients in close contact with confirmed cases; and (4) cluster infections or unwell people in specific workplaces, such as hospitals or nurseries. the defined endemic areas varied over time.suspected cases were confirmed by nucleic acid detection from the sputum, throat swab, lower respiratory tract secretion, or blood samples. the polymerase chain reaction for covid-19 and other viruses were performed (cui, li & shi, 2019; lin et al., 2020; the lancet, 2020) . the suspected cases were isolated in negative pressure rooms or single bedrooms until a second negative test result.since there is no specific treatment for covid-19, the main treatments used are supportive care and oxygen support (who, 2020; taiwan centers for disease control, 2020). suspected or confirmed cases were moved to isolated rooms and received supportive treatment to ensure electrolyte balance, closely monitored vital signs, and oxygen saturation. routine blood tests and arterial blood gas analyses were administered if necessary. chest imaging and other procedures were arranged. patients with pneumonia received intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin or ceftriaxone, and oseltamivir was also administered empirically. for confirmed cases, they could leave isolation and return home after three consecutive negative pcr tests. in average, it took approximately 1 month to achieve the criteria of de-isolation thus the capacity of isolated rooms was an important issue.widespread anxiety is anticipated when facing a novel and unknown infection (the lancet, 2020). the tcdc executed several policies, but individual hospitals were authorized to implement their own infective control measurements against covid-19 in addition to their normal practices. for example, decreasing exposure was important to reduce disease spread, and hospitalized patients are susceptible to various kinds of infectious diseases including covid-19. to reduce viral transmission, hospitals set up outdoor clinics to care for patients with travel or contact histories. we investigated other important health polices and hospital responses.we summarized cumulative cases from other asian countries starting in mid-february ( fig. 1) . by the end of february 2020, 2,150 patients in taiwan had been tested for covid-19. among them, 39 (1.8%) patients tested positive for sars-cov-2. the epidemiological characteristics of the 39 confirmed cases are summarized in table 1 . sixteen (41.0%) patients were male and 23 (59.0%) were female. approximately half (53.8%) of these patients were between 41 and 60 years old. nineteen cases (48.7%) had a history of overseas travel or residence or had visited china. fifteen (38.5%) of the confirmed cases had direct contact transmission from infected family members. one patient (2.6%) died. the tcdc aggressively tracked the travel, occupation, contact, and cluster histories of the confirmed cases. the correlations among the 39 cases were plotted and publicly released (fig. 2) .home quarantine and patient route control hospitals designated separate entrances and exits for patients and the public to prevent hospital-acquired covid-19 infections. suspected cases were treated separately from the emergency and outpatient cases throughout the duration of their hospital stay. when scheduling appointments online, the tracking and management mechanism for people under infection risk announcement appeared (fig. 3) . if patients had any history of travel to endemic areas or of respiratory infection, they were guided to a special covid-19 outdoor clinic (fig. 4) . suspected cases were guided to an outdoor triage and then admitted to an isolation room. diagnostic tests were performed in negative pressure rooms or single bedrooms. hand sanitizer, masks and covid-19-related posters were posted at the hospital entrances. patients and visitors had to wash their hands with alcohol hand gel before entering the hospital. these infectious control measurements all contributed to reducing hospital-acquired infections.hospital visits are common in asian cultures, so hospitals in taiwan restricted visits to prevent covid-19 infections and outbreaks. instead of face-to-face hospital visits, video calls were recommended for family and friends to contact patients. ward entrances were controlled by electromagnetic doors requiring access cards. patients were not allowed in restricted areas. no more than two visitors were allowed to visit the same patient at the same time. visitors with recent travel histories were restricted from entering the hospital (fig. 5) . in the case of a confirmed infection, visitor registration provided clues for tracking the infectious source and their contacts.surgical masks are basic protections that prevent human-to-human transmission of covid-19. taiwanese people tend to wear masks in large and crowded gathering areas in their daily lives to protect themselves and others. in order to prevent public over-purchase and hoarding, the taiwanese government took actions to recruit the mask factories and allocate all masks. the government helped factories upgrade their facilities, and mask production increased from 1 million per day in early february to 10 million per day in late february. the taiwanese government issued surgical masks to all local hospitals and clinics to prevent shortages. each medical staff member received one to two masks every day for regular use, and additional masks or n95 masks were provided for healthcare providers taking care of covid-19 patients or performing invasive procedures. moreover, the government provided surgical masks for susceptible populations, such as patients with cancer, hemodialysis, or those undergoing chemotherapy and radiotherapy. upon hospital admission, one mask was given to patients with reduced nosocomial infection or hospital-acquired infection. to reduce community transmission, the government also issued surgical masks to children. taiwanese residents needed to present a national health insurance card to purchase surgical masks from local pharmacies and primary healthcare units. this policy allowed each residence to purchase two masks weekly and prohibited repeat purchases.suspected and confirmed cases were admitted to their own rooms to ensure isolation. in order to minimize infections of healthcare providers, nursing staff adhered to group scheduling and fixed shifting, separated by meal breaks. job and ward rotations were prohibited to reduce the chances of hospital-acquired transmission.covid-19 is a global health threat, but taiwan has a relatively lower rate of infection compared to other countries. approximately 50% of taiwan's 39 confirmed cases were imported and 38.5% were infected by their own families. aggressive tracking and epidemiological surveillance strategies contributed to identifying infectious sources and reducing disease spread. furthermore, infectious control measurements in hospitals may have reduced the transmission of covid-19. there are no established best strategies against covid-19 and policies differ across populations, geographic regions, cultures, countries and time. "lockdown" was a powerful strategy used by china to isolate infected people and reduce transmission, but it is not easily replicated in many countries. the united kingdom's "herd immunity" strategy also caught our attention (yong, 2020). however, taiwan's close proximity to and frequent interactions with china suggest that following the uk's strategy could result in the collapse of the medical system. moreover, convenience in traveling contributed to virus transmission thus disease spread was almost inevitable. the rapid spread of covid-19 had been observed in uk and the "herd immunity" strategy had been abandoned. the uk government made efforts towards "containment" to slow down the virus transmission (boyle, 2020) . we were still exploring the appropriate strategies to tackle covid-19 in different situations.aggressive control measurements in taiwan helped flatten the infectious curve, prevent medical collapse, and reduce case fatality rates. for example, there were 1,300 isolation rooms with an occupancy rate of approximately 70% in february 2020 (taiwan centers for disease control, 2020). adequate isolation rooms ensured adequate containment and reduced the risk of community infections. furthermore, wearing masks is already prevalent in taiwanese society, and masks provide simple and direct protection against droplet infection . wearing masks has not been a common practice in other countries (desai & mehrotra, 2020) . taiwan's aggressive strategies ensured the provision of adequate masks, decreasing both anxiety among the public and disease spread.although the culture and population density of japan are relatively similar to taiwan's, japan's situation was more complicated. they faced the complex issues with the diamond princess cruise ship carrying infected patients, quarantined in the port of yokohama, japan, and the olympics, and they used different strategies to combat covid-19 (gallego et al., 2020; montanari, 2020) . optimal strategies varied across different countries and changed over time.the covid-19 pandemic is a rapidly changing situation. according to a study by the chinese cdc, the majority of infected people are aged 30-79 years (87%). in taiwan's 39 confirmed cases, 35 (90%) were aged 30-79 years. taiwan's case fatality rate (1/39, 2.56%) was similar to china's (1,023/44,672, 2.3%) (wu & mcgoogan, 2020) . approximately half of taiwanese patients (19/39, 48.7%) had an overseas travel history, but the high risk of community infection should not be ignored. family and ward clusters are important transmission sources, and 22 people across five families were identified in the 39 reported cases. the high contagiousness of sars-cov-2 makes disease prevention difficult. moreover, 81% of infected patients reported mild symptoms which were easily overlooked leading to delayed diagnoses (bai et al., 2020; rothe et al., 2020) . aggressive tracking and infectious source identification lead to early quarantine, transmission prevention, and early diagnoses of patients with mild symptoms.although sars-cov-2's complete route of transmission has not been completely identified, it is mainly spread via droplets and physical contact lu, liu & jia, 2020; xu et al., 2020) . wearing masks and washing hands are essential and effective in preventing the spread of infectious disease (leung, lam & cheng, 2020; macintyre & chughtai, 2015) . public panic is expected when an emerging disease appears likely to become endemic or a widespread epidemic (bao et al., 2020; medley & vassall, 2017) , leading to a shortage of masks and increased risk of disease transmission. the tcdc's mask policy is an executable and effective strategy to combat disease. furthermore, hospitals implementing visitation restrictions and outdoor clinics may also reduce the risk of covid-19 transmission.technological advances also contribute to improvements in infection control. big data analytics, new technology, and proactive testing have been applied in the war against covid-19 (wang, ng & brook, 2020) . a real-time, interactive internet dashboard has also been utilized to provide timely information for the general public and healthcare providers (dong, du & gardner, 2020) . these strategies are believed to be beneficial in preventing and controlling disease spread. we summarized some additional hospital responses and provided photographs for healthcare providers' reference (figs. 1, 3, 4 and 5).our study had some limitations. first, covid-19 is a communicable disease and universal screening is not currently available. the number of patients with mild symptoms may be underestimated. second, since sars-cov-2's virology, transmission, incubation period, and contagious period are not fully understood, the most effective strategies to use against covid-19 remain speculative. more studies are required to investigate the effectiveness of individual infectious control measurements.the emergence of covid-19 is a critical global issue. taiwan's 39 confirmed cases showed a similar age distribution as previous studies . the role of family and ward clusters in disease transmission was emphasized. public health and hospitals' patient route control, outdoor clinics, hospital visit restrictions, mask regulations and ward and staff modification strategies may contribute to reducing the transmission of covid-19.2. feng (2020). "area, age, and gender statistical table-19cov". center for diseases control, ministry of health and welfare. dataset. https://data.cdc.gov.tw/en/dataset/ agsdctable-day-19cov.the most current data is available at the taiwan cdc: https://nidss.cdc.gov.tw/en/ singledisease.aspx?dc=1&dt=5&disease=19cov.doctors need to wear complete protective equipment when large numbers of patients flood into the emergency room. taiwan has so far managed to prevent a large scale community outbreak, city forces wearing face masks on public transportation, and keep social distancing to stem the virus from spreading. the protective device may be contaminated and must be replaced. in the situation of limited resources, how to take care of the physiological needs of the doctor without increasing the chance of contamination during replacement is a consideration. by reducing the chance of contamination during removal and storage, the previous designs were analyzed and improved. we proposed three improved designs to reduce the contact. design-a features a mask with a water channel that allows the user to remain hydrated without removing the cover. design-b has a folding pattern that hides the outer surface. design-c combines the mask with the brim of a cap which form an extended air-intake area. through understanding the problem, related product began distribute on the market, design-d extend the mask usages period with less contact.face mask designs following novel coronavirusthis paper proposes three mask improvement designs for both general users and hospital staff to reduce the chance of face mask contact transmission. influenza virus infection occurs through contact transmission between people. infectious diseases can spread through droplets, respiratory aerosols, or direct and indirect contact with contaminated surfaces. the effectiveness of face masks in disease prevention has been verified through research. 1 macintyre et al. examined the effect of surgical masks and handwashing on the prevention of influenza transmission. 2 public compliance with infection control measures is crucial. if a large number of people use masks during a severe pandemic, the spread of the epidemic is reduced. reducing exposure can reduce the spread of disease in public places such as schools. cauchemez et al. 3 have shown that holidays lead to a 20-29% reduction in the rate at which influenza is transmitted to children in school. face mask comfort is a key to public compliance with infection control measures. in a survey by purdy, 4 participants were asked to use a likert scale of 1-6 to assess the n95 filtering facepiece respirator (ffr) based on fitness, temperature, and respiratory comfort. 4 in terms of discomfort, warmth, and breathing comfort, fitness was rated the most important, and two-dimensional patterns expanded the mask area to cover the facial contours for individuals.the use of reusable cloth masks is widespread, particularly when surgical face masks are scarce, but there is no clinical guidance regarding their use. many people repeatedly use a mask every day, and the masks are repeatedly donned and doffed, placing their users at risk of contact transmission. masks are often placed in a purse or pocket, further compromising their cleanliness. 5 people feel using a face mask is uncomfortably humid and inconvenient for inhalation. in a previous evaluation of mask contact diffusion, individuals who donned and doffed a face mask during a simple task polluted an average area of 530 square centimeters. 6a novel coronavirus was eventually identified on 1 january 2020, who had set up the imst (incident management support team) across the three levels of the organization. 7 virus can be transmitted even during the incubation period. as a result, asymptomatic carriers may still pass the disease to other people. some patients exhibit normal temperatures, and there are many milder cases. medical practitioners are required to wear complete protective equipment when large numbers of patients flood into the emergency room. if the face mask is removed while going to the restroom or drinking water, this protective suit may be contaminated. in a situation with limited resources, it is essential to take care of one's physiological needs without contamination.taiwan has so far managed to prevent a large scale community outbreak, city forces wearing face masks on public transportation, and keep social distancing to stem the virus from spreading. when asked by fox news reporter, gates highlighted taiwan as an exemplary country because it quickly 8 identified the problem and initiated community-wide testing early on and reduced the disease burden.taiwan had learned valuable lessons from the sars outbreak in 2003. a centralized cecc command center led the actions and resource allocation and the necessity to be highly skeptical of data and information when an explosion begins. the central epidemicwe demonstrated the potential for facemask contact to transmit viruses among staff and people. after an investigation of the existing product and patent database, we redesign the mask that could reduce contact transmission with a low-cost approach. through understanding the problem, product-related improvements have already begun in the market, these designs also extend the mask usages period during daily work or a hospital visit. in this article we reviewed the process of finding problems and needs. designers connect needs with product features through creativity. the process of exploring solutions requires a combination of domain knowledge.command center (cecc) announced standards for the suspension of classes. high schools and below will shut down for 14 days based on following rules: i) if one teacher or student is listed as a confirmed case of covid-19 by the cecc, their classes will be suspended; ii) if two or more teachers or students are confirmed to have contracted the disease, all courses in the entire school will be suspended; iii) if one-third of schools in a township or city shut down due to infections, all schools will be closed.the coronavirus is spread through coughing or sneezing or by touching an infected person. commuters are particularly at risk, since they travel with large crowds in enclosed spaces, and subway handrails may spread the virus through contact transmission. 9, 10 there is also a risk of the virus adhering to the car doors and elevator buttons. people cannot avoid the germs that touch their hands and masks, which puts them under substantial psychological and physiological pressure.relevant literature on masks is mainly in the product catalog or patent database. let's summarize them separately from below.several variations on the standard surgical face mask are currently offered by companies. halyard health face masks offer several features and levels of protection. the materials and donning attachments are sonically bonded, and a nose piece assists the mask in conforming to the contours of the face (figure 1 ). most surgical face masks contain an adjustable iron wire which is bent with finger pressure to fix its shape close to the bridge of the nose. this one-dimensional fixation creates a gap when the mask moves. figure 1a also shows an adjustable nose bridge design that maintains a closer fit to the user's face. three charging techniques (viz., corona charging, tribocharging, and electrostatic fiber spinning) were used to charge fibers or fabrics of different polymer types. 11 electrostatic charging technology enables regular masks to filter more air particles. figure 1b shows an extended surgical mask designed with respiratory comfort concerns in mind. a flat-fold design protects against airborne biological particles and serves as a respirator. the three-panel, low-profile n95 particulate respirator mask features a soft cover and nose clip. the mask is opened by pulling up and down, and closed in the opposite way. however, although it is folded vertically, the front outer surface is still touchable during donning and doffing. many existing product designs are based on considerations of filtering performance and suitability for individual face shapes. figure 1c is a design with an elongated elastic restraint. a three-dimensional mask increases the protection of the mask and is convenient to carry. 13 figure 1d shows the upper section and the lower sections are respectively lifted away from the middle to form a three-dimensional shape. the sheet is bent along the first fold line and toward the opposite surface to facilitate carrying. the packaging of the snack face mask is easily opened for fast use (figure 1e ). the packaging is part of the mask, so it does not come into contact with the outside world when it is folded. although there are different folding methods for each design, there is no product that can avoid outer layer contact completely.the elongated hexagon-shaped portion of the face mask has a clear surface. 13 another patent features a gathered peripheral bottom, which provides an air-tight seal under the face. 14 greenblat 15 proposed a mask with a unique shape design which decreases in volume when folded with a joint style. nilsson et al. 16 proposed a cone-shaped tent structure with forward-extending support with an additional air valve device used to reduce the difficulty of inhalation. wang altered the periphery of the breathing area with a compressible gasket and a three-dimensional sealing structure to abut the user's face. 17 a tight seal is necessary between the face and the mask when worn. if it is not tight enough, contaminants may be inhaled by the user. m563890 is a narrow strip mask with reinforced covering. 18 the m464196 folding three-dimensional mask folds to make a three-dimensional mask with a larger exhalation space. 19 since the lower edge of the upper mask portion is engaged with the upper edge of the symmetrical mask portion, mutual contact is ensured to improve safety. after the patent database survey, we did not find a model that could completely prevent the outer layer from contacting contaminants after folding."design thinking" has generated significant attention in the business press and has been heralded as a novel problem solving methodology well suited to the often cited challenges designers face in encouraging innovation. 20 the solid background of knowledge help starts to "think alternative ways to view the problem." after the team member identifies innovative solutions, the prototype is used to redefine one or further problems.li 21 proposed six rules for innovation, which used in different fields such as advertising, commerce, engineering, and design. the six rules are reverse, transfer, combination, reduction, change of direction, and extension. the rules were applied to the development of mask redesign. their contents are: during the design process, the designer needs to think about possible situations and parameters repeatedly and pick the appropriate settings to reduce the time spent on attempts. the design flow is, firstly, i) we look for problems and available materials, ii) we observe the medical characteristics through a simplified model, and iii) we try to find appropriate implement way. secondly, concept drawings provided by the design group and screened based on producibility. in a medical design, the designer needs to extend his knowledge through international regulations such as iso, mdr and fda. the mdr sets high standards for ensuring reliable data are generated from clinical investigations. 22 recently, fda recommendation on device reuse, so that developing cost-effective reusable face masks for the public is essential. the 510(k) submission of surgical mask evaluates medical devices for marketing to ensure they are safe and effective. ultraviolet germicidal irradiation, microwave-generated steaming, and dry heating were tested in reducing or inactivating viral and bacterial pathogens. 23 a costeffective full-face mask was developed to support safety of stuff. 24 in this urgent need of the epidemic, it also urged the creation of improved mask design. designers can develop concepts firmly and realize ideas through cross-domain cooperation.through thinking about the real-life environment situation, brainstorming between medical consultants and designers, we selected ideas and presented three realistic and feasible ideas below.caregivers must wear n95 masks before entering closed spaces. because the mask isolates the virus from the user via the surface layer, touching the mask with hands is dangerous. after a sneeze, droplets soak through the mask, and other individuals have the chance to be infected. in addition, when caregivers remove their masks to drink water, they put themselves at risk of infection. design-a aims to reduce mask removal and infection chance during drinking. the creative rules applied are: reverse-drink water without taking off your mask; transfer-transfer the pet cap to the mask; extension-drink water with an extension straw. medical staff can drink water safely and conveniently without removing their masks. a water bag will engage the inlet on the front of the cover ( figure  2 ). the flange of the water bag can be extended to the user's lips, and the water outlet does not touch the outer surface of the mask while drinking which avoids the risk of contact transmission.after taking off their masks, most subjects carry them in purses or pockets. the hands touch the contaminated areas on the mask and the outer edge of the mask also touch the interior of the purse or pocket. therefore, it is crucial to minimize the chances of contacting the outer edge of the mask. design-b can be folded in a w shape so that the outer part of the mask faces inward and reduces contact transmission (figure 3a) . when the mask is unfolded, a three-dimensional convex surface is formed over the nose (figure 3 b,c) which increases the available area for inhalation. the creative rules applied are: reverse-change of direction, outer surface facing inward; transfertechniques of origami; reduction-reduce the chance of hand contact.because people often do not wear masks when going out, design-c (figure 4 ) combines the mask with the brim of a cap. the design usually acts as a hat, and when needed, the user pulls down the headband, which is made of a flexible material. at this time, the mask and the brim form a sizeable three-dimensional space, and it is easy for the user to breathe with a large area of air intake. when the mask is doffed and folded, the user holds the headband of the cap to avoid contact transmission. the creative rules applied are: reverse-cap front edge elastic can be pulled down; combine-mask combines with hat; change direction-pull down; extension-increase front end size. a major epidemic makes people aware of the importance of avoiding contact and related improvements have distributed in local market. the design-d (figure 5a ) added a breathable thin cloth cover outside the mask, the outer surface of the cover is in contact with the virus, and the inner surface is in contact with the mouth foam; after using for a period of time, remove the cover to wash and dry to increase the use time of the mask. figure 5b shows a foldable box. after removing the mask, the outer surface folds inwards; place the mask in the protective shell with an elastic band to close the protective shell and put it in the pocket. this avoids the opportunity for the outside of the mask to contact the body and clothing. the creative rules applied are: reverse-mask with another mask; combination-mask combines with package; change direction-the outer surface facing inward to reduce contact.the current coronavirus epidemic has increased the need for face masks and respirators that can be used without increasing the chances of contact transmission. residents who live in affected areas are at risk of infection from close contact with other residents, especially during their daily commute. in addition, it is nearly impossible to avoid contact with pathogens on face masks and hands. current face mask patent designs do not protect the outer layer of the mask from outside pathogens after they have been folded.as a result, we propose three improved mask designs to reduce the chances of infection from direct contact. design-a features a mask with a water channel which allows the user to remain hydrated without removing the mask. design-b has a folding pattern which hides the outer mask surface and reduces contact transmission. design-c combines the mask with the brim of a cap. the mask and the brim form an extended air-intake area for easier breathing. the design-d shows related improvements distributed in local market which reduce the chance of mask contact with users' body and clothing. an epidemic makes us aware of the detail living behaviors which strengthen public health. as of may 28, 2020, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has infected more than 5·85 million individuals worldwide and caused more than 359 000 deaths. 1 emergency lockdowns have been initiated in countries across the globe, and the effect on health, wellbeing, business, and other aspects of daily life are felt throughout societies and by individuals. with no effective pharmacological interventions or vaccine available in the imminent future, reducing the rate of infection (ie, flattening the curve) is a priority, and prevention of infection is the best approach to achieve this aim.sars-cov-2 spreads person-to-person through close contact and causes covid-19. it has not been solved if sars-cov-2 might spread through aerosols from respiratory droplets; so far, air sampling has found virus rna in some studies [2] [3] [4] but not in others. [5] [6] [7] [8] however, finding rna virus is not necessarily indicative of replication-competent and infection-competent (viable) virus that could be transmissible. the distance from a patient that the virus is infective, and the optimum person-toperson physical distance, is uncertain. for the currently foreseeable future (ie, until a safe and effective vaccine or treatment becomes avail able), covid-19 prevention will con tinue to rely on non-pharmaceutical interventions, including pandemic mitigation in community settings. 9 thus, quantitative assessment of physical distancing is relevant to inform safe interaction and care of patients with sars-cov-2 in both health-care and non-health-care settings. the definition of close contact or potentially exposed helps to risk stratify, contact trace, and develop guidance docu ments, but these definitions differ around the globe.to contain widespread infection and to reduce morbidity and mortality among health-care workers and others in contact with potentially infected people, jurisdictions have issued conflicting advice about physical or social distancing. use of face masks with orevidence before this study we searched 21 databases and resources from inception to may 3, 2020, with no restriction by language, for studies of any design evaluating physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent transmission of the viruses that cause covid-19 and related diseases (eg, severe acute respiratory syndrome [sars] and middle east respiratory syndrome [mers] ) between infected individuals and people close to them (eg, household members, caregivers, and health-care workers). previous related meta-analyses have focused on randomised trials and reported imprecise data for common respiratory viruses such as seasonal influenza, rather than the pandemic and epidemic betacoronaviruses causative of covid-19 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [sars-cov-2]), sars (sars-cov), or mers (mers-cov). other meta-analyses have focused on interventions in the health-care setting and have not included non-health-care (eg, community) settings. our search did not retrieve any systematic review of information on physical distancing, face masks, or eye protection to prevent transmission of sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov.we did a systematic review of 172 observational studies in health-care and non-health-care settings across 16 countries and six continents; 44 comparative studies were included in a meta-analysis, including 25 697 patients with covid-19, sars, or mers. our findings are, to the best of our knowledge, the first to rapidly synthesise all direct information on covid-19 and, therefore, provide the best available evidence to inform optimum use of three common and simple interventions to help reduce the rate of infection and inform non-pharmaceutical interventions, including pandemic mitigation in non-health-care settings. physical distancing of 1 m or more was associated with a much lower risk of infection, as was use of face masks (including n95 respirators or similar and surgical or similar masks [eg, 12-16-layer cotton or gauze masks]) and eye protection (eg, goggles or face shields). added benefits are likely with even larger physical distances (eg, 2 m or more based on modelling) and might be present with n95 or similar respirators versus medical masks or similar. across 24 studies in health-care and non-health-care settings of contextual factors to consider when formulating recommendations, most stakeholders found these personal protection strategies acceptable, feasible, and reassuring but noted harms and contextual challenges, including frequent discomfort and facial skin breakdown, high resource use linked with the potential to decrease equity, increased difficulty communicating clearly, and perceived reduced empathy of care providers by those they were caring for.in view of inconsistent guidelines by various organisations based on limited information, our findings provide some clarification and have implications for multiple stakeholders. the risk for infection is highly dependent on distance to the individual infected and the type of face mask and eye protection worn. from a policy and public health perspective, current policies of at least 1 m physical distancing seem to be strongly associated with a large protective effect, and distances of 2 m could be more effective. these data could also facilitate harmonisation of the definition of exposed (eg, within 2 m), which has implications for contact tracing. the quantitative estimates provided here should inform disease-modelling studies, which are important for planning pandemic response efforts. policy makers around the world should strive to promptly and adequately address equity implications for groups with currently limited access to face masks and eye protection. for health-care workers and administrators, our findings suggest that n95 respirators might be more strongly associated with protection from viral transmission than surgical masks. both n95 and surgical masks have a stronger association with protection compared with single-layer masks. eye protection might also add substantial protection. for the general public, evidence shows that physical distancing of more than 1 m is highly effective and that face masks are associated with protection, even in non-health-care settings, with either disposable surgical masks or reusable 12-16-layer cotton ones, although much of this evidence was on mask use within households and among contacts of cases. eye protection is typically underconsidered and can be effective in community settings. however, no intervention, even when properly used, was associated with complete protection from infection. other basic measures (eg, hand hygiene) are still needed in addition to physical distancing and use of face masks and eye protection.without eye protection to achieve additional protection is debated in the mainstream media and by public health authorities, in particular the use of face masks for the general population; 10 moreover, optimum use of face masks in health-care settings, which have been used for decades for infection prevention, is facing challenges amid personal protective equipment (ppe) shortages. 11 any recommendations about social or physical distancing, and the use of face masks, should be based on the best available evidence. evidence has been reviewed for other respiratory viral infections, mainly seasonal influenza, 12, 13 but no comprehensive review is available of information on sars-cov-2 or related betacoronaviruses that have caused epidemics, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) or middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). we, therefore, systematically reviewed the effect of physical distance, face masks, and eye protection on transmission of sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov.to inform who guidance documents, on march 25, 2020, we did a rapid systematic review. 14 we created a large international collaborative and we used cochrane methods 15 and the grade approach. 16 we prospectively submitted the systematic review protocol for registration on prospero (crd42020177047; appendix pp 23-29). we have followed prisma 17 and moose 18 reporting guidelines (appendix pp [30] [31] [32] [33] .from database inception to may 3, 2020, we searched for studies of any design and in any setting that included patients with who-defined confirmed or probable covid-19, sars, or mers, and people in close contact with them, comparing distances between people and covid-19 infected patients of 1 m or larger with smaller distances, with or without a face mask on the patient, or with or without a face mask, eye protection, or both on the exposed individual. the aim of our systematic review was for quantitative assessment to ascertain the physical distance associated with reduced risk of acquiring infection when caring for an individual infected with sars-cov-2, sars-cov, or mers-cov. our definition of face masks included surgical masks and n95 respirators, among others; eye protection included visors, faceshields, and goggles, among others.we 19, 20 we handsearched (up to may 3, 2020) preprint servers (biorxiv, medrxiv, and social science research network first look) and coronavirus resource centres of the lancet, jama, and n engl j med (appendix pp 3-5). we did not limit our search by language. we initially could not obtain three full texts for evaluation, but we obtained them through interlibrary loan or contacting a study author. we did not restrict our search to any quantitative cutoff for distance.we screened titles and abstracts, reviewed full texts, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias by two authors and independently, using standardised prepiloted forms (covidence; veritas health innovation, melbourne, vic, australia), and we cross-checked screening results using artificial intelligence (evidence prime, hamilton, on, canada). we resolved disagreements by consensus. we extracted data for study identifier, study design, setting, population characteristics, intervention and comparator characteristics, quantitative outcomes, source of funding and reported conflicts of interests, ethics approval, study limitations, and other important comments.outcomes of interest were risk of transmission (ie, whodefined confirmed or probable covid-19, sars, or mers) to people in health-care or non-health-care settings by those infected; hospitalisation; intensive care unit admission; death; time to recovery; adverse effects of interventions; and contextual factors such as acceptability, feasibility, effect on equity, and resource considerations related to the interventions of interest. however, data were only available to analyse intervention effects for transmission and con textual factors. consistent with who, studies generally defined confirmed cases with laboratory confirmation (with or without symptoms) and probable cases with clinical evidence of the respective infection (ie, suspected to be infected) but for whom confirmatory testing either had not yet been done for any reason or was inconclusive.our search did not identify any randomised trials of covid-19, sars, or mers. we did a meta-analysis of associations by pooling risk ratios (rrs) or adjusted odds ratios (aors) depending on availability of these data from observational studies, using dersimonian and laird random-effects models. we adjusted for variables including age, sex, and severity of source case; these variables were not the same across studies. because between-study heterogeneity can be misleadingly large when quantified by i² during meta-analysis of obser vational studies, 21, 22 we used grade guidance to assess between-study heterogeneity. 21 throughout, we present rrs as unadjusted estimates and aors as adjusted estimates. we used the newcastle-ottawa scale to rate risk of bias for comparative non-randomised studies corresponding to every study's design (cohort or case-control). 23 , 24 we planned to use the cochrane risk of bias tool 2.0 for randomised trials, 25 but our search did not identify any eligible randomised trials. we synthesised data in both narrative and tabular formats. we graded the certainty of evidence using the grade approach. we used the gradepro app to rate evidence and present it in grade evidence profiles and summary of findings tables 26, 27 using standardised terms. 28, 29 we analysed data for subgroup effects by virus type, intervention (different distances or face mask types), and setting (health care vs non-health care). among the studies assessing physical distancing measures to prevent viral transmission, the intervention varied (eg, direct physical contact [0 m], 1 m, or 2 m). we, therefore, analysed the effect of distance on the size of the associ ations by random-effects univariate meta-regressions, using restricted maximum likelihood, and we present mean effects and 95% cis. we calculated tests for interaction using a minimum of 10 000 monte carlo random permutations to avoid spurious findings. 30 we formally assessed the credibility of potential effect-modifiers using grade guidance. 21 we did two sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of our findings. first, we used bayesian meta-analyses to reinterpret the included studies considering priors derived from the effect point estimate and variance from a meta-analysis of ten randomised trials evaluating face mask use versus no face mask use to prevent influenza-like illness in health-care workers. 31 second, we used bayesian meta-analyses to reinterpret the efficacy of n95 respirators versus medical masks on preventing influenza-like illness after seasonal viral (mostly influenza) infection. 13 for these sensitivity analyses, we used hybrid metropolis-hastings and gibbs sampling, a 10 000 sample burn-in, 40 000 markov chain monte carlo samples, and we tested non-informative and sceptical priors (eg, four time variance) 32 the funder contributed to defining the scope of the review but otherwise had no role in study design and data collection. data were interpreted and the report drafted and submitted without funder input, but according to contractual agreement, the funder provided review at the time of final publication. the corresponding author had full access to all data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. scales et al (2003) 66 teleman et al (2004) 68 reynolds et al (2006) bai et al (2020) 36 yu et al (2005) 76 wiboonchutikul et al (2019) 71 arwady et al (2016) 35 liu et al (2020) 52 chen et al (2009) 39 wong et al (2004) 73 ma et al (2004) 54 cheng et al (2020) 40 van kerkhove et al (2019) 46 heinzerling et al (2020) 44 wong et al (2004) we identified 172 studies for our systematic review from 16 36, 37, 40, 41, 44, 52, 70 but most studies reported on sars (n=55) or mers (n=25; appendix pp 6-12). of the 44 comparative studies, 40 included who-defined confirmed cases, one included both confirmed and probable cases, and the remaining three studies included probable cases. there was no effect-modification by casedefinition (distance p interaction =0·41; mask p interaction =0·46; all cases for eye protection were confirmed). most studies reported on bundled interven tions, including different components of ppe and distancing, which was usually addressed by statistical adjustment. the included studies all occurred during recurrent or novel outbreak settings of covid-19, sars, or mers.risk of bias was generally low-to-moderate after con sidering the observational designs (table 1), but both within studies and across studies the overall findings were similar between adjusted and unadjusted estimates. we did not detect strong evidence of publication bias in the body of evidence for any intervention (appendix pp [15] [16] [17] [18] . as we did not use case series data to inform estimates of effect of each intervention, we did not systematically rate risk of bias of these data. therefore, we report further only those studies with comparative data. [26] [27] [28] [29] population comprised people possibly exposed to individuals infected with sars-cov-2, sars-cov, or mers-cov. setting was any health-care or non-health-care setting.outcomes were infection (laboratory-confirmed or probable) and contextual factors. risk (95% ci) in intervention group is based on assumed risk in comparison group and relative effect (95% ci) of the intervention. all studies were non-randomised and evaluated using the newcastle-ottawa scale; some studies had a higher risk of bias than did others but no important difference was noted in sensitivity analyses excluding studies at higher risk of bias; we did not further rate down for risk of bias. although there was a high i 2 value (which can be exaggerated in non-randomised studies) 21 and no overlapping cis, point estimates generally exceeded the thresholds for large effects and we did not rate down for inconsistency. we did not rate down for indirectness for the association between distance and infection because sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov all belong to the same family and have each caused epidemics with sufficient similarity; there was also no convincing statistical evidence of effect-modification across viruses; some studies also used bundled interventions but the studies include only those that provide adjusted estimates. aor=adjusted odds ratio. rr=relative risk. sars-cov-2=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. sars-cov=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. mers-cov=middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. *grade category of evidence; high certainty (we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect); moderate certainty (we are moderately confident in the effect estimate; the true effect is probably close to the estimate, but it is possibly substantially different); low certainty (our confidence in the effect estimate is limited; the true effect could be substantially different from the estimate of the effect); very low certainty (we have very little confidence in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect). †the effect is very large considering the thresholds set by grade, particularly at plausible levels of baseline risk, which also mitigated concerns about risk of bias; data also suggest a dose-response gradient, with associations increasing from smaller distances to 2 m and beyond, by meta-regression; we did not rate up for this domain alone but it further supports the decision to rate up in combination with the large effects. ‡the effect was very large, and the certainty of evidence could be rated up, but we made a conservative decision not to because of some inconsistency and risk of bias; hence, although the effect is qualitatively highly certain, the precise quantitative effect is low certainty. §in a subgroup analysis comparing n95 respirators with surgical or similar masks (eg, 12-16-layer cotton), the association was more pronounced in the n95 group (aor 0·04, 95% ci 0·004-0·30) compared with other masks (0·33, 0·17-0·61; p interaction =0·090); there was also support for effect-modification by formal analysis of subgroup credibility. ¶two studies 54,75 provided adjusted estimates with n=295 in the eye protection group and n=406 in the group not wearing eye protection; results were similar to the unadjusted estimate (aor 0·22, 95% ci 0·12-0·39). ||the effect is large considering the thresholds set by grade assuming that ors translate into similar magnitudes of rr estimates; this mitigates concerns about risk of bias, but we conservatively decided not to rate up for large or very large effects. ; table 2) . ar values with increasing distance given different degrees of baseline risk are shown in figure 3b , with potential values at 3 m also shown.across 29 unadjusted studies and ten adjusted studies, 34, 37, [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [53] [54] [55] [56] [58] [59] [60] [61] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] 72, 74, 75 the use of both n95 or similar respirators or face masks (eg, disposable surgical masks or similar reusable 12-16-layer cotton masks) by those exposed to infected individuals was associated with a large reduction in risk of infection (unadjusted n=10 170, rr 0·34, 95% ci 0·26 to 0·45; adjusted studies n=2647, aor 0·15, 95% ci 0·07 to 0·34; ar 3·1% with face mask vs 17·4% with no face mask, rd -14·3%, 95% ci -15·9 to -10·7; low certainty; figure 4; table 2; appendix pp 16, 18) with stronger associ ations in healthcare settings (rr 0·30, 95% ci 0·22 to 0·41) compared with non-health-care settings (rr 0·56, 95% ci 0·40 to 0·79; p interaction =0·049; low-to-moderate credibility for subgroup effect; figure 4; appendix p 19). when differential n95 or similar respirator use, which was more frequent in health-care settings than in nonhealth-care settings, was adjusted for the possibility that face masks were less effective in non-health-care settings, the subgroup effect was slightly less credible (p interaction =0·11, adjusted for differential respirator use; figure 4) . indeed, the association with protection from infection was more pronounced with n95 or similar respirators (aor 0·04, 95% ci 0·004 to 0·30) compared with other masks (aor 0·33, 95% ci 0·17 to 0·61; p interaction =0·090; moderate credibility subgroup effect; figure 5 ). the interaction was also seen when additionally adjusting for three studies that clearly reported aerosol-generating procedures (p interaction =0·048; figure 5 ). supportive evidence for this interaction was also seen in within-study comparisons (eg, n95 had a stronger protective association compared with surgical masks or 12-16-layer cotton masks); both n95 and surgical masks also had a stronger association with protection versus single-layer masks. 38, 39, 51, 53, 54, 61, 66, 67, 75 we did a sensitivity analysis to test the robustness of our findings and to integrate all available information on face mask treatment effects for protection from covid-19. we reconsidered our findings using random-effects bayesian meta-analysis. although noninformative priors showed similar results to frequentist approaches (aor 0·16, 95% cri 0·04-0·40), even using informative priors from the most recent meta-analysis on the effectiveness of masks versus no masks to prevent influenza-like illness (rr 0·93, 95% ci 0·83-1·05) 31 yielded a significant association with protection from covid-19 (aor 0·40, 95% cri 0·16-0·97; posterior probability for rr <1, 98%). minimally informing (25% influence with or without four-fold smaller mean effect size) the most recent and rigorous meta-analysis of the effectiveness of n95 respirators versus medical masks in randomised trials (or 0·76, 95% ci 0·54-1·06) 13 with the effectmodification seen in this meta-analysis on covid-19 (ratio of aors 0·14, 95% ci 0·02-1·05) continued to support a stronger association of protection from covid-19, sars, or mers with n95 or similar respirators versus other face masks (posterior probabi lity for rr <1, 100% and 95%, respectively).in 13 unadjusted studies and two adjusted studies, 34, [37] [38] [39] 47, 49, 51, 54, 58, 60, 61, 65, 75 eye protection was associated with lower risk of infection (unadjusted n=3713, rr 0·34, 95% ci 0·22 to 0·52; ar 5·5% with eye protection vs 16·0% with no eye protection, rd -10·6%, 95% ci -12·5 to -7·7; adjusted n=701, aor 0·22, 95% ci 0·12 to 0·39; low certainty; figure 6 ; table 2; appendix pp [16] [17] .across 24 studies in health-care and non-health-care settings during the current pandemic of covid-19, previous epidemics of sars and mers, or in general use, looking at contextual factors to consider in recom mendations, most stakeholders found physical distancing and use of face masks and eye protection acceptable, feasible, and reassuring (appendix pp 20-22). however, challenges included frequent discomfort, high resource use linked with potentially decreased equity, less clear communi cation, and perceived reduced empathy of care providers by those they were caring for. the findings of this systematic review of 172 studies (44 comparative studies; n=25 697 patients) on covid-19, sars, and mers provide the best available evidence that current policies of at least 1 m physical distancing are associated with a large reduction in infection, and distances of 2 m might be more effective. these data also suggest that wearing face masks protects people (both health-care workers and the general public) against infection by these coronaviruses, and that eye protection could confer additional benefit. however, none of these interventions afforded complete protection from infection, and their optimum role might need risk assessment and several contextual considerations. no randomised trials were identified for these interventions in covid-19, sars, or mers. previous reviews are limited in that they either have not provided any evidence from covid-19 or did not use direct evidence from other related emerging epidemic betacoronaviruses (eg, sars and mers) to inform the effects of interventions to curtail the current covid-19 pandemic. 13, 19, 31, 78 previous data from randomised trials are mainly for common respiratory viruses such as seasonal influenza, with a systematic review concluding low certainty of evidence for extrapolating these findings to covid-19. 13 further, previous syntheses of available randomised control led trials have not accounted for cluster effects in analyses, leading to substantial imprecision in treatment effect estimates. in betweenstudy and within-study comparisons, we noted a larger effect of n95 or similar respirators compared with other masks. this finding is inconsistent with conclusions of a review of four randomised trials, 13 in which low certainty of evidence for no larger effect was suggested. however, in that review, the cis were wide so a meaningful protective effect could not be excluded. we harmonised these findings with bayesian approaches, using indirect data from randomised trials to inform posterior estimates. despite this step, our findings continued to support the ideas not only that masks in general are associated with a large reduction in risk of infection from sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov but also that n95 or similar respirators might be associated with a larger degree of protec tion from viral infection than disposable medical masks or reusable multilayer (12-16-layer) cotton masks. nevertheless, in view of the limitations of these data, we did not rate the certainty of effect as high. 21 our findings accord with those of a cluster randomised trial showing a potential benefit of continuous n95 respirator use over medical masks against seasonal viral infections. 79 further high-quality research, including randomised trials of the optimum physical distance and the effectiveness of different types of masks in the general population and for health-care workers' protection, is urgently needed. two trials are registered to better in form the optimum use of face masks for covid-19 (nct04296643 [n=576] and ). until such data are available, our findings represent the current best estimates to inform face mask use to reduce infection from covid-19. we recognise that there are strong, perhaps opposing, sentiments about policy making during outbreaks. in one viewpoint, the 2007 sars commission report stated: "...recognize, as an aspect of health worker safety, the precautionary principle that reasonable action to reduce risk, such as the use of a fitted n95 respirator, need not await scientific certainty". 80 "...if we do not learn from sars and we do not make the government fix the problems that remain, we will pay a terrible price in the next pandemic". 81 a counter viewpoint is that the scientific uncertainty and contextual considerations require a more nuanced approach. although challenging, policy makers must carefully consider these two viewpoints along with our findings.we found evidence of moderate certainty that current policies of at least 1 m physical distancing are probably associated with a large reduction in infection, and that distances of 2 m might be more effective, as implemented in some countries. we also provide estimates for 3 m. the main benefit of physical distancing measures is to prevent onward transmission and, thereby, reduce the adverse outcomes of sars-cov-2 infection. hence, the results of our current review support the implementation of a policy of physical distancing of at least 1 m and, if feasible, 2 m or more. our findings also provide robust estimates to inform models and contact tracing used to plan and strategise for pandemic response efforts at multiple levels.the use of face masks was protective for both healthcare workers and people in the community exposed to infection, with both the frequentist and bayesian analyses lending support to face mask use irrespective of setting. our unadjusted analyses might, at first impression, suggest use of face masks in the community setting to be less effective than in the health-care setting, but after accounting for differential n95 respirator use between health-care and non-health-care settings, we did not detect any striking differences in effectiveness of favours eye protection favours no eye protection face mask use between settings. the credibility of effectmodification across settings was, therefore, low. wearing face masks was also acceptable and feasible. policy makers at all levels should, therefore, strive to address equity implications for groups with currently limited access to face masks and eye protection. one concern is that face mask use en masse could divert supplies from people at highest risk for infection. 10 health-care workers are increasingly being asked to ration and reuse ppe, 82, 83 leading to calls for government-directed repurposing of manufacturing capacity to overcome mask shortages 84 and finding solutions for mask use by the general public. 84 in this respect, some of the masks studied in our review were reusable 12-16-layer cotton or gauze masks. 51, 54, 61, 75 at the moment, although there is consensus that sars-cov-2 mainly spreads through large droplets and contact, debate continues about the role of aerosol, 2-8,85,86 but our meta-analysis provides evidence (albeit of low certainty) that respirators might have a stronger protective effect than surgical masks. biological plausi bility would be supported by data for aerosolised sars-cov-2 5-8 and preclinical data showing seasonal coronavirus rna detection in fine aerosols during tidal breathing, 87 albeit, rna detection does not necessarily imply replication and infection-competent virus. nevertheless, our findings suggest it plausible that even in the absence of aerosolisation, respirators might be simply more effective than masks at preventing infection. at present, there is no data to support viable virus in the air outside of aerosol generating procedures from available hospital studies. other factors such as super-spreading events, the subtype of health-care setting (eg, emergency room, intensive care unit, medical wards, dialysis centre), if aerosolising proce dures are done, and environmental factors such as ventilation, might all affect the degree of protection afforded by personal protection strategies, but we did not identify robust data to inform these aspects. strengths of our review include adherence to full systematic review methods, which included artificial intelligence-supported dual screening of titles and abstracts, full-text evaluation, assessment of risk of bias, and no limitation by language. we included patients infected with sars-cov-2, sars-cov, or mers-cov and searched relevant data up to may 3, 2020. we followed the grade approach 16 to rate the certainty of evidence. finally, we identified and appraise a large body of published work from china, from which much evidence emerged before the pandemic spread to other global regions.the primary limitation of our study is that all studies were non-randomised, not always fully adjusted, and might suffer from recall and measurement bias (eg, direct contact in some studies might not be measuring near distance). however, unadjusted, adjusted, frequentist, and bayesian meta-analyses all supported the main findings, and large or very large effects were recorded. nevertheless, we are cautious not to be overly certain in the precise quantitative estimates of effects, although the qualitative effect and direction is probably of high certainty. many studies did not provide information on precise distances, and direct contact was equated to 0 m distance; none of the eligible studies quanti tatively evaluated whether distances of more than 2 m were more effective, although our metaregression provides potential pre dictions for estimates of risk. few studies assessed the effect of interventions in non-health-care settings, and they primarily evaluated mask use in households or contacts of cases, although beneficial associations were seen across settings. furthermore, most evidence was from studies that reported on sars and mers (n=6674 patients with covid-19, of 25 697 total), but data from these previous epidemics provide the most direct information for covid-19 currently. we did not specifically assess the effect of duration of exposure on risk for transmission, although whether or not this variable was judged a risk factor considerably varied across studies, from any duration to a minimum of 1 h. because of inconsistent reporting, information is limited about whether aerosolgenerating procedures were in place in studies using respirators, and whether masks worn by infected patients might alter the effectiveness of each intervention, although the stronger association with n95 or similar respirators over other masks persisted when adjusting for studies reporting aerosol-generating medical procedures. these factors might account for some of the residual statistical heterogeneity seen for some outcomes, albeit i² is commonly inflated in meta-analyses of observational data, 21, 22 and nevertheless the effects seen were large and probably clinically important in all adjusted studies.our comprehensive systematic review provides the best available information on three simple and common interventions to combat the immediate threat of covid-19, while new evidence on pharmacological treatments, vac cines, and other personal protective strategies is being generated. physical distancing of at least 1 m is strongly associated with protection, but distances of up to 2 m might be more effective. although direct evidence is limited, the optimum use of face masks, in particular n95 or similar respirators in health-care settings and 12-16-layer cotton or surgical masks in the community, could depend on contextual factors; action is needed at all levels to address the paucity of better evidence. eye protection might provide additional benefits. globally collaborative and well conducted studies, including randomised trials, of different personal protective strategies are needed regardless of the challenges, but this systematic appraisal of currently best available evidence could be considered to inform interim guidance.dkc, eaa, sd, ks, sy, and hjs designed the study. sy, sd, ks, and hjs coordinated the study. sy and lh designed and ran the literature search. all authors acquired data, screened records, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. dkc did statistical analyses. dkc and hjs wrote the report. all authors provided critical conceptual input, analysed and interpreted data, and critically revised the report.1) search strategies 2) characteristics of included studies 3) risk of bias assessments 4) funnel plots 5) evidence profiles 6) forest plots for additional analyses 7) sensitivity analyses 8) credibility assessment of potential effect modifiers 9) summary of contextual factor data 10) prospero protocol registration 11) prisma checklist, moose checklists, references 'mask'/de or 'protective equipment'/de or 'respiratory protection'/de or 'eye mask'/de #15 meter$:ti,ab,kw or metre$:ti,ab,kw or foot:ti,ab,kw or feet:ti,ab,kw or (('non pharm*' next/0 intervention*):ti,ab,kw) or (((physical or person*) next/0 (intervention* or barrier$ or protect*)):ti,ab,kw) or transmission*:ti,ab,kw or contamination$:ti,ab,kw or shedding$:ti,ab,kw or fomite$:ti,ab,kw or gap$:ti,ab,kw #14((filter* next/0 face next/0 piece):ti,ab,kw) or (((face or respiratory or eye) near/2 (shield or equipment$ or protect* or cover$)):ti,ab,kw) #13((safety or protective) next/0 (supply or supplies or device* or equipment? or material* or measure* or gear$)) and ti,ab,kw or ((safely near/1 equipped):ti,ab,kw) #12 distanc*:ti,ab,kw or space:ti,ab,kw or spacing:ti,ab,kw or separation:ti,ab,kw or ((aerosol next/0 generat* next/0 procedur*):ti,ab,kw) #11(((airborne or 'air borne' or droplet$) next/0 precau*):ti,ab,kw) or n99:ti,ab,kw or n97:ti,ab,kw or goggle$:ti,ab,kw or respirator$:ti,ab,kw or (((patient$ or person* or individual$) next/0 isolat*):ti,ab,kw) #10((filter* next/0 face next/0 piece):ti,ab,kw) or (((face or respiratory) near/2 (shield or equipment$ or protect*)):ti,ab,kw) #9'ppe':ti,ab,kw or ((body next/0 substance$ next/0 isolati*):ti,ab,kw) or bsi:ti,ab,kw or ((infect* next/0 prevent* next/0 control*):ti,ab,kw) or ipc:ti,ab,kw or n95:ti,ab,kw or ffp:ti,ab,kw or ffp1:ti,ab,kw or ffp3:ti,ab,kw or ffp2:ti,ab,kw #8 mask$:ti,ab,kw or facemask$:ti,ab,kw or 'face mask':ti,ab,kw #7 #5 or #6 #6((2019 next/0 novel):ti,ab,kw) or ((2019 next/0 cov):ti,ab,kw) or ((coronavirus next/0 disease next/0 2019):ti,ab,kw) or covid19:ti,ab,kw or 'covid 19 ':ti,ab,kw or (((novel or new) next/0 corona*):ti,ab,kw) or sars2:ti,ab,kw or 'sars cov 2':ti,ab,kw or ((sars near/2 coronaviridae):ti,ab,kw) or coronavirus:ti,ab,kw or sars:ti,ab,kw or ((coronavirus next/0 '2'):ti,ab,kw) or ncov:ti,ab,kw or 2019ncov:ti,ab,kw #5#4 and [1- 11- ((2019 next (novel or new) next corona*)):ti,ab,kw 8 #17 (("2019" next (cov or ncov)) or (coronavirus next (disease next "2019")) or covid19 or covid-19 or ((novel or new) next corona*) or sars2 or sars-cov-2 or (sars near/2 (coronaviridae or coronavirus)) or ((sars or coronavirus) next "2") or ncov or (mask? or facemask? or face-mask? or ppe or (body near substance* near isolati*) or bsi or (infect* near prevent* near control*) or ipc or n95 or ffp or ffp1 or ffp3 or ffp2 or (filter* near face near piece) or ((face or respiratory or eye) next/2 (shield or equipment? or protect* or cover*)) or ((airborne or air-borne or droplet*) near precau*) or n99 or n97 or respirator? or goggle? or ((patient? or person* or individual?) next/1 isolat*) or distanc* or space or spacing or separation or (aerosol near generat* near procedur*) or ((safety or protective) near (supply or supplies or device* or equipment? or material* or measure* or gear?)) or (safely near/1 equipped) or meter? or metre? or foot or feet or (non-pharm* near intervention*) or ((physical or person*) near (intervention* or barrier? or protect*)) or transmission* or contamination? or shedding? or fomite? or gap? or ((head or face) next cover?) or (protective next clothing?)):ti,ab,kw 161945 #25#19 or #20 or #21 or #22 or #23 or #24 161945 #26#18 and #25 43 ⨁⨁◯◯ low critical ci: confidence interval; or: odds ratio a. all studies were non-randomized and evaluated using the newcastle-ottawa scale. some studies had higher risk of bias than others but there was no important difference in the sensitivity analyses excluding studies at higher risk of bias. we did not further rate down for risk of bias. b. although there was a high i2 value and lack of overlapping confidence intervals, all point estimates of the studies exceeded the thresholds for large effects and we did not rate down for inconsistency. c. we did not rate down for indirectness for the association between distance and infection because the sars and covid-19 viruses all belong to the same family and have each caused epidemics with sufficient similarity; there was also no convincing statistical evidence of effect modification across viruses d. some studies included the use of masks, but subgroup analysis did not reveal important differences. some studies also used bundled interventions and the effect of distances could not be evaluated in isolation but the studies shown here include only those that provide adjusted estimates. we did not rate down for intervention indirectness. e. the effect is large considering the thresholds set by grade assuming that the odds ratios translate into similar magnitudes of relative risk estimates. this also mitigated concerns about risk of bias. f. the data suggest a dose-response gradient with associations increasing from smaller distances to 2 meters and beyond. this was also suggested by a meta-regression. we did not rate up for this domain alone but in combination with the large effects. g. one of the studies, did report the raw data but only the adjusted estimates. h. although there was a high i2 value, all point estimates of the studies were relatively large and the confidence intervals were overlapping and we did not rate down for inconsistency. i. all studies were non-randomized and evaluated using the newcastle-ottawa scale. some studies had higher risk of bias than others but there was no important difference in the sensitivity analyses excluding studies at higher risk of bias. we did not further rate down for risk of bias. j. we did not rate down for indirectness for the association between eye protection and infection because the sars and covid-19 belong to the same family and are considered sufficiently similar. some studies also used bundled interventions and the effect of distances could not be evaluated in isolation but the studies shown here include only those that provide adjusted estimates. we did not rate down for intervention indirectness. k. the effect is large considering the thresholds set by grade assuming that the odds ratio translate into similar magnitudes of relative risk estimates. this mitigate concerns about risk of bias but all studies were unadjusted and risk of bias still too high to rate up for large effects. l. two of these studies provided adjusted estimates with a total of 295 in the goggles group and 107 in the group not wearing goggles. the results were similar to the unadjusted estimate (or 0.22, 95% ci 0.12 -0.39). m. although there was a high i2 value, all point estimates of the studies were relatively large and the confidence intervals were overlapping and we did not rate down for inconsistency. n. all studies were non-randomized and evaluated using the newcastle-ottawa scale. some studies had higher risk of bias than others but there was no important difference in the sensitivity analyses excluding studies at higher risk of bias. we did not further rate down for risk of bias. o. we did not rate down for indirectness for the association between eye protection and infection because the sars and covid-19 belong to the same family and are considered sufficiently similar. some studies also used bundled interventions and the effect of distances could not be evaluated in isolation but the studies shown here include only those that provide adjusted estimates. we did not rate down for intervention indirectness. p. the effect is large considering the thresholds set by grade assuming that the odds ratio translate into similar magnitudes of relative risk estimates. this mitigate concerns about risk of bias but all studies were unadjusted and risk of bias still too high to rate up for large effects. unadjusted estimates by n95 or similar (1) or not (0) overall ( bayesian analyses also support this with posterior probability of rr<1 being >95%.possibly, p=0.049 in univariate meta-regression, and when controlling for differential n95 use between settings, still low at p=0.11did the hypothesis precede rather than follow the analysis, and include a hypothesized direction that was subsequently confirmed?was the subgroup hypothesis one of a small number tested? appendix 9. summary of contextual factor data resource use two qualitative and two cross-sectional studies reported on data related to the cost and resource use in the management of sars (51, 65) , mers (5) and coronavirus (83) . the four studies were conducted in hong kong, brazil, singapore and saudi arabia. reported the cost of 3m powered air-purifying respirators (papr) to be us$860 and stryker parp us$580 as compared to n95 (us$0.70) (51) . in another study, health workers perceived the management of sars as a burden which costs hundreds of millions; with direct operating expenditure (e.g., medical supplies, personal protective equipment, and screening) costing us$110 million (65) . malordi et al. (2017) highlighted the consequences of the lack of resources which include inadequate training on measures to prevent disease transmission (83) . al-tawfiq et al. (2019) highlighted a monthly added cost of $16,400 for infection control items, such as hand sanitizers, soap, surgical masks, and n95 respirators during mers outbreak in one hospital in saudi arabia (5) . a survey of health workers in a hospital (doctors, nurses and respiratory therapists, n=51) showed that the majority of health workers (84%) preferred using papr over n-95 respirators when treating suspected sars patients despite its high cost (51) .six qualitative studies conducted in china and one cross-sectional study conducted in vietnam reported on the acceptability of physical distancing and/or wearing masks as preventive measures for covid-19. carried out an online survey to investigate the protective behaviors of visitors accompanying hospitalized patients during . 208 questionnaires were collected, and the survey showed that 85% of visitors accompanying suspected covid-19 cases wear masks while present in the hospital.four qualitative studies presented information on the willingness of residents in china to wear masks in public places and to avoid crowds (18, 64, 102, 166) . the four studies used online questionnaires to survey members of the public and the samples were respectively, n=1,138 (64), n=917 (166), n=3,083 (102), and n=4,016 (18) . across the four studies, most of the participants reflected high willingness to wear masks in public places (95%, 99%, 97%, 94% respectively). in terms of social gatherings, the majority of the participants across three of the studies favored avoiding crowded areas (91%, 96%, 97% respectively) (18, 64, 102) .another survey conducted in vietnam (n=345) found that the risk perception of covid-19 threat significantly increased the likelihood of wearing medical masks (p<0.01). the increased likelihood of wearing masks was also shown to increase with age (45) . acceptability by college students a survey to assess the knowledge and protective behaviors among college students (n=22,302 online questionnaires) in china during covid-19 pandemic (12), found that 99% of students were willing to avoid close contact with others (less than 1 meter), 95% considered avoiding crowded places as an important way to control the epidemic, and 99% reported wearing a mask in public places for week prior to being surveyed.a cross-sectional survey (56) performed in the context of the sars epidemic in hong kong, assessed various precautionary measures from the viewpoint of 1,397 residents. most of the respondents believed that sars could be transmitted via direct body contact with patients (84%) and via respiratory droplets (97%). the perceived risk of transmission increased during the escalating phase of the epidemic (52%) and declined during a later stage (36%).during the first phase of the epidemic, respondents reported a significant increase in the application of preventive measures such as avoiding going outside and avoiding crows, which dropped at a later stage. those who perceived avoiding crowded places as an effective preventive measure (or: 31.564, 95% ci: 15.610 -63.824) were likely to avoid crowded places. in terms of the acceptability of wearing masks, most of the respondents (95%) regarded this action as a 'civic responsibility' and reflected commitment to wearing masks in public places. those who perceived wearing a mask as an efficacious means of prevention (or: 7.151, 95% ci: 4.245-12.045) were more likely than others to wear a mask (56) .five studies conducted on health professionals (including medical staff and nurses) in primary health care and hospital settings showed that an increase in the perceptions and awareness of risk of transmission of sars was associated with better adherence to preventive measures including wearing masks and eye protection (32, 75, 83, 88, 116) .a cross-sectional quantitative survey of dental health professionals (n=406) working in dental facilities in saudi arabia showed good practices related to making patients with mers infection wear masks during transport (84%). however, knowledge was relatively limited (56.4%) about the need to wear a mask within a 90 cm distance from a patient under droplet precaution care (10) . another cross-sectional survey of health workers (n=10,236) was conducted about the appropriateness of using papr and n95 respirators in public hospitals and polyclinics during the sars outbreak in singapore (23) . among doctors (n=873), nurses (n=4,404), and clerical staff (n=921), 99.5%, 99% and 97% respectively viewed n95 respirator to be an adequate protection against sars.a cross-sectional study (two surveys) was conducted to assess the use of personal protective equipment among medical students during and after the sars outbreak in a teaching hospital in hong kong and study its impact on their personal hygiene practice when they contacted patients (139) . prior to the sars outbreak, none of the students wore masks during history taking and physical examination. in the 2004 survey, 86.1% and 93.8% of students wore masks during history taking and physical examination, respectively.another study (secondary data analysis) conducted in saudi arabia evaluating the use of masks before and during mers showed an increase in the use of both, surgical masks (from 2,947.4 to 10,283.9 per 1,000 patient-days) and n-95 respirators (from 22 to 232 per 1,000 patient-days) (p <.0000001) (5) .in this section, we summarized barriers and facilitators to the implementation and sustainability of using masks based on findings from the included studies. among barriers, we identified:barriers to the use of protective masks a study showed that n-95 respirators was perceived by health workers as uncomfortable during the sars outbreak (48) . n95 respirators often developed cracks in the chin area for small-jawed female health professionals and the overlapping parts of different ppe items were ill-fitted (e.g., gaps between goggles and n95 respirator) (48) .family physicians (n=7) in singapore stressed on the physical discomfort during prolonged use of the n-95 mask (e.g., breathing difficulty, headache, development of allergic facial rash around the mask) in a qualitative study employing interviews about factors that influence the use of ppe during the sars outbreak (119) . in this study, family physicians in singapore also showed that the use of the n-95 mask led to difficulty in communication with patients who had adverse reaction (i.e., worries and concern as ppe was a sign that the physician could have been exposed to sars) (119) . in addition, showed that papr made most of the health workers (64%) feel that they looked frightening to their patients when using it (51) .another qualitative study used 15 focus group discussions to examine the perceptions of health workers (n=105) in canada regarding factors associated with self-protective behavior during the sars outbreak (85) . this study identified mask fitting and uncomfortable ppe to be among the barriers to effective use of ppe.absence of a monitoring system showed that barriers to the use of protective wear included deficiencies in the tracking system to monitor the development, delivery and evaluation of training in infection control (85) .in a qualitative study among health professionals (n=26) in the netherlands about barriers to implementing infection prevention and control guidelines during crises, respondents highlighted the below as potential reasons for the lack of adherence to guidelines during outbreaks such as sars (124): -lack of imperative or precise wording -lack of easily identifiable instructions specific to each profession -lack of concrete performance targets -lack of timely and adequate guidance on personal protective equipment and other safety measures other barriers that were described in the included studies were the shortage of ppe and cost due to bulk purchase (119), lack of consistent policies for quarantining individuals, reuse of masks, and deficiencies in decision regarding the assignment of patients to negative pressure rooms (85) .most of the health workers perceived both types of papr (3m and stryker) to be easy or relatively easy to use (74% and 91%) with an acceptable level of visual impairment attributable to the papr (98% and 95% for the 3m and stryker papr, respectively) (51).a survey about factors influencing the wearing of facemasks for the prevention of sars among adult chinese (n=1329) in hong kong showed that 61% of respondents reported consistent use of facemasks to prevent sars and the following predicting factors (120): -awareness of the risks and serious consequences associated with sars: respondents who felt more susceptible to contracting sars (or = 2.575; ci = 1.586, 4.181) and those who perceived sars as having more serious consequences (or =1.176; ci = 0.909, 1.521) were more likely to wear facemasks. -awareness of the benefits of wearing facemasks: respondents who believed greater benefits in wearing facemasks (or = 1.354; ci = 1.019, 1.800) were more likely to wear facemasks.a rapid systematic review of physical distancing with or without masks and with or without eye protection to prevent covid-19 transmission between patients with confirmed covid-19 infection and other people, including health care workers holger schunemann, derek chu, elie akl, mark loeb, sally yaacoub, layal hneiny, neera bhatnagar, aida farha, ray yuan zhang, ariel izcovich, ignacio neumann, carlos cuello garcia, finn schünemann, giovanna muti-schünemann, gian paolo morgano, tamara lotfi, thomas piggott, ewa borowiack, anna bak, tejan baldeh, rosa stalteri, anisa hajizadeh, leila harrison, hong zhao, guang chen, antonio bognanni, marge reinap, paolo giorgi rossi what is the impact on people maintaining at least one meter distance compared to a smaller distance from a patient or suspected patient with covid-19 on droplet transmission (intervention question)?sub-questions:(1) with or without a mask on the patient;(2) with or without a mask and with or without eye protection on the non-infected personwe will search the following electronic databases:• pubmed, medline, embase, cinahl, and the cochrane library from 2019 to current date.we will search the following chinese electronic databases: we will conduct a search for ongoing trials using the u.s. national library of medicine register of clinical trials (clinicaltrials.gov) and the who international clinical trials registry platform (ictrp). we will handsearch the reference lists of the included papers. we will also review the studies included in any identified relevant systematic reviews.search strategy combines relevant medical subject headings (mesh) and keywords, which include "covid-19", and "corona virus". pubmed search terms are informed by https://blocks.bmionline.nl/catalog/397. the search strategy has been drafted by ms. layal hneiny and is being peer reviewed by two information specialists (ms. neera bhatnagar and ms. aida farha). finalized search strategies will be available on march 26, 2020 but the final draft can be found in the appendix.content experts will search websites of governmental and organizational websites for relevant grey literature documents.additional search strategies to identify indirect evidence on sars and mers will also be constructed and peer-reviewed by information specialists. this latter search will focus on systematic reviews.no restrictions will be placed on study design. however, evidence will be prioritized by study design as follows: i) randomized controlled trials; ii) non-randomized comparative studies; iii) non-comparative studies (i.e., case reports, case series); iv) qualitative studies. we will exclude single case reports if non-randomized studies comparative studies provide the same certainty of evidence. we will also review modelling studies. for the question addressing how far the virus can travel we will consider mechanistic human studies.participants/population studies focused on patients with confirmed and people in close contact with them, including health care workers, will be eligible for inclusion. other related populations to consider are:• individuals with suspected covid-19 infection who are waiting to be tested (e.g., presenting to a lab, emergency department, or dedicated clinic to get tested), or cannot be tested (because of lack of resources) • individuals with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection (whether symptomatic or not) who are in isolation in non-healthcare settings (e.g., at home, and other dedicated spaces such as stadiums and tents)?intervention(s), exposure(s) at least one meter distance between people and covid-19 infected patients:(1) with or without a mask on the patient;(2) with or without a mask and with or without eye protection on the hcw. main outcome(s) · transmission · risk of transmission to members of the community (herd immunity) · acceptability by different stakeholders (patient, hcw, individuals handling the dead bodies, health authorities) (e.g., possibly as a surrogate for harms if people are not wearing masks or eye protection) · unintended harms of distancing (e.g., when providing care) and of using masks or eye protection, stigmatization · covid19 infection (confirmed) · covid19 probable case · icu admission · hospitalization · death · (time to) recovery a single reviewer will extract data using a piloted form and a second reviewer will verify all extracted data. minimal data will be extracted addressing the following domains: study identifier; study design; setting; population characteristics; intervention and comparator characteristics; outcomes (quantitative if possible); source of funding and reported conflicts of interests; ethical approval; study limitations or other important comments.one reviewer will perform risk of bias assessments and a second reviewer will verify all assessments. we will use the cochrane risk of bias tool (version 2) for randomized controlled trials, and newcastle ottawa scale for non-randomized studies.we will synthesize data in both tabular and narrative formats. we anticipate our outcomes to be dichotomous, such as transmission, and therefore they will be analyzed as pooled risk ratios (rrs), if they are unadjusted estimates. if there are adjusted odds ratios from multivariable regression reported in the studies, then these will be pooled as adjusted odds ratios (aors). these will be summarized using random effects meta-analysis using the dersimonian and laird random effects model, with heterogeneity calculated from the mantel-haenszel model. if there are time to event outcomes, shared frailty cox prorportional hazards models will be completed, with validation of the assumption of proportionality. this may necessitate digitization of kaplan-meier curves from published studies. all summary measures will be reported with an accompanying 95% confidence interval.we anticipate that traditional statistical measures of heterogeneity will be less informative than established criteria per grade. because of the poor performance of i² to quantify true heterogeneity, then we will accept page: 3 / 6 prospero international prospective register of systematic reviews any magnitude of i² for meta-analysis. nevertheless, we will collect the i² statistic, but comment on its limitations in the presentation of final product. we will also accept any number of study for comparative or non comparative meta-analysis. summary measures will include absolute and relative risks for the outcomes outlined above, displayed using funnel plots and calculated using random effects models. publication bias will also be assessed visually using funnel plots and harbord's modification to egger test, or if adjusted odds ratios are used, then egger's original test. if necessary, mean and sd will be calculated from medians and iqr or range by the method of wan (bmc medical research methodology201414:135) .if there are only non-comparative studies, then we will meta-analyze these by proportions (ie. incidence of outcome per report [eg. numerator=events of transmission, denominator=total exposed]. in the presence of sparse data, we will give preference to the logit transformation when completing this, otherwise we will use the freeman-tukey double arcsine transformation.the synthesis of contextual factors (acceptability, etc.) will be narrative.subgroup effects will be analysed by meta-regression with tests of interaction by 10, 000 monte-carlo permutations to calculate p values to avoid spurious findings.sensitivity analyses will include analysis by fixed effect and knapp-hartung-sidik-jonkman random effects model. we will also employ bayesian meta-analyses of existing literature on the efficacy of mask use to prevent viral transmission, using as charitable assumptions as plausible that the rct data represent the true effect estimates. this will include shrinking the effect estimate of the observational data, decreasing its weight (ie. increasing its variance as a prior) or both. we will also employ noninformative priors. data analyses will be performed using stata 14.3. gradepro gdt will be used to construct the summary of findings table.the analyses and reporting of the review will be done according to the prisma and moose guidelines. a single reviewer will grade the certainty of the evidence using the grade approach and a second reviewer will verify all assessments. if applicable, we will follow published guidance for rating the certainty in evidence in the absence of a single estimate of effect. evidence will be presented using grade evidence profiles developed in the gradepro (www.gradepro.org) software. the record owner confirms that the information they have supplied for this submission is accurate and complete and they understand that deliberate provision of inaccurate information or omission of data may be construed as scientific misconduct.the record owner confirms that they will update the status of the review when it is completed and will add publication details in due course.16 april 2020 prospero this information has been provided by the named contact for this review. crd has accepted this information in good faith and registered the review in prospero. the registrant confirms that the information supplied for this submission is accurate and complete. crd bears no responsibility or liability for the content of this registration record, any associated files or external websites.3 describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known.objectives 4 provide an explicit statement of questions being addressed with reference to participants, interventions, comparisons, outcomes, and study design (picos).protocol and registration 5 indicate if a review protocol exists, if and where it can be accessed (e.g., web address), and, if available, provide registration information including registration number.eligibility criteria 6 specify study characteristics (e.g., picos, length of follow-up) and report characteristics (e.g., years considered, language, publication status) used as criteria for eligibility, giving rationale.information sources 7 describe all information sources (e.g., databases with dates of coverage, contact with study authors to identify additional studies) in the search and date last searched.search section/topic # checklist item reported on page #risk of bias across studies 15 specify any assessment of risk of bias that may affect the cumulative evidence (e.g., publication bias, selective reporting within studies).additional analyses 16 describe methods of additional analyses (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression), if done, indicating which were pre-specified.17 give numbers of studies screened, assessed for eligibility, and included in the review, with reasons for exclusions at each stage, ideally with a flow diagram. table 2 risk of bias across studies 22 present results of any assessment of risk of bias across studies (see item 15) . table 2 , appendix additional analysis 23 give results of additional analyses, if done (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression [see item 16] ).summary of evidence 24 summarize the main findings including the strength of evidence for each main outcome; consider their relevance to key groups (e.g., healthcare providers, users, and policy makers).limitations 25 discuss limitations at study and outcome level (e.g., risk of bias), and at review-level (e.g., incomplete retrieval of identified research, reporting bias).conclusions 26 provide a general interpretation of the results in the context of other evidence, and implications for future research.funding 27 describe sources of funding for the systematic review and other support (e.g., supply of data); role of funders for the systematic review. description of study outcome(s) 6type of exposure or intervention used 5-6type of study designs used 5-6study population 5-6qualifications of searchers (eg, librarians and investigators) 5-6, appendixsearch strategy, including time period included in the synthesis and keywords 5-6, appendixeffort to include all available studies, including contact with authors 5-6, appendixdatabases and registries searched 5-6, appendixsearch software used, name and version, including special features used (eg, explosion) 5-6, appendixuse of hand searching (eg, reference lists of obtained articles) 5-6, appendixlist of citations located and those excluded, including justification description of any contact with authors 5-6description of relevance or appropriateness of studies assembled for assessing the hypothesis to be tested 5-6rationale for the selection and coding of data (eg, sound clinical principles or convenience) 5-7documentation of how data were classified and coded (eg, multiple raters, blinding, and interrater reliability) 5-7assessment of confounding (eg, comparability of cases and controls in studies where appropriate) 5-7assessment of study quality, including blinding of quality assessors; stratification or regression on possible predictors of study results 7assessment of heterogeneity 7 description of statistical methods (eg, complete description of fixed or random effects models, justification of whether the chosen models account for predictors of study results, dose-response models, or cumulative meta-analysis) in sufficient detail to be replicated 7-8 table 2 reporting of discussion should includequantitative assessment of bias (eg, publication bias) 16justification for exclusion (eg, exclusion of non-english-language citations) 16assessment of quality of included studies table 2 , 13consideration of alternative explanations for observed results 16generalization of the conclusions (ie, appropriate for the data presented and within the domain of the literature review) 13-14guidelines for future research [14] [15] disclosure of funding source 8the coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the novel coronavirus strain, known as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), emerged in 2019 and is considered to be a pandemic in the form of viral pneumonia [1] . in the last two decades, there have been several epidemics, including sars-cov in 2002-2003, h1n1 influenza in 2009, and mers in 2012. the coronavirus family (cov) are single-stranded rna viruses that are found in different animals and can cross species barriers and use other mammals as hosts. these viruses have the potential to become a pandemic, as the world health organization (who) declares covid-19 to be outbreaks of infectious disease crossing international boundaries, resulting in morbidity and mortality at a large dyspnea, as well as muscle ache. sars-cov-2 can be transmitted human-to-human and is mainly through indirect or direct contact with mucous membranes in the mouth, eyes, or nose ( figure 1a ). the droplets from coughing can penetrate the human body via nose or mouth. sars-cov-2 has a higher transmission rate than sars-cov, probably due to the genetic recombinant event in covid-19. sars-cov-2 also has an incubation period from 3 to 7 days, but it could be as long as 24 days in rare cases [4] .the chain of coronavirus infection happens when one person infects another and the cycle keeps going. this chain breaks when a significant proportion of the population has immunity against the viral or bacterial disease, through what is known as herd immunity [7, 8] . this technique remains ineffective for all diseases such that the human body develops immunity against certain disorders after the first infection, or sometimes through vaccination. the same pattern applies to the newly emerging viral infection, covid-19, due to the spread of the sars-cov-2 virus (figure 1b) . however, the biggest concern for covid-19 is the balance between the natural rate of disease transmission, and social distancing principles such that the population acquires herd immunity after it gets significantly exposed to the virus that facilitates the elimination of the pandemic. however, with the strict social distancing guidelines, the population remains unexposed to the virus to develop herd immunity. lastly, a recently developed framework, termed as shield immunity, builds a pandemic recovery based on central interactions of recovered individuals, exhibiting no virus, but with their antibodies detected in serological tests [9] . the shield immunity concept has the potential to enrich safer social networks through substitution of interactions to control the evolving dynamics of pandemics.drug repurposing against covid-19: recent drug discovery efforts have repurposed drugs that were previously used for other health conditions to treat covid-19, and in particular, the combination of anti-malaria drugs, including food and drug administration (fda)-approved drugs, such as hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine [10, 11] . however, these drugs may not be suitable for covid-19 treatment because of their narrow therapeutic window, such that the difference between the effective dose and the toxic dose is significantly small. given that there is not enough strong clinical data to support the alleged benefits from these drugs, it can worsen symptoms associated with covid- 19. there have been prior attempts to use antimalarial drugs in controlling other viral infections, including human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) and hepatitis c. for example, the antimalarial drug, ferroquine was proven to be a strong inhibitor of the hepatitis c virus, while another antimalarial drug, chloroquine showed weak efficacy against hiv infection [12] [13] [14] . although antimalarial drugs can be effective against a number of viral infections, their response varies for all viruses and conditions. thereby, more clinical trials are needed to judge the ability of antimalarial drugs in treating covid-19 patients to further understand the potential benefits and risks of these drugs. for example, the washington university school of medicine in st. louis recently launched a clinical trial to test the efficacy of the antimalarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine alone and in combination with another drug, the antibiotic azithromycin [15] . these drugs are currently being tested on covid-19 hospitalized patients at the barnes-jewish hospital.in addition to hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, remdesivir (gs-5734) is another drug that is being evaluated for the treatment of covid-19. remdesivir, as an inhibitor of the viral rna polymerases, has broad-spectrum activity against sars-cov and mers-cov and has been identified as a potential candidate for the treatment of covid-19. a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial was performed on patients that were hospitalized with covid-19 and showed the benefits of remdesivir in improving time to recovery and lowering respiratory tract infection. however, the trial was implemented in restricted locations and during a time of restricted travel. since safety procedures limit the resources, research staff often monitored the visits remotely [16] .although the compassionate treatment program in another preliminary report for evaluating the efficacy of remdesivir demonstrated 68% of clinical improvement, the results were not comparable to that of the other reports due to the lack of randomized trials. the interpretation of the results is limited by the lack of viral load data collection, a non-uniform duration of therapy, and the small size of the cohort [17] . therefore, these preliminary reports can only provide clinicians the option of remdesivir, and further assessments on the safety and efficacy of remdesivir and potential combinations with other therapeutic agents are required via randomized, placebo-controlled trials.favipiravir (avigan) is another broad-spectrum antiviral drug that works by inhibiting the rna polymerase machinery of rna viruses, resulting in a nonviable virus phenotype. it was developed by toyama chemical in 2014 through screening chemical libraries for anti-viral activity against the influenza virus, and was approved and stockpiled in japan against novel influence pandemics [18] [19] [20] . this drug was recently shown to be effective against other viral diseases, including ebola and the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) [21] . clinical trials in china have led the effort in testing the efficacy of favipiravir in treating covid-19 patients in february 2020. the study showed that favipiravir resulted in a significant decrease in the median time to viral clearance and faster improvement in patients' chest computed tomography (ct) scans [22] . however, this study was small and non-randomized, meaning that it needs to be supported by bigger, open-label, randomized, and controlled clinical trials to test the safety and efficacy of favipiravir. even though the drug was not initially approved in the usa for the treatment of influenza, several clinical trials have been designed to test its efficacy in treatment of covid-19 patients across the entire country [23, 24] .similarly, ivermectin is an anthelmintic drug that acts on parasites and roundworm infections. this drug was shown to be a promising candidate for treating viral diseases, including chikungunya and yellow fever [25] . several clinical trials are underway after ivermectin was proven to have in vitro activity against sars-cov-2. ivermectin led to significant reduction in viral rna shortly after treatment [26] . however, the concentrations needed to achieve these promising in vitro results were much higher than those recommended and approved for the treatment of parasitic infections. thereby, the fda issued a warning against the inappropriate use of ivermectin for the treatment of covid-19 patients [27] .vaccine development: another method to eliminate this pandemic is through vaccines that can solve the problem from its roots by protecting healthy individuals from catching and transferring infections. since the genomic data of the novel sars-cov-2 became available in january 2020, there has been an increasing global interest in vaccine development. as of april 2020, there have been 115 vaccine candidates against sars-cov-2 worldwide [28] . a subset of these vaccines is at the clinical phase and are currently being tested on human subjects. these vaccine candidates include mrna-1273 from modernatx [29] . mrna-1273 utilizes an emerging technology in vaccine development and delivery of a lipid nanoparticle (lnp) mrna vaccine that encodes for the s protein on the novel sar-cov-2 virus. another successful vaccine candidate is ad5-ncov from cansino that is an adenovirus vector encoding for the s protein [30] . furthermore, ino-4800 was developed by inovio pharmaceuticals, which is a dna plasmid that encodes for the s protein of the virus [31] . finally, the shenzhen geno-immune medical institute developed two vaccine candidates, lv-smenp-dc and pathogen-specific apc, which are lentiviral vectors designed to express proteins of interest to deactivate the virus [32] .one of the contributing factors to virus infectivity and virulence is a phenomenon called antibody-dependent enhancement (ade). ade refers to the viruses binding to specific antibodies of the surface of host cells that enhance their entry and replication. this phenomenon was observed in many viruses, including the yellow fever virus, zika virus, and coronaviruses [33] . ade can adversely impact the process of vaccine development because vaccines could trigger the production of antibodies that viruses could use to gain access to host cells, so the vaccine could worsen the condition that it was designed to fight. thus, ade is a major potential challenge for covid-19 vaccine development, as ade was observed in other types of coronaviruses that resulted in previous pandemics, including sars-cov and mers-cov. for example, there were several vaccine candidates for the sars-cov pandemic, including whole inactivated viruses, dna, subunits, and vectored vaccines. although these vaccines were able to halt the replication of the sars-cov virus in infected cells, they granted viral access to macrophages through ade, which eventually caused serious lung infections [34, 35] . the sars vaccine candidates resulted in enhanced hepatitis, increased morbidity, and stronger inflammatory responses that were attributed to ade [36] . similarly, the mers-cov virus was shown to utilize the cellular receptors that mimic viral receptors to gain access to host cells, resulting in enhanced infection [37] . little is known about whether ade will present a challenge to target the sars-cov-2 due to gained access to immune cells or due to prior coronavirus infections, and it is currently an active area of investigation [38] .test results for covid-19 can lead to the initial steps in identifying the scale of the pandemic. with the data from the test results, mathematical models can be created to aid governors' decisions about the length of time for stay-at-home orders. previously, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) tests were the diagnostic method of choice. however, these methods are not ideal for rapid diagnosis due to their long wait times of two to three hours, as well as the need for expensive laboratory equipment and trained professionals (figure 1c ).for the rapid diagnosis of current infection, covid-19 testing stations use molecular tests to determine the presence of sars-cov-2. these tests rely on the genetic sequence of sars-cov-2 and use pcr (figure 1c ). under the emergency use authorization (eua), many labs can utilize their existing machines for detection, which vary in terms of multiplexing, complexity, throughput, and turnaround times. for example, genmark's eplex respiratory pathogen instrument can detect common pathogens in the nasopharyngeal swab specimens. cobas ® sars-cov-2 on the cobas ® 6800 [39] (roche molecular diagnostics, pleasanton, ca, usa) and xpert ® xpress sars-cov-2 [40] (cepheid, sunnyvale, ca, usa) give high-volume and automated throughput using the lightmix ® kit. while these devices can use specimens other than nasopharyngeal swabs, the cobas ® 6800 takes 3.5 h and the xpert ® xpress sars-cov-2 takes 45 min. currently, abbott's id now, a rapid molecular in vitro diagnostic test utilizing an isothermal nucleic acid amplification technology, has a covid-19 feature for testing, which takes less than 13 min [41] . a nasopharyngeal, throat, and nasal swab can be used. although there is considered to be a sensitivity of 90% with these molecular tests, there still stands the risk and repercussions of false-negative tests with these current devices.with covid-19 being considered a respiratory infection, several studies focus on using medical screening lung scans to track the progress of the disease in central healthcare infrastructures. one study in wuhan, china focused on the progression of covid-19 in the lungs of 81 patients, and used ct scans to track the progress [42] . all patients with and without symptoms of the "viral pneumonia" showed abnormal chest cts, specifically as bilateral, subpleural, ground-glass opacities with air bronchograms, ill-defined margins, and a slight predominance in the lower right lobe. as the patient heals, the patient's lungs show improvements in the lung lesions. this medical screening was considered to be quicker and more sensitive than the rt-pcr test. a safer way to test for changes in the lungs is via ultrasonography, because the evolution of the disease can be tracked to inform clinical decision-making. ultrasounds still cannot detect lesions deep within the lung, in which case a ct scan would be needed. however, lung ultrasonography can be the first detection step because it does not use radiation and the detection would be repeatable with lower costs. these techniques should be used to evaluate treatment or as a diagnostic test in conjunction with the molecular tests. ct scans and ultrasounds require trained personnel and enclosed space, making it challenging to consider it as the main diagnostic test. human-to-human transmission is a common characteristic in three types of coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), sars-cov-2, and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). even though the fatality rate is not lower than sars-cov and mers-cov, vaccines and treatments are needed; (b) herd immunity plays an essential role in controlling the transmission of the disease. without herd immunity, the virus will be available to get transferred from infected patients to any susceptible individual, resulting in a high infection rate and high mortality. on the other hand, herd immunity interrupts this chain of infection, resulting in better outcomes with less infected individuals and a significantly reduced the mortality rate; (c) the three main categories of covid-19 diagnostics and the time-frame of each: laboratory test centers for current infection, medical screenings, antibody tests to determine immunity. test centers use samples from nasopharyngeal swabs and test for covid-19 infection via molecular or reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) tests, with rt-pcr tests taking longer. healthcare clinics and hospitals offer quick medical screenings via computed tomography (ct) scans or ultrasounds; ultrasounds are the safer option due to no radiation. the next step in rapid testing will be to test human-to-human transmission is a common characteristic in three types of coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), sars-cov-2, and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). even though the fatality rate is not lower than sars-cov and mers-cov, vaccines and treatments are needed; (b) herd immunity plays an essential role in controlling the transmission of the disease. without herd immunity, the virus will be available to get transferred from infected patients to any susceptible individual, resulting in a high infection rate and high mortality. on the other hand, herd immunity interrupts this chain of infection, resulting in better outcomes with less infected individuals and a significantly reduced the mortality rate; (c) the three main categories of covid-19 diagnostics and the time-frame of each: laboratory test centers for current infection, medical screenings, antibody tests to determine immunity. test centers use samples from nasopharyngeal swabs and test for covid-19 infection via molecular or reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) tests, with rt-pcr tests taking longer. healthcare clinics and hospitals offer quick medical screenings via computed tomography (ct) scans or ultrasounds; ultrasounds are the safer option due to no radiation. the next step in rapid testing will be to test covid-19 patients for antibodies against sars-cov-2 to see if the patient has the potential to fight reinfection and determine if the individual was previously sick.for rapid diagnosis, abbott and labcorp looked into mass-producing antibody tests [43] . these tests focus on testing for immunoglobulin g (igg) antibodies because its responses relate to adaptive immunity and have immunological memory of previous virus encounters. the presence of these igg antibodies can identify what specific antigen it has a high affinity for, and the previous virus is encountered [44] . in the context of covid-19, the testing provides information on whether that patient was previously infected and whether immunity was detected or not.the abbott antibody test (sars-cov-2 igg assay) has shown 100% sensitivity and 99.9% specificity thus far [45] . the abbott test finds whether the patient has igg antibodies for covid-19, which can stay for months to years after a person has recovered. one laboratory can run up to 14,000 tests per day. while abbott previously released a covid-19 molecular test and the id now rapid test, this serological test claims to be the most accurate [46] . the abbott tests are running on the architect ® i1000sr and i2000sr laboratory instruments with more than 2000 of these machines in different laboratories; this allows for abbott to focus on the distribution of the tests and not the machinery on which to read them [47] .while abbot is a frontrunner in the production of these antibody tests, other corporations are also researching antibody tests. for example, arcpoint labs has started to offer an antibody test in monterey [48] . this test ranks the patient into one of three categories: no exposure, exposure, exposure, and recovery. currently, due to the fda's eua, any company can release these tests without testing for accuracy. the rate at which these tests come out is high, but consumers should still take the necessary precautions that are advised by the cdc [49] .covid-19 transmission: the coronavirus spreads primarily through droplets that are generated by infected individuals during coughing, sneezing, or speaking. while it was initially believed that since these droplets are too heavy to stay in the air, the coronavirus is not airborne. viruses may be airborne in the form of aerosols, which are fine particles that are able to stay in the air for a sustained amount of time. a recent study on aerosol and surface stability found that sars-cov-2 was stable for three hours in its aerosol form [50] . this indicates that air transmission of the virus is possible, due to its capability to remain viable as an aerosol. while aerosolized viral particles cannot travel far from an infected patient breathing normally, coughing and sneezing can lead to traveling distances up to an estimated 20 feet [51] . these particles then remain suspended in the air near or far from their surface, depending on how the particles were produced, or fall out of the air and attach to surfaces in the case of larger particles (figure 2a ). once these particles have attached to various surfaces, the length over which these particulates remain viable depends on the material of the surface. under experimental conditions, it was found that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 had similar stability times. for sars-cov-2, the half lifetimes are aerosol (1 h), copper (1 h), cardboard (3 h), stainless steel (5 h), and plastic (7 h).masks in covid-19 transmission: individuals have resorted to wearing masks for protection against various viruses, but there is much controversy on whether these masks help. masks might help keep people with covid-19 from unknowingly transmitting the virus to others, and even though there is no harm in wearing masks, there is also no clear and significant benefit. when patients were asked to cough without masks, while wearing a disposable surgical mask and again wearing a 100% cotton mask, neither mask meaningfully decreased the viral load coughed onto the petri dishes [52] . however, surgical masks reduced coronavirus detection in both droplets and aerosols. the virus was found in respiratory droplets in 3 out of 10 samples from participants not wearing masks, and in aerosols in 4 out of 10 samples taken without masks (figure 2b ) [53] . there was no detection of any virus in respiratory droplets or aerosols collected from participants wearing face masks that showed a trend toward reduced detection in respiratory droplets with the use of a mask. thus, surgical masks reduced the droplets of the virus, but not the viral load that gets transmitted. to avoid spreading the virus before individuals experience symptoms, masks should be used in public venues. the difference in the spread of viral load and aerosol droplets with a mask and without a mask; (c) the relationship between the mean replication rate of sars-cov-2 and the temperature of 24 different countries is demonstrated. there is a moderate negative correlation between the mean replication rate and temperature, with a p value < 0.001. data were taken from caspi et al. [55] "climate effect on covid-19 spread rate: an online surveillance tool" with permission. (a) the spread of virus particles depending on coughing and sneezing, as well as particle size. the mode of ejection affects velocity and distance traveled, while the size affects the ability to stay in the air; (b) the difference in the spread of viral load and aerosol droplets with a mask and without a mask; (c) the relationship between the mean replication rate of sars-cov-2 and the temperature of 24 different countries is demonstrated. there is a moderate negative correlation between the mean replication rate and temperature, with a p value < 0.001. data were taken from caspi et al. [55] "climate effect on covid-19 spread rate: an online surveillance tool" with permission.seasonal covid-19 transmission: concerns have arisen as to whether a second wave of the coronavirus will return and whether the virus is seasonal. as societies start to lift lockdown regulations, social distancing rules must still be followed until the seasonality of the virus is confirmed. current studies and previous research on sars-cov, influenza, and mers-cov shows that high temperatures and high humidity decrease the spread and transmission of the virus. for example, sars is likely to stay on surfaces longer when the temperature is below 38 • c and humidity is below 95% [54] . on the other hand, influenza stays longer when the temperature is below 30 • c and the humidity is below 35%. this data suggests that covid-19 is likely to occur during colder seasons, such as fall and winter, and stay longer in colder climates; these studies only show correlations between temperature and humidity as a function of mean viral replication rate (figure 2c ) [55] . optimal temperature and humidity conditions of the survival of sars-cov-2 need to be validated over time in the year 2020 and beyond. after determining the presence of sars-cov-2 over all seasons, countries will be well-informed and prepared to enforce the necessary regulations.with the spread of covid-19, the demand for ppe grew as healthcare workers started following infectious disease protocols and as the individuals began shielding themselves from the virus. this necessity first emerged in wuhan, china, which was met easily by domestic and international partners. however, as the pandemic spread into europe and the americas, it was evident that a shortage of ppe would be inevitable.masks for covid-19 management: n95 masks ( figure 3a ) were the first form of ppe to be at risk of running out in hospitals because of their ability to filter out at least 95% of airborne non-oil aerosols and smaller particle aerosols. these masks, made by the 3m company, were approved by the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) and, when worn properly, are face-fitting to reduce the wearer's chance of inadvertently inhaling virus particles. naturally, good samaritan health centers, communities, and businesses responded to this ppe deficit. these innovators attempted to slow the spread of covid-19 by modifying the original surgical mask design to mass-producing face shields around the world to develop environmental precautions for safe social distancing to ensue. for example, because surgical masks ( figure 3b ) are not face-fitting, health professionals employed different tying strategies to secure the side openings ( figure 3c ). moreover, wadhwani et al. created a method of improving surgical masks when an n95 respirator is unavailable [56] . dr. wadhwani attached air-conditioning filters with a filter performance rating (fpr) of 10 to the outer surface of regular surgical masks to increase the filtering ability of the mask (figure 3d ). the mask design filters out 95% of airborne particles larger than 0.3 microns, similar to n95 respirators. the mask was able to pass saccharin and smoke testing, but has yet to be tested with other fda-approved regulations.self-manufacturing masks: the three-dimensional (3d) printing community has responded quickly and effectively. a community with over 2 million consumers of 3d printers and 140,000 industrial 3d printers around the world had the unique ability to change their item of production in hours instead of weeks and months, effectively creating elastic production capacity for any device that can be 3d-printed. bioengineers at the stanford prakash laboratory are currently developing the pneumask, a modified full-face snorkel mask that can be reused by health professionals for ppe [57] . the pneumask features one inhaling port at the top of the mask, a breathing circuit filter that filters air entering through the inhaling port, and two exhaling ports at the bottom of the face (figure 3e ). the eyes, nose, and mouth are sealed from outside contact in this full-face snorkel. the 3d-printed design can be disassembled and autoclaved for reuse. this product has not been certified as ppe yet. at duke's innovation co-lab, bioengineers have created a powered air-purifying respirator (papr) design [58] to modify current surgical helmets (figure 3f (upper)). surgical helmets do not filter the air in the room, so the laboratory used 3d printing to create a filter that could be attached to the suits (figure 3f (lower)). papr was tested by the precision air technology for hepa certification, and is currently used by duke health. this product has also not been certified as ppe yet.in addition to the face masks designed by the prakash laboratory and the duke's innovation co-lab, there are fully 3d printable designs from the veterans health administration and a maker mask group in seattle. each mask design relies on filter patches to be inserted into the mask. the maker mask is only meant for non-clinical settings where there are no fda-approved masks available ( figure 3g ). however, the stopgap mask from the veterans health administration was approved by the fda to protect clinical personnel from covid-19 ( figure 3h ). this approval was allowed as the mask had effective disposable filters, tightly fit around the nose and mouth, and was easy to disinfect.high-efficiency particulate air (hepa)-based air-conditioning filters are also a cause for concern. hepa filters are effective in filtering particles larger than 0.3 microns that cannot pass through the filter, as well as smaller particles that bounce off other particles and cling to the filter [59] . hepa filters would seem to be an adequate solution when an n95 respirator is unavailable, yet the dangers of using hepa filters for face masks is that glass fibers in masks could be inhaled and cause throat and facial irritation unless the air is filtered properly.with regard to homemade masks which the public has utilized for personal protection, hospitals are far less likely to utilize them in a hospital setting for any purpose other than for use by patients. this is due to their being constructed by a less effective material for blocking pathogens, and to them being made in non-medical-grade conditions that could cause contamination of the masks with microorganisms. medical-quality masks are three times more effective in blocking the transmission of microorganisms than homemade masks, and are thus not suitable for use by medical professionals in the care of sick patients.the new ppe and medical device designs that have emerged from the pandemic have not been through the extensive prototype testing that fda-approved devices have been able to pass. it has not been confirmed as to whether the new devices effectively treat or harm users. the cdc has issued an official statement that recommends healthcare professionals to only use homemade masks (e.g., bandanas, scarves) for the care of patients with covid-19 as a last resort, and focuses on maximizing current stores of ppe [60] .most regulations regarding the donation of ppe stem from the good samaritan drug and medical supply donation act [61] . this law puts into place the basis for donating medical supplies to hospitals and medical professionals. those who donate medical supplies must be able to describe the conditions under which the equipment was made, so as to ensure medical-grade quality. importantly, as long as the donator makes sure the medical group is aware of these conditions and does not withhold any information about them, the medical group and any patient may not be able to sue the donator for any injury or loss of life sustained while the donated equipment is being used.however, using ppe that fails to comply with the fda, niosh, and occupational safety and health administration (osha)-approved tools poses a threat to the health of healthcare and essential workers. to best filter aerosols and droplets, the fda requires masks to pass the astm f 1862 fluid resistance test, the astm f 1215-89 particle challenge study, astm f2101-01 bacterial filtration efficiency (bfe), mil-m369454c breathability, and cpsc cs-191-53 flammability [62] . the fda cautions about the dangers of using 3d-printed ppe, and specifically 3d-printed masks and respirators, because while the ppe may provide a physical barrier, it might not be able to safely provide fluid resistance, bacterial filtration, and breathability. moreover, 3d-printed ppe may not be face-fitting or function as properly as those manufactured by a medical company. open-source 3d models from the same stl file, in theory, produce the same device, but in reality, these 3d files can result in an unexpected variation in the product, due to differences in g-code variables when translated across different devices. likewise, different 3d printers have different thermoplastic filaments that vary in composition and properties. 3d-printed ppe can pose a possible threat if the filament is prone to retaining moisture in the environment, which can inadvertently transmit virus particles [63] . the role of face shields: covering the entire face is another highly sought-after ppe for healthcare professionals [64] . although face shields are not a fool-proof method of protection against viral particles, a short-term barrier is sustained against the exposure of respiratory droplets by 97% after five minutes, and 81% after thirty minutes [65] . within a week of covid-19 being classified as a pandemic, one of the biggest leaders in the 3d printing community, prusa printers, put out a face shield model that was verified by the ministry of health in the czech republic for use in clinical settings (figure 3i) [66]. prusa printers alone printed and assembled 55,000 face shields in three weeks [67] . this initial effort was the beginning of a wave of 3d printers that started printing face shields for their medical workers in the community, with over 250,000 downloads.researchers at the georgia institute of technology (georgia tech) and emory university worked together to design a diy shield frame that can be mass-produced using injection molding (figure 3j ). the georgia tech team produced up to 2000 rigid frames per day, 3000 rigid shields per day, and 3000 disposable shields per day for hospitals all around atlanta [68] . the designs were made available to others for worldwide manufacturing. additionally, the project manus team at the massachusetts institute of technology developed a single-sheet, disposable face-shield design that can be mass-produced using die-cutting ( figure 3k ) [69] . the project manus team produced 50,000 shields per day to be shipped out to hospitals where healthcare professionals can easily store and assemble the disposable face shields. teams at the university of cambridge and the university of queensland have also designed happyshield, which is a curved-crease origami face-shield for infection control [70] . happyshield can be easily assembled on-site and decontaminated for reuse over high numbers of shifts. these products from different teams have not yet been certified as a ppe.the good samaritans have taken yet another approach to provide solutions for the world's hospitals in their time of need. volunteers put together their sewing efforts to donate diy cloth face masks to hospitals, healthcare facilities, and nursing homes. the cdc has released an official guideline on how, when, and where cloth face masks should be used, as well as the instructions for the public on how to make cloth face masks. specifically, the cdc recommends the public to use tightly woven cotton for their homemade masks to slow the spread of the virus in public places.workplace shields for prevention: another population besides healthcare professionals at risk of contracting covid-19 and spreading the virus is essential workers. financial institutions, retail stores, supermarkets, manufacturing plants, and funeral homes are all essential businesses under stress due to constant social interaction, proximity to others, and extended exposure from the high number of shifts. safetell, a physical security solution provider, has designed the hygiene shield, which allows staff to continue communicating safely to minimize physical contact (figure 3l ). the clear glass wall can be easily disinfected and protects both consumers and employees from spreading the virus. hygiene shields can be used for essential businesses that require the transaction of items from consumer to employee, and vice versa.umdasch, a german company that creates special retail solutions, has developed various devices to support retailers in the pandemic. similar to safetell's hygiene shields, staff protection shields are acrylic glass shields that allow employees to communicate effectively while maintaining social distancing (figure 3l ) [71] .aviointeriors, an aircraft interior and passenger seat producer, designed the glassafe and the janus seat to remodel aircraft seating arrangements in response to covid-19 [72, 73] . glassafe is a transparent glass covering that can be installed on existing seats to isolate the passenger on the sides and back of the seat (figure 3l ). while the janus seat's material is similar to that of glassafe, the glassafe configuration allows passengers in the center to face backward, instead of all passengers facing the flight direction. this solution isolates all three passengers from each other, and at the same time, the rows in front and behind them and people who walk through the aisle are socially distanced.the hygiene station has a sensor-based disinfectant dispenser for contactless hand disinfectant, a disinfectant wipe dispenser for sanitizing baskets and trolleys, and an optional face mask dispenser.the hygiene station also has a customer enumeration strategy for access management by controlling numbers of customers in the store at a time to enhance social distancing measures (figure 3m ).gloves have long been used as a means to ensure the safety and wellbeing of healthcare workers who are at risk of being exposed to deadly pathogens. however, with the advent of the novel coronavirus, many have wondered whether or not the usage of gloves, in both medical and non-medical grades, can help prevent the spread of the virus. for medical purposes, the cdc recommends that all personnel directly involved in the care of patients with covid-19 wear medical-grade gloves at all times, and frequently change them to prevent the accidental spreading of the virus (figure 4a ). without proper protocol, gloves in a medical setting can carry microorganisms and will lead to increased rates of infection among both patients and medical professionals.for non-medical settings, the cdc does not recommend the usage of gloves for containing the spread of covid-19, unless caring for an infected family member where there is a risk of being exposed to bodily fluids. while the gloves themselves have been proven to be effective, many individuals without medical training are far less likely to frequently replace them, and thus risk contaminating others with dirty gloves. instead, the cdc recommends frequent use of hand sanitizer containing 60% or more alcohol, or frequent handwashing with soap and water for at least 30 s, to ensure any microorganisms are cleaned off [74] .for medical professionals using gloves as a ppe, only certain materials are approved by the fda for use as medical-standard materials for use in glove production (figure 4a ). for routine inspections that are not expected to bring a medical professional into contact with bodily fluids, latex and vinyl gloves are acceptable as a means for protection. however, for surgical settings or for situations where high exposure to covid-19 is anticipated, thicker nitrile gloves are recommended and are considered to be the best option as a form of ppe [75] .mechanical ventilators (mv) are mechanical breathing assistance devices that use mechanical pressure to pump air into and out of the lungs. these devices are used when patients are not able to breathe independently. during the covid-19 surge, the need for mv is exceeding capacity and mechanical engineering teams from the public and private sector have started to rapidly manufacture new devices.the general design for mv includes an adjustable air pump, a breathing monitor, and an exhalation valve. air administration may use either a face mask that covers the mouth, or an intubation tube that flows air directly into the lungs (figure 4(b1) ). pressure sensors and air volume sensors monitor breathing and time the air-pump cycle and breath volume. how long a patient uses the vent and weaning a patient off is determined by careful tests conducted by physicians [76] .as the demand for low-cost, compact, and sanitary ventilators are rising, teams of engineers from universities and the private sector are making new designs (figure 4(b2) ). a stanford team developed a $1500.00 device, which was donated to hospitals in peru [77] . mit developed a prototype based on a design from a mechanical engineering class in 2010 [78] . the team partnered with the new york city economic development corporation to supply 3000 devices to the new york city hospitals [79] . a georgia tech team, led by dr. shannon yee, partnered with the emory healthcare system to design a prototype [80] . their design is an adaptation of bag-valve-mask resuscitators, with manual tidal volume adjustment and dual patient usage. a team of both nasa and california institute of technology engineers developed a device named the ventilator intervention technology administered locally (vital) [81] . their device is capable of handling outdoor terrains, and has a device sterilization procedure to sterilize between patients. the device was developed in only 37 days. the low-cost devices are termed "bridge" ventilators or automatic resuscitators that are meant to be used before a critically ill patient is put on a "standard" ventilator ( figure 4(b3) ). fda approval processes of the nasa's vital ventilator and the mit's "bridge" ventilator were both expedited by the fda's eua. the fda employed the eua as of 24 march 2020 for ventilators to fast-track new approvals for designs that are not currently legally manufactured (figure 4(b4) ). the act states the fda will aid in the development and distribution of the newly approved devices. approval reduces the number of requirements for the device. the act only approves the ventilators for the duration of the covid-19 pandemic, while the eua is in effect. the fda's aid and the global need for ventilators have decreased the cost of manufacturing ventilators and increased the number of new designs. medtronic already had a compact, lightweight, and portable ventilator that is termed the puritan bennett 560. the company plans on introducing the device in the usa under the eua, and to ramp up production to 25,000 units by the end of the summer. medtronic, the mit team, and nasa are all licensing their blueprints for free or at a reduced cost to other manufacturers.the use of mechanical ventilators on high-risk patients over the age of 65 years is being put under scrutiny. based on a new report of 5700 patients hospitalized with covid-19, of the patients between 18-65 years old, 76.4% died on mechanical ventilation, and 19.8% of patients died who were not on mechanical ventilation. of the patients older than 65 years, 97.2% died on mechanical ventilation, and 26.6% died who were not on mechanical ventilation [82] . the discrepancy between patients who die on and off mechanical ventilation warrants further examination into the risk factors associated with using mechanical ventilation in different patient age-groups, disease stages, and disease severities.machine learning (ml) advances can be helpful in many aspects of the covid-19 pandemic, such as molecular, clinical, and societal utilization.protein structure prediction for covid-19 drug design: from a molecular perspective, ml models can be used to better understand the proteins that are involved in sars-cov-2 infection to help the search for potential targets for treatment. first, an alphafold [83] model was used to predict the protein 3d structure that was determined by amino acid sequences and their influence on the role and function of the protein of interest [84] (figure 5a ). biomedical data reconstructs the relationships between proteins and drugs that can predict potentially effective drug candidates [85] . therefore, at a molecular scale, ml has the potential to predict the structure of the protein, identify existing drugs for targeting these proteins, and enable covid-19 treatments.large-scale analysis of covid-19 ct scans: from a clinical perspective, ml can be used to detect covid-19 and predict patient outcomes. pathogenic laboratory testing is the standard for screening suspected cases, but this process is time-consuming, with significant false-negative results. therefore, alternative diagnostic methods that are both accurate and rapid to combat the disease using machine learning to support diagnosis from ct scans are needed. this is because of the virus exhibiting radiological signs and image patterns that can be observed in ct scans, but identifying these signs remain difficult and time-consuming, even for radiologists. therefore, because of the complexity of the imaging data, researchers developed a deep-learning-based model for automatic screening and diagnosis of covid-19 detection, based on ct chest scans [86] . the inputs are pre-processed ct pictures from which the model first extracts a region of interest (roi) before passing it on to a convolutional neural network that classifies each roi using ensemble methods. three-dimensional ct volumes can be used to detect covid-19 and its transmission patterns [87] . a deep-learning-based algorithm takes a lung-region 3d ct scan and segments it using a pre-trained u-net neural network. then, the segmented region is fed into a 3d deep neural network and predicts the infection rate. taking 3d space information for a weakly-supervised deep-learning model improved the prediction for infection (figure 5b ). the first step is a multiple sequence alignment that compares a protein's sequence with a similar one, suggesting a close location in the folded protein. the neural network learns to accurately predict the distance by training on precisely measured distances in proteins. in parallel, another neural network is trained to predict the angles of the joints in the folded protein chain. finally, gradient descent is used to find a physically possible folding of a protein; (b) a deep-learning framework on a ct scan. first, the lung region is extracted using a segmentation method. then, the corresponding image of the lung region is passed onto the deep-learning model that predicts the risk value based on the ct scan; (c) machine learning pipeline for patient risk forecasting; (d) pandemic forecasting using machine figure 5 . machine learning analysis of covid-19 dynamics. (a) protein unfolding prediction. the first step is a multiple sequence alignment that compares a protein's sequence with a similar one, suggesting a close location in the folded protein. the neural network learns to accurately predict the distance by training on precisely measured distances in proteins. in parallel, another neural network is trained to predict the angles of the joints in the folded protein chain. finally, gradient descent is used to find a physically possible folding of a protein; (b) a deep-learning framework on a ct scan. first, the lung region is extracted using a segmentation method. then, the corresponding image of the lung region is passed onto the deep-learning model that predicts the risk value based on the ct scan; (c) machine learning pipeline for patient risk forecasting; (d) pandemic forecasting using machine learning under various quarantine rules. the model predicted the infected case count of the us with quarantine control and the exponential increase of cases if there were no quarantine measures. it also shows predicted case counts under various quarantine measures, as implemented in wuhan, italy, and south korea. all of them led to a plateau of cases sooner than the us model; (e) covid scholar website for scientific article search. searching for the term "rapid test" gives all journal articles related to the term. this can be further filtered depending on the year, the type of document, whether they were peer-reviewed, and whether they are specific to pandemic predictions for hospitalizations: to prepare, plan, and optimize the health system during the pandemic, forecasting patient outcomes is critical. factors that make patients at risk for hospitalization should be identified to calculate the probability of developing acute respiratory distress and organ failure during clinic treatments. based on the dataset that includes blood samples and ct scans from patients, machine learning models can identify patients at high risk and who might develop respiratory distress in the future. using models such as gradient boosting or the support vector machine, key measurable and explainable features that influence those risks can be determined (figure 5c ).spatial-temporal dynamics of pandemics: from a societal perspective, ml can be used to predict the number of cases under various quarantine policies and cluster geographical regions to find similarities. understanding how the virus is transmitted, and its effect on different demographics and geographic regions is crucial for public policy healthcare interventions. the effect of quarantine control in the covid-19 spread can be accurately predicted using deep learning (figure 5d) . a data-driven deep-learning model was developed to interpret and extrapolate publicly available data that was computed with the first-principles epidemiological equations [88] . then, isolation measures in different countries and their effects on controlling the reproduction number of the virus were compared. by using this model, the spread of the virus to implement reasonable quarantine rules could be predicted. an autoencoder was created for real-time forecasting of new cases using the latent variable layers to extract the most important features for each geographical region. the autoencoder was fed into a k-means clustering algorithm to group similar regions for further analysis [89] .covid-19 literature management: finally, other machine learning tools developed can indirectly help researchers and the public fight the pandemic. covidscholar is a text-mining website aimed at synthesizing a huge amount of scientific literature on covid-19 using neuro-linguistic programming (nlp) to automate search. this is helpful because more than 200 new journal articles are being published every day on the coronavirus. a simple search for a "rapid test" in covidscholar provided organized and classified data that can greatly expedite covid-19 research (figure 5e ).covid-19 data collection: since the outbreak of covid-19, who and most countries around the world have been trying to overcome the disease over the past few months by extensive testing and simulations that predict the degree to which the world would be affected. this is achieved by the data collected by healthcare and government institutions around the world. the simulation models have multiple sources of data that come from the who, national health commission of the people's republic of china (nhc), the covid tracking project, european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc), and cdc. notable websites on pandemic data include 1point3acres, worldometers.info, and bno news. covid-19 is prone to community transmission, and is therefore harder to track and to control its spread. epidemic curves are often plotted in an attempt to understand the extent of infections and the implications of preventative measures. the cdc suggested that adhering to strict preventative measures would make it possible to flatten the epidemic curve, which is illustrated by a cartoon rendition (figure 6a) . the simulation models are implemented by taking the current level of threat that is posed to society into consideration, as well as the adverseness of the measures that need to be taken. the results of the models are usually analyzed by governing institutions, while implementing appropriate measures such that it minimizes economic and financial distress, as depicted in the flowchart (figure 6b ). to get accurate results from the simulation models, researchers need the appropriate information and resources to make their models work (figure 6c ). hospital resource predictions: the institute for disease modeling produced software called epidemiological modeling (emod) [90] , which is used extensively by epidemiologists and research groups to understand the effects of taking measures to eradicate the disease, or at least slow it down. utilizing mathematical basis and concepts, factors such as susceptibility to disease, cases which tested positive for covid-19, and cases that recovered from covid-19 are included. there are also assumptions made regarding the probability of a person catching covid-19 in a population, which is further divided into groups to understand the propagation of the disease. the depletion of healthcare resources, such as the number of beds available in the us, can be circumvented by taking appropriate social distance measures. simulation models predict the availability of the number of icu beds, regular hospital beds, and equipment that are required, such as ventilators (figure 6d) .social pattern analysis: several of the other common models deal with scenarios of the entirety of the population at the outset (single group model), such as social hierarchy, division of the existing population into subpopulations (composite group model), characteristics and traits of individuals (individual models), and so on. for covid-19 models, a model that capitalizes on individual traits and behaviors can be accurately simulated. to construct the model, a set number of rubrics about the behavior of individuals are considered. for example, the set of actions and time of execution of actions for each individual would be rigid. given the prior movements of the individual, it should be possible to fully predict the individual's whereabouts. of course, except in cases such as the "diamond princess", this would hardly be an accurate assumption, as it does not reflect the reality of the situation. if the models need to consider extensive individualistic behavior, to make them as accurate as possible, there is a need to acquire a huge amount of data. the active number of cases is predicted to decrease steadily until mid-june (figure 6e ). the "diamond princess" ship is an interesting case study, as it was in controlled settings and optimal for parameter control. this case study helps in the analysis of how prevention of the covid-19 infection could have been brought about by implementing control measures. based on the environment that exists on the "diamond princess" cruise ship, a disease transmission model based on crowd flow control would be feasible for simulation purposes.there are several simplified online simulators available to the general public to experiment with and gain an understanding of the importance of social distancing to minimize the damage caused. the washington post also simulated a covid-19 model based on a billiard ball model that conceptualizes many spherical structures that locomote within a bounded rectangular region, of which a rendition is displayed (figure 6f ) [91] . this model is simplistic and is mainly used to spread awareness of the disease. agent-based models can be used for the analysis of bias-variance trade-offs, probabilistic graphical models, differential equations, and game theory [92] . apart from simulations, multiple websites, such as the covid-19 visualizer, used to update people on the number of cases worldwide in real-time were developed (figure 6g ). the cdc website helps visualize multiple statistics and graphs for the pandemic's dynamics (figure 6h) . a website interface that is hosted by johns hopkins university provides various visualizations of the spread of covid-19 (figure 6i ). more complex models include interactive python scripts to quantify the degree of social distancing, geographic areas, and ease of movement, such as a covid-19 epidemic simulator (figure 6j) .computational resources for covid-19 simulations: another set of simulations in the fight against covid-19 involves running calculations in epidemiology, bioinformatics, and molecular modeling to study the virus' spread and its dynamics. high-performance computing and distributed computing are a few approaches that have been demonstrated to run experiments that would take months or years to complete on a traditional computing platform at a faster pace. the covid-19 high-performance computing (hpc) consortium combines the computing capabilities of advanced and powerful computers to allow researchers to run projects related to the disease which require high computing power [93] . this consortium includes a range of computers from small clusters to supercomputers from the u.s. department of energy national laboratories, companies like ibm, google cloud and amazon web services, federal agencies such as nasa and national science foundation (nsf), and various academic institutions, such as the massachusetts institute of technology and the university of texas at austin. currently, there are 36 active projects on topics such as social modeling and forecasting based on epidemiology models, understanding the structure of the virus at the molecular level, analyzing the viral rna, studying the dna of the patients infected, and suchlike. as an example of the potential of this approach, using the world's most powerful supercomputer summit built by ibm, researchers were able to simulate more than 8000 small-molecule medications and natural product compounds within days and identified 77 compounds that had the potential to bind to the virus' spike protein [94] . another project that uses hpc is covid moonshot, by postera, a start-up company linked to cambridge university. this project is a crowdsourcing initiative that accepts submissions of designs of potential drugs from chemists and uses machine learning to screen them and select the most promising candidates for synthesis and testing [95] .folding@home is a distributed computing project based at washington university in the st. louis school of medicine [96] . it focuses on disease research, connecting the unused processing power of laptops and desktop computers around the world to create a virtual supercomputer. this project aims to understand how the spike protein in sars-cov-2 works and how therapeutics can be designed to stop it from infecting host cells, using computer simulations to understand the protein's folding process, considering the structures obtained from experiments as the starting point. these simulations yield the structures that are otherwise hidden and identify potential sites to act as drug targets. such a simulation has shown to be useful in the case of the ebola virus, uncovering a previously unknown structure of the viral protein with a druggable site [97] . rosetta@home is another such distributed computing project, run by the baker laboratory at the university of washington, to predict the three-dimensional shapes of the viral proteins in their final folded state [98] . unlike folding@home which models the nature of protein folding, rosetta studies only the final protein structure. these projects can help access the structure and function of the proteins in the fight against the virus.social contract tracing: in the past few months, many countries have gone under lockdown to slow down the transmission of the virus. however, since lockdown disrupts productivity and affects the livelihood of the people, an approach called contact tracing has been implemented in many places to contain the disease while allowing people to live a new normal [99] . contact tracing is a way of identifying potentially infected people by studying people's social interactions [100] . it helps to notify healthcare workers of potential cases and the people of their risk of infection. the government can use this information to recognize infection hotspots and come up with strategies. this process is an important step that has been used in the past to slow down epidemics such as ebola and hiv. while manual contact tracing is tedious and unreliable, an automated digital approach using smartphone apps, device tracking data, and surveys may be a better solution [101] . a general approach to smartphone app-based contact tracing is illustrated in figure 7a . apart from apps, a global positioning system (gps) and quick response code (qr-code)-based wristbands and bracelets are also used for tracking and enforcing quarantine so that authorities are alerted if a patient leaves their designated area.smartphone-based covid monitoring: there are many smartphone applications developed and deployed around the world, with a few of them being supported by the official government in countries like china, singapore, and india. different approaches have been taken by different countries; for example, many countries require citizens to enter their personal information and allow location tracking, while others use law enforcement monitoring authorities to automatically track the movement of citizens. most covid-19 contact tracing applications use bluetooth to locate phones nearby that use the same application (figure 7b ). the apps then keep a record of the bluetooth signals individuals encounter in distinct locations. these bluetooth signals can contain information about the distance between people and the number of times where individuals were close to each other. when a person tests positive, the result is uploaded to the app which then notifies other people who may have been exposed to the virus, based on how close individuals were to the person. general smartphone app-based contact tracing-the social encounters (distance less than 6 feet) of all the users are recorded by the app, using methods such as gps information, qr code-tracking, and bluetooth communication. an asymptomatic patient could infect others in their family, commute, or workplace. the patient takes the covid-19 test (using the app) when individuals show signs of symptoms, such as fever. when the patient tests positive, instant notifications are sent to individuals who could be infected by the virus. individuals are asked to take the covid-19 test and self-isolate themselves for 14 days. the places where the patient went before testing positive are also thoroughly disinfected to prevent the spread of the disease; (b) bluetooth-based contact tracing, as proposed by the mit lincoln laboratory, does not require personal information or location to be shared. the app keeps a record of bluetooth signals it has encountered, along with information about the distance between the devices and duration for which other individuals were nearby. when a user tests positive, the app sends the contact record to the database of anonymized contacts, which then sends figure 7 . digital monitoring tools of covid-19 spread by online and cellphone applications. (a) general smartphone app-based contact tracing-the social encounters (distance less than 6 feet) of all the users are recorded by the app, using methods such as gps information, qr code-tracking, and bluetooth communication. an asymptomatic patient could infect others in their family, commute, or workplace. the patient takes the covid-19 test (using the app) when individuals show signs of symptoms, such as fever. when the patient tests positive, instant notifications are sent to individuals who could be infected by the virus. individuals are asked to take the covid-19 test and self-isolate themselves for 14 days. the places where the patient went before testing positive are also thoroughly disinfected to prevent the spread of the disease; (b) bluetooth-based contact tracing, as proposed by the mit lincoln laboratory, does not require personal information or location to be shared. the app keeps a record of bluetooth signals it has encountered, along with information about the distance between the devices and duration for which other individuals were nearby. when a user tests positive, the app sends the contact record to the database of anonymized contacts, which then sends exposure notifications to the users who might have been in close contact with the patient. this app works in a privacy-sensitive manner, without revealing user information to other individuals and health authorities; (c) examples of apps that use surveys to track the symptoms of users to monitor the prevalence of the disease and identify potential hotspots: screenshots from a generic symptom tracking app to show sample survey questions, covid symptom study (by massachusetts general hospital, the harvard t.h. chan school of public health, king's college london and stanford university school of medicine, working with zoe-a health science company) and the healthy together (by state of utah, usa); (d) examples of contact tracing apps: screenshots from a generic contact tracing app to show user interface and official government-developed apps-tracetogether (singapore) and covidsafe (australia). these apps use bluetooth-based contact tracing and provide region-specific healthcare guidelines and information.apart from contact tracing and alerting, several of these apps also help in tracking symptoms, self-diagnosis, and providing healthcare information to the users [102] [103] [104] [105] [106] . apps like the covid symptom study [107] and howwefeel [108] (figure 7c) [109] . these surveys collect details such as demographic background, zip code, health conditions, daily symptoms, possible exposure to others with covid-19, and social distancing behavior. this data can help health agencies to predict virus hotspots and respond better to the pandemic.one of the key concerns regarding using a smartphone app for contact tracing is the issue of privacy [110] . individuals are reluctant to share their private information with other individuals, public health professionals, the government, or cell service providers. this issue has been considered and there are a few privacy-sensitive apps, such as tracetogether [111] , an app used in singapore, and covidsafe [112] , an app developed by the university of washington and microsoft, which uses bluetooth communications between devices to track contact (figure 7d ). similar efforts have been led by researchers at mit, who came up with a smartphone-assisted contact tracing system, called private automated contact tracing (pact) [113] , which identifies people who are at risk of covid-19 infection in an anonymous and location-independent manner by using bluetooth communication between cell phones in proximity. while the technology has been tested at the laboratory, large-scale use has yet to be implemented. a major initiative in this area is the google and apple contact tracing project which combines bluetooth low energy technology with privacy-preserving cryptography to create an exposure notification system. being a collaborative effort between google and apple, the exposure notification application programming interface (api) works across both android and ios devices. using the api, app developers working on behalf of public health authorities can build applications for smartphones according to their specifications. in the future, there will be an integration of this system with google's android and apple's ios operating systems to rely less on apps.online search method for covid-19 tracking: another method of digitally monitoring the spread of the disease involves studying online search behavior [114] . a study by researchers from university college london, in collaboration with public health england, microsoft research, and harvard medical school, uses machine learning to track covid-19 by using keywords from google search queries and covid-19-related news coverage daily. google search data is collected from the google health trends api. it includes queries about covid-19-related symptoms, as identified by the nhs ff100 survey, and other coronavirus-related terms. their current model uses online search frequency time-series to predict the prevalence of covid-19 in a few countries, including the united kingdom, the united states of america (usa), australia, canada, and italy. this research can help identify potential positive cases who are otherwise not tested and help understand the true extent of community spread.as of now, vaccines are under development to prevent covid-19 in healthy individuals. a vaccine has an integral role in protecting society and removing current social distancing protocols. currently, multiple pharmaceutical companies and university labs are working on the creation of the vaccine in collaboration or independently. these partnerships are utilizing existing vaccine technologies that include inactivated viruses, virus-like particles, protein nanoparticles in matrix-m, non-replicating or replicating viral vectors, rna-or dna-based vaccines, and protein subunits. along with researching the platform for the vaccines, different routes of administration are useful in the development of these vaccines. with the four phases of clinical trials necessary for fda approval, covid-19 vaccines are projected to be available to the public in 12-18 months [115] . tracked by the regulatory focus professionals society, a few of the most promising vaccines under clinical trials are an mrna vaccine and a non-replicating viral vector vaccine [116] .the university of oxford is using a non-replicating viral vector from chimpanzees' adenovirus to target the s glycoprotein, which is under a phase i clinical trial [117] . the vaccine contains the weakened version of the adenovirus with the genetic material of the sars-cov-2 spike protein. this spike protein acts as a protection for the immune system if covid-19 infects the body. the university of oxford and astrazeneca have also paired together for the global development of this vaccine following the clinical trials [118] . current estimates dictate that if human trials are successful, then this vaccine may be publicly available by september [119] . vaccine development is typically a long and expensive process, with high attrition and stringent involvement of the fda. however, in the case of a pandemic, many steps, such as clinical development and manufacturing development are done parallelly to speed up the development process. previous tried-and-true methods must be utilized in vaccine development to allow for sufficient manufacturing [120] .to further aid in terminating this pandemic, a global testing strategy is needed such that a significant portion of the population gets screened for the disease. doing so ensures that we have a better understanding of the disease progression and can further help in allocating medical staff and resources in different hospitals, cities, and countries. currently, there are more than 20 different test kits for covid-19, each with a different rate of producing false positives and/or false negatives [121] . furthermore, countries have varying guidelines for reporting infected cases. these factors increase the variability in the reported data and are uninformative about the disease progression, which negatively affects several nations' ability to adequately prepare for this pandemic as it develops quickly worldwide. therefore, countries need to have detailed testing guidelines and report their testing results regularly and openly.molecular testing checks for the presence of sars-cov-2 genetic material from respiratory specimens, either through swapping nostrils or sampling saliva. in addition to this, covid-19 diagnostics involves serological testing for the presence of antibodies against sars-cov-2, and it can be done through a blood sample from a simple finger prick. although serological tests are typically faster than molecular testing, a higher rate of producing false negatives is obtained because the human body starts producing antibodies against the virus a few days to a week after the infection. what further increases the complexity of the problem is the fact that the fda has approved over 40 serological tests from different manufacturers, each with different precision and accuracy measures [122] .several countries are considering giving an immunity passport via antibody test results in place of a vaccination certificate to identify which individuals are ready to go back into society. an immunity passport would allow individuals to return to their workplaces and schools, as well as other aspects of daily activities; it could act as the first step in society returning to its status quo. there is a gap in understanding the time frame for which igg antibodies last, as well as the number of antibodies needed to prevent infection, which would be critical to assigning citizens the immunity passport. antibody tests still need to have acceptable specificities and sensitivities, as well as optimize false negatives and positives. if an individual is false-positive and gets an immunity passport, then the individual could unknowingly infect others. these passports cannot be given based on self-reporting of covid-19 either just because a couple of individuals did not get tested. with these current gaps in knowledge, the antibody test field needs to be researched further before an immunity passport becomes an adopted policy.another topic to consider is which careers and places would need this immunity passport. places of large public gatherings such as restaurants, clubs, and public transportation systems would have to check for it. healthcare professionals, restaurant staff, and other jobs involving human contact would require this immunity passport. an issue that arises with the assignment of an immunity passport is that it excludes several workers and is liable to corruption, as well as social inequities. particular people would have better access to these antibody tests and be able to prioritize their applications ahead of others. additionally, many legal issues ensue in terms of whether the lack of immunity counts as disability and anti-discrimination laws. vaccine certificates incentivize people to get vaccines, a beneficial act for the individual and society. on the other hand, these immunity passports seem to incentivize covid-19 infection, which is detrimental to society. countries that suggest using immunity passports should consider the societal consequences of this decision [123] .a robust healthcare workforce is essential in responding to this pandemic. while unemployment is quickly rising in other industries with many businesses shutting down, more healthcare workers are still needed to deal with the sudden influx of patients. many primary care doctors are working remotely via telemedicine and can address any patient's concerns without risking the patient's exposure to covid-19. previously, many physicians and patients resisted this concept of virtual healthcare since in-person consultations are vital to both parties. however, this virtual healthcare system allows physicians to see up to 100 patients per day and allows patients to avoid the long waiting-room time [124] .not all patients can be evaluated by telemedicine. with the rise of covid-19 cases, there is a need for healthcare professionals in hospitals and clinics to provide services in environments with high viral exposure, coupled with a lack of ppe. most countries have a shortage of medical equipment, such as ventilators, as well as ppe, like face masks, sanitizers, and gloves. this shortage can be attributed to a lack of planning from the healthcare sector in the case of a pandemic [124] . however, many private companies are now supporting the government to expiate this. even though the private healthcare sector is fully prepared for every eventuality, unlike other sectors, the sector is facing two major challenges:investing additional manpower, equipment, consumables, and other resources to ensure 100% preparedness for safety in the hospitals and eventual treatment of patients.experiencing a sharp drop in the outdoor patient department (opd) patients, elective surgeries, and international patients.the industry is also likely to benefit from increased awareness about healthcare. there should be increased recruitment of medical professionals, and front-line health workers should be prioritized in receiving vaccines and diagnostic tests, as well as the families of these workers, due to the high risk of transmission. start-ups that aim to develop health-related products will receive more attention from investors, creating a series of biotechnology ventures that are inspired by the covid-19 experience.as people have grown to realize the importance of healthcare, more students are drawn to health-related education. in such a critical time, one of the only industries that have shown no signs of slowing down is the healthcare sector, making proper healthcare the only way to make it to the other side of this pandemic. with this field having the greatest demand in such a situation, many students will be attracted to healthcare fields.to expedite the much-needed process of clinical trials for covid-19 treatments, as mentioned previously, national institute of health (nih) has collaborated with 16 companies, including abbvie, amgen, astrazeneca, bristol myers squibb, evotec, glaxosmithkline, johnson & johnson, ksq therapeutics, eli lilly, merck, novartis, pfizer, roche, sanofi, takeda, and vir biotechnology. while big pharmaceutical companies usually work independently, these industries are now collaborating with different companies and laboratories in the fight against covid-19. such nih industry partnership allows for standardized testing protocols and gives researchers access to better facilities for diagnoses, treatment, and vaccine testing [125] . these industrial partners have promising potential results of their respective research in the fields of diagnostics, prevention, and treatment, as highlighted in table 1 . working on molecular (m2000 and id now) and antibody tests [126] abbvie treatment adopting its antiretroviral therapy of hiv (lopinavir/ritonavir) for covid-19 [127] amgen and adaptive biotechnologies diagnostics and treatment researching neutralizing antibodies to prevent and treat covid-19 [128] astrazeneca diagnostics, prevention, and treatmentcollaborating with different university labs to manufacture covid-19 diagnostics, treatment, and vaccines [129] biontech and pfizer prevention collaborating on a covid-19 vaccine [130] bristol myers squibb treatmentcollaborating with the community to accelerate therapies via potential molecule screening and testing current medications [131] eli lilly treatmentadopting its rheumatoid arthritis therapy (baricitinib) and other antibody therapies for covid-19 [132] evotec diagnostics and treatment collaborating with the community to accelerate therapies via potential antibody screening [133] gilead treatment adopting its antiviral therapy (remdesivir) for covid-19 [134] glaxosmithkline and sanofi (gsk) preventioncollaborating on a covid-19 vaccine using gsk's pandemic adjuvant technology and sanofi's s-protein covid-19 antigen [135] johnson & johnson and janssen prevention collaborating on a covid-19 vaccine using janssen's advac ® and per.c6 ® technology [136] ksq therapeutics treatment using its crispromics ® to discover targets for the current covid-19 treatments [137] merck prevention and treatmentresearching the molecular mechanism of covid-19 to identify potential vaccine and medicine targets for covid-19 [138] moderna prevention collaborating on a covid-19 vaccine using mrna technology [139] novartis prevention adopting its autoimmune disease therapy (canakinumab) for covid-19 [140] roche diagnostics and treatment researching covid-19 antibody tests [141] takeda, csl behring, biotest, bpl, lfb, and octapharma treatment adopting hyperimmune globulin for covid-19 treatment [142] vir biotechnology diagnostics and treatment researching neutralizing antibodies to prevent and treat covid-19 [143] in this paper, the biological background of coronaviruses was provided, with a specific focus on the newly emerging virus sar-cov-2 and the ongoing pandemic covid-19. the disease's symptoms, methods of transmission, and the currently available medical supportive care were discussed. the control measures for a pandemic were highlighted to incorporate herd immunity, shield immunity, drug repurposing, and vaccine development. the various tools of protection were demonstrated, along with their proper use. a unique perspective was provided to utilize diy fabrication methods to make face masks, face shields, and ventilators that provide adequate cost-effective protection against the disease. a multidisciplinary approach was presented to integrate machine learning applications, statistical simulations, and digital monitoring in combating covid-19, tracking its spread, and predicting its trajectory. the role of public regulations in controlling the disease infection rate was shown, with specific emphasis on standardizing the criteria to report new covid-19 patients, developing novel vaccines, and running nation-wide immunity tests. finally, this review emphasized the need for preparedness for the management of the covid-19 pandemic and beyond.funding: a.f.c. holds a career award at the scientific interface from burroughs wellcome fund. a.f.c. was supported by start-up funds from the georgia institute of technology and emory university.anticipated in supplies of personal protective equipment, including n95 respirators, surgical masks, gowns, gloves, face shields, and goggles. furthermore, given the uncertainties on how this disease is transmitted, health care workers, including obstetricians, are understandably confused and anxious about how covid-19 is spread and how to best protect themselves as health care workers, which ultimately protects the patients they serve. the goal of this article is to review what is known about personal protective equipment in the context of transmission of covid-19, recognizing that this is a rapidly evolving topic.coronavirus 2019 is caused by a novel coronavirus called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), because its genetic sequence is approximately 80% similar to the virus that caused severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), which is now called sars-cov-1. this virus was first recognized in china in december of 2019 and has rapidly spread throughout the world. the most common manifestations include fever, cough, myalgia, extreme fatigue, and shortness of breath, with less commonly reported symptoms including sore throat, headache, anosmia, dysgeusia, diarrhea, and nausea. data from china suggest that 81% of patients with confirmed cases have illness that is mild (not requiring hospitalization), 14% have severe illness (generally characterized by pneumonia and typically requiring hospitalization), and 5% have critical illness often requiring care in an intensive care unit. persons at highest risk are those older than 65 years of age and those with underlying health conditions (eg, cardiovascular conditions, diabetes, hypertension, chronic respiratory disease). 1, 2 although estimates of case fatality rates have varied widely, a recent study using individual case data from china estimated both the case fatality rate, which is the proportion of clinically recognized cases that will eventually lead to death, and the infection fatality rate, which is the proportion of all infections that will eventually lead to death, as 1.38% and 0.66%, respectively. 3 the true case fatality rate and the infection fatality rate will not be known until serosurveys allow for a more precise measurement of those with undiagnosed infections and may vary from region to region based on availability of health care resources. the covid-19 pandemic is evolving rapidly; although there is a great deal we do not know, we continue to learn more daily.as with other issues related to covid-19, much remains to be learned about sars-cov-2 transmission. based on available data, evidence supports that transmission is similar to that of influenza, sars, and middle east respiratory syndrome-primarily personto-person through respiratory droplets that are produced when a person coughs, sneezes, or talks among close contacts. large droplets typically do not travel more than 6 feet; thus, close contact is defined as less than 6 feet from a person with covid-19 infection. droplets that land in the mouths, noses, or eyes or possibly are inhaled into the lungs of people in close contact can cause infection. however, under some circumstances, droplets may travel more than 6 feet, depending on various factors such as expiratory effort, viscosity of the respiratory secretions, and air currents in the area. 4 furthermore, recent work has suggested that exhalations, sneezes, and coughs may create turbulent gas clouds that may be able to travel longer distances. 5 infection may also occur when a person touches a surface contaminated with the infectious secretions and respiratory droplets from a person with infection. 6 although sars-cov-2 has been detected in stool by polymerase chain reaction testing, it remains unknown whether infectious virus may be shed in stool or whether stool may play a role in the transmission of sars-cov-2. 7 the contribution of infectious aerosols (small respirable particles) to the transmission of covid-19 is currently unknown. some of this uncertainty about the role of airborne transmission of sars-cov-2 parallels the uncertainty regarding influenza transmission. although airborne transmission of influenza can be demonstrated in experimental models and selected circumstances, such as airplanes with disabled ventilation systems, 8 the contribution of airborne spread to influenza transmission is thought to be small. furthermore, the relevance of experimental models to viral transmission in clinical settings is unclear. in an artificial experiment that generated sars-cov-2 aerosols in a laboratory setting without hospital-level ventilation systems, virus remained viable in aerosols for as long as 3 hours. 9 however, in an analysis of air samples near a patient with a high viral load of sars-cov-2, virus was not identified in eight air samples after a patient was instructed to breath normally, breathe deeply, speak, and cough continuously; these specimens were collected at a distance of 10 cm from the patient's chin, with or without wearing a surgical mask. 10 during certain medical procedures involving the respiratory tract, such as noninvasive ventilation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and endotracheal intubation, respiratory aerosols can be generated. 11, 12 however, other studies have questioned whether significant aerosols are generated from some of these procedures. 13 although most covid-19 infections are related to exposure to persons with symptomatic disease, two reports of viral shedding and likely transmission by presymptomatic (period before developing overt covid-19 infection) or asymptomatic persons raise concern that, in areas with active covid-19 transmission, all patients should be considered as potential sources. one report describes seven clusters of transmission in singapore where transmission likely occurred before source patients became symptomatic. this asymptomatic transmission accounted for 6.4% of known covid-19 transmission locally. 14 in another report from an outbreak in a skilled nursing facility in the united states, about half of residents with detectable virus were asymptomatic or presymptomatic at the time of sampling; viral levels measured by polymerase chain reaction cycle time were similar for those with and without symptoms. 15 although these findings may not be generalizable to the obstetric population, they demonstrate the potential for unrecognized viral shedding in areas of high disease prevalence. among 215 women admitted for delivery at two hospitals in new york city, 29 of the 33 (88%) who tested positive for sars-cov-2 were asymptomatic at presentation (sutton d, fuchs k, d'alton m, goffman d. universal screening for sars-cov-2 in women admitted for delivery [letter] . new engl j med 2020 apr 13 [epub ahead of print].)although the use of personal protective equipment is a critical strategy to protect health care workers, other strategies also need to be implemented. case finding is one such strategy and a pillar to preventing exposure in health care settings. before entering an ambulatory care setting, pregnant patients need to be screened for possible symptoms of covid-19 or exposures to patients with known or suspected covid-19. this can be done by telephone when outpatient appointments are scheduled. patients with symptoms or significant exposures should be assessed to determine whether an in-person appointment is necessary or whether the patient can be seen through telemedicine and managed at home. 16 if an outpatient appointment is necessary, a facemask should be placed on any patient with respiratory symptoms immediately on presentation (known as source control), and she should be quickly isolated in an examination room with the door closed. if the prevalence of covid-19 in the community is high, placing a mask on all patients should be considered to minimize potential transmission from presymptomatic or asymptomatic patients with covid-19 infection who could be shedding virus. triage areas should be separate, well-ventilated areas, and barriers should ensure that patients are separated (eg, plexiglass barriers) from staff during the screening process. patients in triage areas should sit at least 6 feet apart, which commonly requires rearranging the seating. ample hand hygiene dispensers should be placed in triage areas, waiting rooms, and patient care areas. the number of personnel entering the room of a patient with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection should be minimized. this may be accomplished by having physicians perform some aspects of patient care that may normally be performed by nursing staff (eg, vital signs). some tasks, such as visits with dieticians, can be virtual. hand hygiene is critically important for preventing nosocomial transmission of covid-19, particularly with the demonstration of persistence of virus on surfaces from several hours up to 3 days depending on the surface material. 10 furthermore, frequent cleaning of surfaces and rooms should be undertaken, with high-touch areas such as door knobs, faucets, and chair arms being wiped with an appropriate disinfectant between patients.use of personal protective equipment is a fundamental strategy for protection of health care workers. 18 an n95 respirator is a personal protective device that covers the nose and mouth, fits tightly, and reduces the wearer's risk of inhaling airborne particles. these respirators are designed to prevent the wearer from diseases known or suspected to be transmitted by airborne droplet nuclei, including measles, varicella, and mycobacterium tuberculosis. unlike respiratory viruses that are primarily spread by droplets, these specific microorganisms can be widely dispersed by air currents and may be inhaled by a person in the same room or over a long distance from the patient, depending on factors such as temperature and ventilation. 19 for settings in which airborne transmission is the primary transmission mechanism, there are three respirator options. an n95 respirator filters out at least 95% of airborne particles sized 0.3 micrometers in diameter, although, in practice up to 10% of n95 respirator users exposed to aerosolized influenza had breakthrough leakage. 20 another type of respirator is a powered air-purifying respirator, which uses highefficiency particulate air filters. these respirators are reusable and must be cleaned and disinfected after each use. filters should be replaced according the manufacturer's recommendations. the national institute for occupational safety and health has cautioned against use of powered air-purifying respirators in the operating room because of concerns that unfiltered exhaled air may contaminate the sterile field and the absence of scientific evidence to support use. however, a preliminary experimental study using two types of powered air-purifying respirators found no contamination of the surgical field. although these findings are reassuring, further study is needed. 21 cartridge air purifying respirators are another option; depending on the filter cartridge chosen, they can provide a similar level of respiratory protection to that provided by an n95 respirator and can be reused. these respirators generally have not been designed for use in the health care settings; communication with patients may be difficult during use, and there are no manufacturer instructions for decontamination.a facemask is a standard fda-cleared medical mask that may or may not have a plastic face shield attached; these are the standard masks used on labor and delivery units. surgical masks prevent transmission of viruses transmitted by large droplets, a common method for prevention of transmission of respiratory viral illnesses. 19 importantly, whether a medical mask or respirator, the operator must wear facial protection correctly and use eye protection to assure that all mucous membranes are covered.when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection, cdc guidance states that facemasks are an acceptable alternative to n95 masks when the supply of n95 masks is insufficient, except when aerosol-generating procedures are performed. 17 although the cdc guidance implies that n95 masks are superior to facemasks, there are some recent, reassuring data about the effectiveness of facemasks in illnesses transmitted by respiratory droplets.previous studies have provided mixed results, and the majority of studies assessing respiratory protection against viruses have focused on influenza. a noninferiority randomized trial of 446 nurses concluded that surgical masks compared with n95 masks resulted in noninferior rates of laboratory-confirmed influenza. however, this study was halted prematurely owing to the onset of the 2009 h1n1 pandemic and changes in the health system's recommended personal protective equipment use. 22 by contrast, the authors of two other randomized trials, 23, 24 as well as a pooled analysis of the two studies, 25 concluded that n95 masks may be more effective than surgical masks. although the n95 group had lower rates of clinical respiratory illness, influenza-like illness, laboratory-confirmed respiratory infection, and laboratory-confirmed influenza compared with the surgical mask group, these differences were not statistically significant in the intent-to-treat analysis. 25 a recent 4-year cluster randomized trial compared the effect of n95 respirators with that of facemasks among 2,862 health care personnel. the study found no significant difference in the incidence of laboratory-confirmed influenza for those wearing n95 respirators compared with those wearing face masks. 26 a recent cochrane systematic review found that n95 respirators were not significantly different than surgical masks in preventing respiratory virus acquisition but were more expensive, uncomfortable, and irritating to skin. 18 using polymerase chain reaction testing, a recent case report found no transmission of sars-cov-2 to 41 health care workers who had more than 10 minutes of exposure at less than 2 m from a patient undergoing multiple aerosolizing procedures; 85% of these health care workers wore surgical masks. 27 although this report is reassuring, it is limited by being an isolated case report.there has been a great deal of discussion and debate in obstetric circles about what does and does not constitute an aerosolizing procedure. because the cdc guidance states that n95 masks are important when aerosol-generating procedures are performed, 17 it is important to be able to identify procedures on the labor and delivery unit that have a high likelihood of producing aerosols. intubation for general anesthesia has been shown to produce aerosols and may increase the risk of transmission to the person performing the intubation. by contrast, cesarean deliveries under © 2020 by the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists. published by wolters kluwer health, inc.unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.neuraxial anesthesia (ie, spinal or epidural) are unlikely to produce aerosols. there has been speculation that the labored breathing and expulsive efforts of pushing in the second stage of labor may generate aerosols. although the risks of aerosolization during vaginal delivery have not been studied, most aerosolizing procedures that have been identified as high risk (eg, intubation, bronchoscopy) involve direct manipulation of the respiratory tract. 11, 12 however, of the role of turbulent gas clouds in covid-19 transmission is not known. 5 given the limitations of the current evidence, it is not possible to definitely state whether or not aerosols are generated during the second stage of labor. however, given what we know to date, it is highly likely that the primary method of transmission of covid-19 is through respiratory droplets. all women with covid-19 infection should wear a facemask during their entire hospitalization, including during the second stage of labor (source control) when possible.currently, there are challenges with adequate supplies of personal protective equipment, with some hospitals having shortages of certain types of personal protective equipment and some reporting overall shortages. problems with the personal protective equipment supply chain in the united states have been described during previous public health emergencies. for example, during the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic, the commercial supply could not keep up with the demand for n95 masks and facemasks. to address shortages, supplies from the u.s. strategic national stockpile were released. since that time, the strategic national stockpile has not been replenished to the pre-h1n1 level, and the personal protective equipment supply chain has not substantially improved, 28 resulting in shortages during the current covid-19 pandemic. thus, extended use and limited reuse have been recommended by the cdc as strategies to conserve personal protective equipment. extended use refers to wearing the same n95 mask for repeated contact with several patients. limited reuse involves using the same n95 mask for contact with several patients but removing ("doffing") it between patient encounters. 29 for pathogens such as tuberculosis, in which transmission from fomites is not a concern, n95 mask reuse has been widely practiced. with covid-19, the primary infection risk from reuse is self-inoculation if the surface of the n95 mask becomes contaminated. in a study of 10 nurses during two 12-hour shifts, nurses touched their faces or the n95 mask more than 20 times per 12-hour shift. 30 therefore, if extended use or reuse of n95 masks is practiced, it is critical that health care professionals practice correct donning and doffing, practice good hand hygiene, and avoid touching the n95 mask or their faces during use. although it is unknown whether sars-cov-2 may contaminate the filtering material of respirators, influenza virus was able to be recovered from n95 respirators experimentally exposed to aerosols containing influenza. 31 given the possibility of exhausting the supply of n95 respirators during the covid-19 pandemic, many health care organizations have resorted to reuse of n95 masks beyond the cdc's limited recommendation, with continued use of respirators until they become soiled or lose integrity. novel cleaning regimens, including the use of uv light, vaporized hydrogen peroxide, or other methods, have been suggested. [32] [33] [34] [35] with current mask shortages, members of the public have been offering to sew cloth masks. a clusterrandomized trial of medical and cloth masks found a significantly higher rate of influenza-like illness among health care workers in the cloth mask arm compared with the medical mask arm. 36 in addition, cloth masks have limited ability to protect the wearer against the penetration of fluids through the mask after a splash. therefore, hospital systems should be cautious about using cloth masks for direct patient care activity with patients under investigation for or with confirmed covid-19 infection. cloth masks are likely effective in capturing large droplets and keeping the wearer from being a source of transmission. owing to evidence that people with covid-19 infection who do not have symptoms can transmit the virus to others, 37 the cdc has recently recommended wearing cloth masks in public, particularly in settings in which maintaining social distancing is difficult. therefore, cloth masks may be useful for decreasing community transmission. 38 conclusion obstetricians on busy labor and delivery units want to know how to best protect themselves from covid-19. unfortunately, during this current covid-19 pandemic, there has been widespread concern and confusion about personal protective equipment, particularly about types and use of masks. although much of the focus is on facial protection, data from the sars outbreak suggest that it is the "bundle" of © 2020 by the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists. published by wolters kluwer health, inc.unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.personal protective equipment with hand hygiene and environmental cleaning that leads to decreased risk of transmission of respiratory viruses, and this is likely true for covid-19. the personal protective equipment guidance at the national level and at the hospital system level can be complex and confusing. furthermore, it can change rapidly based on evolving evidence as well as availability of supplies. although adherence to infectioncontrol procedures is important, published and anecdotal evidence suggests that health care professionals, including obstetricians, have opportunities for improvement. 39 the key for obstetricians is to be familiar with whatever personal protective equipment is stocked by their labor and delivery unit, to train using that personal protective equipment, and to use personal protective equipment correctly and consistently (including donning and doffing). for places where the rapid increase of patients has not yet begun, now is a good time for labor and delivery units to conduct refresher training for personal protective equipment use and to consider conducting multidisciplinary simulations of a pregnant patient with covid-19 infection presenting to labor and delivery. strict adherence to hand hygiene combined with correct and consistent use of personal protective equipment and careful environmental cleaning may help reduce the risk of nosocomial transmission and help keep obstetricians healthy during this time of covid-19.world. as of april 11, 2020, totally 1.61 million covid-19 patients were confirmed in more than 200 countries and regions with 99690 deaths. 1 while each country has taken all measures to control the spreading, wearing mask in general population is still controversial and different countries have different recommendations on mask use in community settings. 2 some scholars strongly suggest wearing masks in general population, 3 however, who does not recommend wear masks in general population because of lack of evidence. 4 however, the absence of evidence of effectiveness just means no relevant investigation, but is not equal to evidence of ineffectiveness.3 so far, accumulating evidence has indicated that wearing mask in general population is useful to prevent sars-cov-2 transmission.it is infeasible to conduct well designed prospective studies to obtain evidence to evaluate the efficacy of wearing mask in general population in preventing sars-cov-2 transmission. however, it is well known that wearing mask can prevent other airborne infectious diseases, such as pulmonary tuberculosis and influenza. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.as a general rule, an infection can occur only after exposure to sufficient amount of an infectious pathogen. masks cannot completely prevent the pathogen exposure, but can reduce the amount of exposed pathogen to below the infectious dose, a certain amount that can cause an infection. even if failed in preventing an infection, wearing mask can still reduce the amount of exposed pathogen, which will cause a relatively mild disease. thus, wearing masks in general population can prevent at least a considerable proportion of covid-19. more recently, ma et al showed that n95 mask, medical mask, and homemade mask with 4-layer kitchen paper and 1-layer cloth blocked 99.98%, 97.14%, and 95.15% of avian influenza virus in aerosols respectively, 5 which provide evidence that masks can block the transmission of viruses in publics.currently, sars-cov-2 was mainly transmitted in communities and most patients had no history of contacting covid-19 patients. it has been demonstrated that covid-19 patients can spread sars-cov-2 when they are at asymptomatic incubation period, and some sars-cov-2 infected individuals do not have symptoms at all. 6, 7 these individuals are belonging to healthy general population before they are identified. without use of masks, they will directly release the viruses, leading to the silent spreading in community settings.the facts that covid-19 transmission occurred in hundreds of persons after religion convenes in south korea showed us lessons for the super spreading of this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.covid-19 without wearing masks; 8 none of those participants wore mask in the convenes. after this event, almost all persons in south korea wore masks when they were outdoors or had public activities, as recommended by the south korea government. the daily confirmed cases were significantly reduced after three weeks, with daily around 100 or fewer new cases ( figure 1a ). by contrast, after the surge of covid-19 in italy at the beginning of march, 2020 and having taken strict measures such as "home stay" and "social distance" since then and "city quarantine in whole country" since march 10, 2020, the number of daily new cases had not significantly reduced, with daily about 4000 new cases ( figure 1b) .although the prevention strategies in south korea and italy may be somewhat varied, an obvious difference between south korea and italy appeared to the use of masks in general population, since wearing mask is not recommended in general population in italy. the situations in other european countries, such as france and germany, were similar to that in italy ( figure 1b) , even after having taken comprehensive control measures for several weeks.as sars-cov-2 appeared to be more rapidly spreading in europe and usa than in asia, some scholars in europe argued that it is time to apply the precautionary principle and to advise wearing masks in public. 9 actually, ordinary masks used in publics can be reused after a couple of hours in sunshine and several masks may be used in turn, 10 which has minimal influence on the mask use of healthcare a novel coronavirus (now designated sars cov 2) was first reported in wuhan, hubei 19 province, china, in december 2019 [1] . the covid-19 pandemic has since reached an experts also believe that one of the reasons for the failure of educational programs is the lack of 32 attention to analytical studies and their inability to consider psycho-social models as an intellectual 33 framework in educational planning. among the theories that have been used in various studies to 34 predict protective behaviours is the protective motivation theory (pmt) [5] .considering the importance of identifying the determinants of the preventive behaviours of 1 covid-19 in hcw in the design and implementation of preventive programs, this study was 2 conducted for predicting the preventive behaviour of hcw towards covid-19 based on the pmt. the present cross-sectional and analytical study was conducted in five teaching hospitals of the 5 hamadan city, the capital of hamadan province, affiliated to hamadan university of medical 6 sciences in march 2020. the study population was 25% of hospital staff, selected through multi-7 stage sampling (sequence of stratified-simple random sampling) to participate in the study. all (strongly agree). the construct perceived susceptibility was assessed by two items, i.e., "it is 17 unlikely that i will be infected with the coronavirus." the perceived severity was assessed by three 18 items, i.e., "coronavirus disease can lead to death." the perceived self-efficacy was assessed by 19 five items, i.e., "i can use the mask constantly in my work environment." the response efficacy was 20 assessed by five items, i.e., "disinfecting surfaces and equipment prevent coronavirus." the 21 response cost was evaluated by two items, i.e., "i feel that protecting yourself against coronavirus 22 is time-consuming." and finally, the protection motivation (behavioural intention) was assessed by 23 one item, i.e., "i intend to observe the recommended precautions until the end of the coronavirus 24 epidemic". according to the theoretical assumptions, the threat appraisal score is the sum of the 25 perceived susceptibility and severity scores. also, the coping appraisal score is the sum of the self-26 efficacy and response efficacy scores minus the response cost score.covid-19 preventive behaviours were measured by five items rated by a 3-point likert scale 28 ("always," "sometimes," and "never," scored '2,' '1,' and '0,' respectively). the validity of the 29 questionnaire was confirmed using the viewpoints of 10 health education experts. the reliability of 30 the questionnaire was investigated by calculating internal consistency.correlation between bmt components was assessed by pearson's correlation coefficient. the mean 32 of threat and efficacy score were compared according to demographic characteristics using t.test 33 and anova. a univariate linear regression analysis was performed to screen potentially significant determinants of intention and behaviour. all statistical analyses were conducted in 1 stata version 14 with a significant level of less than 5%. table i ). the response cost (57.8%) and intention (84.25%) had the lowest and 11 highest percentage of the mean from the maximum obtainable score among structures of the model.protective behaviours of hcw against covid-19 showed that wearing a glove for all procedures 13 (43.3 %) and using a face mask at any time (51.8%) were the least frequent preventive behaviours. 14 7.9% and 3.7% of participants never used gloves or a mask during patient care, respectively. 87% in table ii, . the lower levels of ppe declared in our study may be attributable to low levels of 7 awareness, no habit of mask and glove wearing, perception that they interfere with performing 8 tasks, lack of time, and lack of understanding of the importance of observing health and safety 9 principles. 10 as the most important hypothesis of the pmt, as well as the most important hypothesis of the 11 present study, the results showed that both threat appraisal and coping appraisal predicted 12 behavioural intention. in other words, according to the hypothesis of the pmt that suggests two 13 decisions process to engage or not engage in health-related behaviours, the threat appraisal 14 components have a higher ability to predict the behavioural intention. huang et al. showed that 15 emotion-focused and problem-focused responses were predicted coping strategies of nurses and 16 nursing students at the time of covid-19 outbreaks, which is consistent with the results of the 17 present study [10] . 18 this study showed that hcw were not at a desirable level of perceived efficiency; rather, their 19 assessed perceived threat was relatively at a desirable level. as a result, 35.5% of participants were 20 on the fear control path. considering the assumptions of the pmt, first, the threat is assessed in 21 terms of severity. next, by increasing the perceived threat, a second evaluation is motivated on the 22 effectiveness of the recommended strategies. in this situation, in addition to evaluating the 23 effectiveness of recommended strategies, the individuals also evaluate their level of effectiveness.when the threat is not considered seriously (low perceived susceptibility and severity), there is a 25 low motivation to focus on the subject, making people superficially evaluate the effectiveness of 26 recommended strategies. in other words, if people do not grasp the threat and do not understand its 27 severity, they will easily ignore the relevant available information. in contrast, similar to the 28 findings of the present study, despite the perceived threat, when people find the recommended 29 strategy ineffective with low self-efficacy, or find themselves unable to act against the 30 recommended strategy and to prevent a serious threat, the fear control process will prevail over the 31 danger control process [5] . considering the findings of the present study, increasing the perceived 32 efficacy of protective behaviours against covid-19 by hcw is recommended as an educational 33 priority.one of the limitations of this study is that evaluating behaviour by self-reporting can cause bias and 1 misrepresentation. furthermore, the reluctance of some members of the research community to 2 participate in the study was another limitation. however, the findings showed that protective 3 behaviours against covid-19 were at relatively favourable levels among hcw. hcw are 4 expected to be at the highest level of threat and efficiency and experience the process of danger 5 control. therefore, future training programmes must consider the level of self-efficacy of hcw and 6 increase their knowledge regarding the effectiveness of recommendation strategies to perform 7 protective measures against the covid-19. 8  table i mean, sd, percentage, range of scores and pearson correlation coefficients among the constructs of pmt (n=761) to assess the potential skin damage, a recent cross-sectional study surveyed 330 hcws working at fever clinics and inpatients ward of covid-19 cases. the results showed that 71% of respondents reported self-perceived skin barrier damage. the main symptoms were burning, itch, and stinging. the most commonly reported types of eruptions were dryness or scales, papules or erythema, and maceration. since frontline hcws frequently encounter skin and mucous barrier damage, the consensus for protecting skin and mucosa the survey showed that 66.1% of hcws washed hands over 10 times per day, but only 22.1% took protective skincare measures after washing. a large epidemiological study in sweden reported that prolonged water exposure induces skin irritation. 1 therefore, standardizing moments and disinfectants for hand hygiene and emphasizing skincare after hand washing are essential for hand care.according to specification of hand hygiene for healthcare workers (ws/t313•2019), 2 hand hygiene should adhere to "two before and three after." it includes before touching a patient, before any aseptic procedure (including invasive procedure) is performed, after potential exposure to patient's body fluid, after touching a patient, and after touching a patient's surroundings or items that might be contaminated. if ppe is regularly used by hcws, the above-mentioned moments for hand hygiene can be replaced by glove decontamination. however, some extra moments 3 need to be addressed:(a) before donning ppe, (b) before, during and after doffing ppe, (c) before leaving affected area, (d) before eating or drinking, (e) before and after defecation, and (f) after reaching the residence.in addition, sufficient quantities of alcohol-based hand rub are essential for cleaning. washing hands need both hand detergents and running water. wearing gloves is not a substitute for hand hygiene. the survey showed that 12.4% of hcws wear three layers of gloves at the same time during daily work. long-term use of gloves may lead to overhydration of stratum corneum, which may cause maceration and erosion. chemical materials in latex gloves are likely to cause contact dermatitis in macerated or erosive skin. to make it worse, damaged skin is vulnerable to secondary infection. hence, several points should be emphasized when wearing gloves.one layer of qualified latex gloves is adequate for skin protection.additional layer is recommended for hcws with existing skin barrier damage or underlying risk of gloves broke. theoretically, the increased layers of gloves cannot add to protective effect proportionally, however, gloves-related adverse skin reactions may increase. the adverse skin reactions caused by prolonged wearing of masks and goggles include pressure injury, urticaria, contact dermatitis, skin dryness, and aggravation of existing skin diseases. according to a report from singapore during the sars outbreak in 2003, 35.5% hcws reported acne (59.6%), facial itch (51.4%), and rash (35.8%) from n95 mask use. 7, 8 1. protective measures for pressure injury • the choice of masks: wear a properly fitted mask. 9 use masks in different ways alternately to avoid sustained friction and pressure on the same site.• application of moisturizers or gel: apply moisturizers or gel before wearing facial protective equipment to lubricate and reduce friction between skin and masks or goggles.• correct use of goggles: the main purpose of using goggles is to avoid being infected by transmissible splash. over-tight using cannot enhance the protective effect but damage the skin and generate fogs instead. patients reporting severe pruritus can take antihistamines orally.closed and humid environments caused by water in exhaled air may cause skin barrier dysfunction and lead to subsequent skin dryness and scales. applying high-potent moisturizers before and after wearing ppe is paramount to prevent such discomfort. short-term close exposure to uv irradiation without eye protection can damage the cornea and conjunctival epithelium, resulting in keratitis presenting with eyelid redness, conjunctival congestion and chemosis, foreign body sensation, pain, photophobia, and blurred vision. cutaneous reaction to uv irradiation includes erythema, swelling, exudation, pain, and tenderness. in addition, over-inhalation of ozone produced by some uv disinfection lamps (udls) may cause dizziness, nausea, and other adverse reactions. 17 therefore, hcws should avoid direct exposure to uv irradiation, especially close and long-term exposure. according to the survey, 56.7% of hcws wore ppe for over 6 hours per day. getting all wet after shift was reported in 64.5% of hcws.overhydration tends to cause cutaneous dysbacteriosis and skin barrier damage. besides, the performance of ppe will also decline simultaneously with hydrosis. 3 preventive measures include (a) control working hours with ppe. nasal vestibule mucosa is a vulnerable area for virus or bacteria to colonize for its abundant blood vessels, mucinous glands and serous glands which create a humid environment. angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2) expression was found in the basal layer of the nonkeratinizing squamous epithelium in nasal mucosa, indicating that coronavirus may infect nasal mucosa cells if basal layer is exposed due to nasal mucosa barrier breakdown. 21 accordingly, hcws should clean nasal cavity once leaving isolated wards and pay attention to the protection of upper respiratory tract and mucosa. 22 1 adhere to the standards: adhere to the standards on wearing ppe. 22 2 nasal vestibule cleansing: strictly follow the standard of nasal vestibule hygiene for healthcare workers (db12/t551•2014). 23 • moments for cleansing: before leaving clean zone or getting off work.• moments of sterilizing: masks or nasal cavity is contaminated with patient's blood, body fluid, or secretion. oral bacteria tend to colonize on teeth and gingiva due to long-term wearing of masks and insufficient water intake, which may consequently cause oral diseases including halitosis, gingival bleeding, aggravation of periodontitis and oral ulcers. 28, 29 protective oral care includes brushing teeth every morning and night, using mouthwash or brushing teeth after meals and ensuring timely water intake. rinse mouth with water or normal saline when getting off work 30 the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic presents a significant challenge to the medical profession. the widespread effect of this pandemic and its influence on the practice of orthopaedic surgery and musculoskeletal work is the subject of this work. we discuss the issues revolving personal protection of musculoskeletal (msk) healthcare workers, non-operative management of musculoskeletal conditions, remote consultations, trauma escalation stages, staff wellbeing and orthopaedic surgery for covid-19 cases.personal protection at the time of the covid-19 pandemic is prime consideration for health workers, employers, department of health and patients. this issue is important to ensure the heath and well being of the personnel caring for musculoskeletal (msk) patients, and also key for organisations to ensure continuity of patient care. msk teams deal with a huge proportion of patients in the primary and secondary care. the aim of this document is to provide guidance towards personal protection for this group of health workers in a patient facing role, and secondarily to briefly review controversial topics and treatments. it would therefore be applicable to surgeons, radiologists, rheumatologists, nurses, physiotherapists, advanced practitioners, radiographers, ward clerks, receptionists, cleaning teams, porters, phlebotomists, pharmacists and all allied health professionals.2.1. understanding the mode of spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)the spread of sars-cov-2 is predominantly via droplets (aerosol), but also via direct contact with contaminated surfaces (fomites). any personal prophylaxis needs to consider both these modes. also, one needs to consider the viral load to which the health worker is exposed which in turn influences the severity of disease, if acquired.aerosol (droplets from the patient's mouth or nose) spread from an infected patient to the health worker via a direct aerosol assault can vary in quantum from low level contamination e from encounters such as talking e to high level contamination e via coughing or sneezing. such aerosol entry may be via the nose, mouth or eyes of the recipient. the distance of the source to the recipient influences the quantum. a safe distance of 6 feet is recommended when possible to minimize such aerosol spread during clinical encounters. 1 sars-cov-2 is detectable in aerosols for up to three hours 2 and hence aerated rooms are safer than closed spaces. regular ventilation of closed spaces is advisable.a wide variety of aerosol filters (face masks) are available and sometimes the nomenclature can be challenging to understand. 2 the two main variables one needs to consider when one decides to choose such a mask is the filter efficiency and whether it provides an airtight fit around the personnel's mouth and nose. filter efficiency is tested by assessing the proportion of a 300 nm (0.3 mm) aerosol challenge, which is filtered by the device. to understand the nomenclature mentioned in the following table, for example, a ffp2 filter will prevent at least 94% of the aerosol challenge from passing through. the european ratings are covered with two standards and the filters are classified as filtering face piece (ffp) [ffp1, ffp2 or ffp3] or p1/p2/p3 2 e see table 1 .the us healthcare lead by centre for disease control (cdc) uses a different nomenclature, although the principle of testing is similar. for example, a n95 mask filters out 95% of particles sized 300 nm 3 , see table 2 .the size of coronavirus is around 100 nm (0.1 mm) 4 and hence simple mathematics would suggest that these particles would pass through most of these filters, which are tested for a 300 nm particle challenge. however, particles smaller than 300 nm do not travel in a linear motion; they travel using a zig-zag movement as they are bounced randomly by molecules of comprising air (brownian motion). 2 hence these particles are often trapped in filters with mesh sizes bigger than themselves. n95 masks are recommended for medium risk clinical encounters. for high-risk encounters, positive pressure suits are recommended. 2, 5 many of the re-useable commercially available facemasks (respirators) for protection during spray painting/woodwork/industrial fumes are ffp3/p3 category and would offer protection against a heavy viral aerosol challenge. however, most of these are not easy to sterilize and neither licensed for medical use. there is a risk of the virus staying alive on the respirator surface (up to 3 days on plastic) 6 and hence their repeated use cannot be recommended in the context of the covid-19 pandemic. it may be too expensive for these to be used on a disposable basis (approximately £100 cost per piece), but in case of dire shortage of supplies, and if they can be mass-produced in the country, they will have a potential role in clinical encounters such as the subject of this document.surgical face masks are not designed for personnel protection and do not closely fit around the face and mouth. their design is intended for preventing contamination of the surgical wound from the aerosols generating by the surgical team. when tested for personal protection, in lab settings, they provide a 35% protection against a standard lab aerosol challenge. 3 there are no clinical studies comparing n95/p2 masks to surgical masks for prevention against coronavirus but studies have compared these two masks in the setting of influenza virus (which is a similar sized virus and is also airborne). 7 despite the differences we have seen in the lab settings, there seem to be no difference in infection rates between these two groups in the clinical setting (2 randomised trials). it is apparent that in the lab setting n95/p2 masks are superior but in the clinical setting such a difference is not seen.also, there is evidence to suggest that wearing a mask (either surgical mask or n95) reduces the risks of acquiring the 'flu by the close contacts of patients when compared to no protection (3 arm randomised trial), 8 medical research council (imperial college) suggests the use of masks can reduce the chances of developing disease, but notes that the compliance may be poor. 7 in light of the above evidence, it can be inferred that the surgical masks are not a reliable protection against a known/suspected covid-19 patient, but they are useful to prevent the personnel against an accidental aerosol challenge from an asymptomatic carrier of sars-cov-2 during the incubation phase. equally if a health worker is in the asymptomatic incubation phase, this will reduce the aerosol challenge towards an uninfected patient or coworker. 5, 7 by reducing the viral load acquired, such facemasks are protective for personnel as they are likely to reduce the severity of illness, especially at the height of the pandemic.it is recommended that a known patient of covid-19 wears such a mask to reduce viral shedding and hence this measure is protective to the health workers. these masks are also useful for symptomatic patients in self-quarantine to reduce viral load transmission to the rest of the members of family in quarantine.aerosols/droplet contamination via the eye can be prevented by routine use of glasses or visors. 6 such protection would be useful when a direct aerosol challenge may occur such as clinic appointments, reception staff, clinical examination, physiotherapy, phlebotomy, radiology procedures etc.direct contact with contaminated surfaces may also lead to inoculation, for example when the health worker examines the patient and then uses the contaminated hand to rub one's eye or touch their face. sars-cov-2 is detectable for up to 4 h on copper, up to 24 h on cardboard and up to two to three days on plastic and stainless steel. 6 hence hand washing with soap and water or disinfecting gel is advisable before and after every patient contact. a direct decontamination of all patient contact points is vital (chairs, door knobs, pens, clipboards etc.) many times each day. it is advisable to avoid touching one's eyes nose or mouth. it is advisable to cough or sneeze in a tissue and bin the tissue immediately. if tissue is not immediately available, it is best to cough and sneeze into the elbow. 9 the hospital should be divided into areas affiliated with a level of risk. 10 level 1 e applicable to pre-exam triage and general outpatient dept.disposable surgical cap and mask work uniform disposable gloves and protective clothing level 2 e applicable to a&e, isolation wards, fever clinics, icu, specimen examination of suspected or confirmed cases, cleaning surgical instruments. level 3 e applicable to surgical theatres on suspected or confirmed cases, intubation, tracheotomy, bronchoscopy, endoscopy, procedures with splash/spray secretions.as above and full face respiratory protective devices or powdered airpurifying respiratoralthough surgical hoods (such as those made by stryker) meet aami level 4 personal protection, there has been no study looking at their effectiveness in covid-19, and as such their use cannot be recommended.minimize aerosol related spread:-a safe distance of 6 feet is recommended during clinical encounters -surgical masks are recommended during all clinical encounters with asymptomatic patients. surgical masks are recommended for personnel working in areas where air exchange is < 3 h -n95 masks/positive pressure suits are recommended for medium/high risk clinical encounters. -eye protection is recommended for all clinical encounters.minimize direct contamination -hand washing with soap and water or disinfecting gel is advisable before and after every patient contact. -a direct decontamination of all patient/staff contact points is vital (chairs, door knobs, pens, clipboards, keyboard, mouse etc) many times during the working day. -it is advisable to avoid touching one's eyes, nose or mouth. it is advisable to cough or sneeze in a tissue and bin the tissue immediately. if tissue is not immediately available, it is best to cough and sneeze into the elbow.-minimize personnel entering operating theatre.-ideally have a negative pressure operating area, a buffer zone and a clean zone. -put ppe on in the buffer zone; dispose of it in the buffer zone.-patients should have surgical masks and caps on.ideally divide into teams, with each team only being in a level 2 or level 3 area for 4 h at a time. 10 the hospital should have a 'fever clinic' running. i.e. anyone who enters a&e or miu will have their temperature taken. those with a fever are taken to a 'fever clinic' for further assessment: this is a level 2 zone.there is no clear-cut guidance specifically related to staff with comorbidities. however, comorbidities that place individuals at greatest risk are: hypertension cardiac disease/cerebrovascular disease diabetes respiratory disease 11 malignancy and immunodeficiency those treated with ace-inhibitors and arbs are at greater risk 12 copd is the most strongly predictive comorbidity for both severe disease and icu admission 13 3. non-operative management of msk disorders during the pandemic outbreak long acting corticosteroid injections are often used in musculoskeletal conditions to control pain and relieve localised inflammation. there is concern regarding the use of such injections during a pandemic as it may depress the immune system. non steroidal anti-inflammatory medications (nsaids) have been linked with a more sever form of covid19.methylprednisolone has been linked to prolonged viral shedding 14 and who advises against their use in covid-19 except for patients with an associated acute respiratory distress. general corticosteroids have led to delayed viral shedding in mers-cov and sars-cov, as well as psychosis and avascular necrosis in sars-cov and increased mortality in influenza. 15 in addition, a previous study of over 15 ,000 cases showed that intra articular steroid administration reduces the efficacy of the influenza vaccine and suggest susceptibility to viral load. 16 to date there are no papers specifically looking at intra articular steroid administration in coronavirus strain covid-19, but the advice from who regarding steroids is to avoid them unless the patient is in ards. 17 the current advice is not to take nsaids in covid-19 and to use paracetamol to treat symptoms. 18 there is speculation that the drug causes "cytokine storms". taking the drug in the early stages of the disease may induce prolonged illness or more severe respiratory or cardiac complications.the effectiveness of virtual fracture clinics in the uk is now wellestablished. 19e21 the same research has not been done for elective orthopaedics. certainly from a follow-up perspective, the virtual clinic is encouraged from the royal college of surgeons. 22 many countries across europe are now conducting telephone outpatient clinics in light of covid-19.gmc has some guidance on this, but it is limited. they suggest ensuring the patient being assessed has capacity, has a straightforward treatment request and that the clinician has all the necessary patient information to hand.the newest guidance from the british orthopaedic association suggests changing all, except the most essential, from face-to-face clinics to virtual or telephone clinics. 23 each hospital will have its own escalation plan, but in the first instance it is desirable for specialist teams to work within their own remit, albeit working in emergency mode. for example, orthopaedic surgeons could staff trauma lists, fracture clinics and minor injuries units to treat the walking wounded. at some point however people will have to work outside their specialist area.there are studies emerging about the effects of this rapidly spreading disease on the mental health of health workers. it is important that we support each other and recognise that every one is working outside of their comfort zone. ensure rest and respite between shifts, eat sufficiently and stay in regular contact with friends, family and colleagues.at some point soon, orthopaedic surgeons may have to step outside the comfort zone of trauma and orthopaedics and treat and triage any patient entering a&e. the royal college of surgeons has outlined this in its "guidance for surgeons" and has set out 5 key phases:triage and deliver healthcare and protect the workforce maintain emergency surgery capabilities protect and preserve the workforce fulfill alternate surgical roles fulfill alternate non-surgical roles it is therefore important that we:understand the basics of covid-19 recognise when to escalate to respiratory medics or icu are able to treat acute or emergent medical conditions as needed key terms covid19 (abbreviated from corona virus disease 2019) -name of the disease caused with sars-cov-2) sars-cov-2 (abbreviated from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2)-virus causing covid-19.this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.abstract background infection from the sars-cov-2 virus has led to the covid-19 pandemic. given the large number of patients affected, healthcare personnel and facility resources are stretched to the limit; however, the need for urgent and emergent neurosurgical care continues. this article describes best practices when performing neurosurgical procedures on patients with covid-19 based on multi-institutional experiences. methods we assembled neurosurgical practitioners from 13 different health systems from across the usa, including those in hot spots, to describe their practices in managing neurosurgical emergencies within the covid-19 environment. results patients presenting with neurosurgical emergencies should be considered as persons under investigation (pui) and thus maximal personal protective equipment (ppe) should be donned during interaction and transfer. intubations and extubations should be done with only anesthesia staff donning maximal ppe in a negative pressure environment. operating room (or) staff should enter the room once the air has been cleared of particulate matter. certain or suites should be designated as covid ors, thus allowing for all neurosurgical cases on covid/pui patients to be performed in these rooms, which will require a terminal clean post procedure. each covid or suite should be attached to an anteroom which is a negative pressure room with a hepa filter, thus allowing for donning and doffing of ppe without risking contamination of clean areas. conclusion based on a multi-institutional collaborative effort, we describe best practices when providing neurosurgical treatment for patients with covid-19 in order to optimize clinical care and minimize the exposure of patients and staff.the coronavirus species are a group of enveloped positive single-stranded rna viruses belonging to the genus beta coronavirus. 1 four of these viruses cause common cold symptoms while two previously known strains of zoonotic origin, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), can cause fatal respiratory illnesses. 1 the sars-cov-2 virus, also known as 2019-ncov, is a new coronavirus species 1 that started the covid-19 pandemic as a cluster of viral pneumonia in december 2019 in wuhan, china, and which is currently spreading across the usa and the rest of the world. 1 2 there are two main routes of transmission for respiratory viruses: aerosolization with droplet transmission and direct contact modes of transmission, with the virus remaining viable for significant intervals of time between hours and days on most surfaces. 3 aerosolized transmission 4 5 can be either droplet (sars-cov-2) or airborne (sars), generally depending on the size of the expelled particle. larger particles once expelled into the air tend to settle on surfaces or to the ground typically within 1 m of the source. 4 the sars-cov-2, like other corona viruses, can be transmitted via droplets within close proximity during coughing or sneezing, and thus the recommendation for individuals to remain 6 feet apart ( www. cdc. gov/ coronavirus/ 2019-ncov/ prevent-gettingsick/ social-distancing. html). the droplets can enter through the eyes, mouth, or nose of a nearby person. person-to-person transmission via direct contact or contact with contaminated surfaces can also occur (https://www. cdc. gov/ coronavirus/ 2019-ncov/ infection-control/ control-recommendations. html). close range aerosol transmission 5 is most likely during high-risk aerosolization procedures such as endotracheal intubation, extubation, suctioning, chest compressions, and endonasal and transoral procedures. as per the who, airborne transmissionaerosolized particles that travel through the air over longer distances-has so far not been shown to be a transmission mode for this novel coronavirus (https://www. who. int/ publications-detail/ advice-on-the-use-of-masks-in-the-communityduring-home-care-and-in-healthcare-settingsin-the-context-of-the-novel-coronavirus-( 2019-ncov)-outbreak). or specific to particular surgical type (neuro-oto, general-trauma, and cardiothoracic and vascular) ► anteroom needs to be used for donning and doffing as well as intubating/extubating patients ► consider anesthesia team using long extensions to endotracheal tubes and portable ventilators to prevent need for circuit disconnection ► minimize personnel for intubations and extubations of symptoms varying from asymptomatic to respiratory distress to multiorgan failure with ensuing death. anosmia may be a unique early symptom with the covid-19 syndrome based on anecdotal reports from around the world. based on the chinese reports, 81% of patients have mild symptoms, while 14% have moderate symptoms and 5% have critical illness with the need for mechanical ventilation. others present with flu-like symptoms and muscle aches, or gastrointestinal symptoms. 6 elderly people and those with baseline cardiopulmonary disease appear to be at greatest risk for poor outcomes with covid-19. at the time of this report, the us has the most infected documented cases in the world with a rising death toll.there is a nationwide shortage of personal protective equipment (ppe), and disruptions in global supply chains are aggravating this shortage. this protective equipment is needed most significantly by healthcare providers in close, repeated, or continuous contact with the infected patients. the who's interim guidance from february 27, 2020 advises a rational and appropriate use of ppe based on multiple factors such as the location of a patient, type of personnel involved, and type of procedures being performed. the document also highlights steps that can be taken to safely conserve ppe and improve their efficiency (https:// apps. who. int/ iris/ handle/ 10665/ 331215).given the novelty of this disease and the current scarcity of reliable clinical data, it is essential and responsible for us to share our collective efforts and experiences in our responsibility to our patient population requiring neurosurgical care while protecting the healthcare population. the following document is a summary of lessons learned across multiple regions (13 healthcare systems and affiliated experts) of the usa in optimizing conditions for the safety of our patients and neurosurgical providers, and their support staff (box 1).the current document was formulated with a mission of serving patients requiring surgical intervention while minimizing sars-cov-2 exposure to non-infected patients and staff, understanding the significant shortages of personnel, facility, and ppe resources. we aim to describe a comprehensive approach to caring for a surgical patient during the covid-19 pandemic including a strategy of decreasing elective surgical volume to create capacity for a surge in covid-19 patients. the authors of this manuscript represent 13 different health systems including centers in hot spots of new york, pennsylvania, washington, and michigan. they have shared their best practices being used at their centers, leading to a formulation of the best practices document. the process was conducted by creating an initial template for the manuscript led by the first author. this was iteratively revised by all authors. a thorough search of prior publications led to a very limited reference list. it was apparent that, while a lot is being rapidly published on covid-19, the precise areas of critical interest for neurosurgical practice were severely limited. in light of the lack of data, we constructed the model where each author populated all the areas of the manuscript individually. these submissions were then collated and edited to optimize the subject matter by the first author and circulated for edits from the larger group to create a concise repository of best practices.given the tremendous challenges posed by the covid-19 pandemic, there is a lack of data to support each of these recommendations and thus we present the best practices as options to adapt based on a health system's resources and goals. we are presenting a consortium of practices based on pre-print publications, studies of previous viral illnesses, and emerging experience from major centers during a worldwide pandemic.while a comprehensive definition of non-elective procedures is lacking and depends on individual presentations, the following list includes procedures that are commonly understood as emergent or urgent: it is critical that all planning and preparation for emergent neurosurgical care be performed in conjunction with the institution's central coordination committee. 7 isolated planning without proper communication will lead to confusion and poor compliance. additionally, this planning should be performed keeping in mind the institution's resources and best available scientific data. unilateral expectations unsupported by best evidence may stress an institution's global response as adherence to extreme precautionary measures may not necessarily be safer and may deplete precious resources. it is also important to realize that new evidence may change practices in the future. the ultimate goal of general planning is to safeguard the operators and mitigate in-hospital transmission. the current environment demands creativity, up-to-date knowledge of emerging evidence, and a collaborative atmosphere. thus, it is possible that multiple options could be equally safe and effective as long as sound scientific principles and emerging evidence are adopted.a strategy to prioritize invasive procedures that are allowed to continue under conditions of pandemic surge. level iiib cases are the first to be cancelled or disallowed. level i -delay in surgery >24 hours will result in adverse clinical outcome (urgent/emergency surgery) level ii -prolonged delay in surgery may result in adverse clinical outcome level iia -system stress: surgery will use limited hospital resources that are needed for patients with higher levels of acuity level iib -patient stress: prolonged delay likely will place patient at clinical risk i. risk of disease progression within 1 month places patient at risk that is felt to outweigh risk of procedure in pandemic environment ii. risk of disease progression within 3 months places patient at risk that is felt to outweigh risk of procedure in pandemic environment level iii -prolonged delay in surgery will not result in adverse clinical outcome (truly elective surgery)level iiia -elective surgery that does not use significant system resources level iiib -elective surgery that does use significant system resources most patients who are in need of emergent/urgent neurosurgical care may be lacking appropriate covid-19 risk factor history or covid testing and thus should be considered as persons under investigation (pui) or covid-19 positive. 8 taking this approach allows for creation of standardized protocols in managing such patients as well as enhances safety for all involved, given the necessity of maximal ppe when interacting with pui/covid-19 patients. coordinated rehearsals of personnel responsibilities and processes for patients with covid needing neurosurgical care are essential, given that personnel within the or suite should not move to clean areas. it is also ideal to have numerous posters/laminated sheets to outline the procedures for contacting personnel for ppe, personnel exposure, terminal clean, and hospital-based infection protection authority. 9across the usa there is a general trend to cancelling elective procedures to minimize the number of healthcare providers at risk of exposure within the hospital environment. donning and doffing of maximal ppe should be demonstrated and hand hygiene during this process should be emphasized. given the importance of proper ppe placement in preventing exposure to the sars-cov-2 virus, adherence should be monitored.members of the surgical, anesthesia, and neuromonitoring team should limit their movements within the or and between rooms so as to not expose clean areas to sars-cov-2 particulate matter. this will require the placement of a team member outside the operative suite in case surgical equipment that is not present in the or suite is necessary for continuing the operation. donning and doffing should take place within the anteroom to prevent exposure of clean areas to infectious matter from the operating suite.given the multitude of or suites within most hospital settings, it is ideal to concentrate all covid and pui cases within several covid designated ors. such ors should ideally be attached to an anteroom as a mechanism of preventing exposure of clean areas. in addition, the designated covid-19 or suites should be divided into rooms focusing on three surgical types: (1) neurosurgical, otolaryngology, and spinal procedures; (2) general surgery, transplant, and trauma; and (3) cardiothoracic and vascular surgery. such division will allow for surgical specialty specific equipment to be housed within the dedicated covid or, thus preventing movement of equipment from clean areas to covid designated areas and vice versa. hybrid ors deserve special consideration, and crossspecialty collaboration might be the only way to achieve economies of scale that allow focusing one or more hybrid ors for patients with covid and others for non-covid patients.given the positive pressure areas within the operative suite, it is essential to have a negative pressure area with hepa filtration for doffing, donning, as well as intubation and extubation as both of these procedures will lead to significant aerosolization. such an area is defined as the anteroom which needs to be attached to each covid designated operative suite and serves an essential feature of preventing contamination of adjacent clean areas. post procedure, the covid or should undergo a terminal clean of all exposed material from ceiling to floor including lighting.direct communication should take place between the transporting team to the or personnel in the room to be certain that all individuals have appropriate ppe before transport.transportation of non-intubated patients should be done with a face mask in place. portable ventilators and extensions to endotracheal tubes are important ways to prevent the need for disconnecting the circuit. when a disconnection is necessary, clamping of the endotracheal tube is essential to prevent aerosolization.intubations and extubations are ideally performed within a negative pressure room and thus the anteroom is a suitable location. 10 only the anesthesia team donning maximal ppe should be within the room when performing intubation and extubation in order to minimize exposure to other team members. 11 12 the surgical team should wait for a period of time post intubation/extubation, ideally corresponding to twice the predicted time of air turnover in the room, to reduce the aerosolization content within the covid or environment before entering with maximal ppe including a n95 respirator. given the rise in patients with covid-19 and thus the demand for icu beds and ventilators, extubation post procedure should be emphasized thus freeing up a ventilator and icu room. post extubation, efforts should be made to transport the patient to a final destination rather than intermediary locations such as the post anesthesia care unit. this will minimize the number of areas and personnel exposed to patients withcovid-19. however, it may be more efficient to have the ability to turn an or suite into a negative pressure environment where the patient can be transported for extubation. this will allow the covid or suite to be more efficiently used for surgical procedures rather than extended periods of time for recovery until extubation. some may advocate extubating only outside of the or, in particular to perform extubation in the critical care unit; however, this does not fully incorporate the flow of patients in the hospital, especially in busy centers, and may add a significant number of ventilator days during a time when ventilators are a scarce resource.neurosurgical procedures specifically involving the airways can lead to significant aerosolization and exposure of surgeons and others within the operative suite. in addition, high-speed level iiia -elective surgery that does not use significant system resources surveillance angiography of unruptured aneurysms or after 1 year for ruptured aneurysm level iiib -elective surgery that does use significant system resources bone drilling has been shown to increase production of contaminant aerosolized particulate matter, as reported by workman et al, 13 and thus participants should be in full ppe. in the same manner, the use of electrocautery has also been shown to increase production of contaminated aerosolized particulate matter. 14 thus, neurosurgical operative procedures involving endonasal approaches for tumor resection and pituitary surgeries as well as transoral approaches for spinal pathology should be avoided unless absolutely necessary. such procedures should be some of the first cases delayed secondary to the substantial exposure of healthcare personnel to infectious particulate matter.with the continual rise of covid-19 cases it is plausible that there will be scarcity of appropriate ppes. specifically, n95 masks are integral to preventing exposure to covid-19 particulate matter and appear to be in short supply. ideally, n95 masks should be changed from patient to patient. there are ongoing discussions regarding the reuse or sterilization of used n95 masks. the fda has recently approved the use of hydrogen peroxide vapors to decontaminate n95 masks, as this disinfects without compromising the mechanical integrity of the mask (https://www. fda. gov/ media/ 136386/ download). innovative mechanisms of sterilizing used n95 respirators have also included heat and ultraviolet light sources as well as hydrogen peroxide vapors. there is no evidence to support sterilization with ultraviolet light and heat without the possibility of reducing the effectiveness of the n95 respirator. reuse of n95s may be enhanced by wearing a surgical facemask over the n95, thus preventing its gross contamination. in addition, a replacement of the n95 mask could be the reusable elastomeric half-mask respirator (ehmr), which has the same ability to filter infected particulate matter and allows for a tight fit over the face. in addition, the face piece can be disinfected with alcohol or bleach and the cartridges can be replaced to allow for reuse. pompeii et al 15 recently reported that healthcare personnel can be rapidly fit tested and trained to use the ehmr. the utilization of other types of masks with the same functionality as the n95 has been discussed, including the use of anesthesia face masks attached to hepa filter and straps. see the occupational safety and health administration (osha) video on the application of n95 and ehmrs at https://www. osha. gov/ video/ respiratory_ protection/ resptypes. html.during a heavy influx of patients affected with covid-19, hospital bed availability and critical care resources may become severely limited. a typical approach has been to create capacity by limiting routine clinical work. however, other clinical needs continue and cannot be ignored as the delay in management of emergent or urgent patient care can increase morbidity and mortality. disrupted supply chains leading to limited ppes, medical devices, and critical care resources and limitations in inpatient capacity make it necessary to identify patients whose care may be delayed without harm versus those whose health will be compromised by delay in care.a successful strategy for determining which invasive procedures should be allowed to proceed must take into consideration the medical urgency or risk to the patient, the resources required before, during and after the procedure, and the resources available within the local health system. one very reasonable approach was adopted by the trihealth hospital system in cincinnati, ohio (m delworth, md; d kirkpatrick, md) and is offered here for consideration. the tiers of care take each of the factors listed previously into consideration so that lower priority (higher level number) cases are the first to be cancelled in a 'bottom up' approach (box 2).while this stratification of case priority is clearly logical, interpretation requires a nuanced understanding of the clinical conditions being considered. for example, a cerebrovascular or endovascular specialist may see cases of obviously high urgency, such as stroke or subarachnoid hemorrhage, and cases clearly considered elective, such as embolization of a low-grade dural fistula causing tinnitus. however, many other cases are in the grey zone-for example, large unruptured aneurysms with significant yearly risk of rupture, carotid endarterectomy or stent for symptomatic disease, which should be done sooner rather than later as benefit wanes the longer one waits.consideration should also be given to what kind of delay is reasonable in some situations when it comes to prioritizing patients on a future schedule on a way back towards normalcy.many disease states may allow for several months of delay without any evidence of expectation of harm to the patient in excess of the periprocedural risk in itself.assignment of cases at priority levels ii and iii should consider the risk of progression or recurrence of disease, the likely rate of that progression, and the potential adverse effect on the patient's outcome should progression or recurrence occur. it must also take into consideration the resources required to perform the procedure and to manage the patient before and after the procedure. one condition may have only a moderate concern for progression or recurrence, but its management may require few critical resources and only a brief stay in hospital, if any. another may have a higher concern for progression or recurrence but require a lengthy stay in the icu, possibly on a ventilator, and use of critical resources for many days. in this scenario, the first procedure may be allowed to move forward but the second may not. guidance for appropriate prioritization of common neurovascular procedures based on these criteria is given in box 3.infection from the sars-cov-2 virus has led to the covid-19 pandemic. given the large number of patients affected, healthcare personnel and facility resources are stretched to the limit; however, the need for urgent and emergent surgical and interventional care will continue. we describe best practice options when providing neurosurgical treatment of patients with covid-19 in order to optimize clinical care and minimize the exposure of patients and staff. the described best practices may apply to a variety of operative and interventional procedures given that the goal of preventing sars-cov-2 exposure is of the utmost importance in all disciplines.this is a pdf file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. this version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. the new emergent coronavirus, severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), broke out in wuhan, china [1] . the virus immediately spread worldwide, causing many covid-19 cases and deaths. sars-cov-2 resides in the upper respiratory tract and spreads via droplets from coughing or sneezing. the world health organization recommends washing hands with soap, maintaining social distancing, and avoiding crowded places to prevent the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f spread of viral infections [2] . in addition to these preventive measures, most countries recommend travel restrictions and curfews.influenza viruses, rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, coronaviruses (229e, oc43, nl63 and hku1) and the human metapneumovirus cause common cold-like symptoms [3] . of these viruses, influenza viruses are an annual epidemic in the winter. owing to the development of treatments and vaccines, the mortality rate from influenza viruses is low.in december 2019, the sars-cov-2 outbreak coincided with the influenza viral epidemic. seasonal influenza activity in japan was lower in 2020 than in previous years [4] .however, whether sars-cov-2 is more infectious than other viruses remains unknown. here, we performed genetic analyses to determine which viruses were spreading in the japanese population. this epidemiologic study shows the infectability of each virus after implementing social preventive measures against sars-cov-2.we studied 191 patients exhibiting cold-like symptoms from 10 march 2020 to 7 may 2020 in our district 100-150 km west of tokyo, japan. nasopharyngeal samples were collected from all patients using cotton swabs and universal transport media (copan, murrieta, ca, usa). the institutional review board at yamanashi central hospital approved this study and the use of an opt-out consent method (g-2019-1). the requirement for written informed consent was waived. participation in the study by patients was optional.to analyze the viral species related to patients' respiratory diseases, we performed multiplex pcr targeting 17 viruses and three bacterial species using the filmarray respiratory panel (biomérieux, marcy-l'etoile, france) per the manufacturer's instructions. briefly, buffer and 300 μl from the nasopharyngeal swab were injected into the filmarray pouch. the reaction proceeded automatically on the filmarray torch system. the limit of detection was listed as previously reported (table 1 ) [5] .the total nucleic acid was automatically isolated from the nasopharyngeal swabs using the magmax viral/pathogen nucleic acid isolation kit (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa) on kingfisher duo prime (thermo fisher scientific) as previously described [6, 7] . to detect sars-cov-2, we performed rt-pcr as previously described [7, 8] . the rt-pcr assays were conducted on a steponeplus real-time pcr system with the following j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cycling conditions: 50°c for 5 min for reverse transcription, 95°c for 20 s, and 45 cycles of 95°c for 3 s and 60°c for 30 s. the threshold cycle (ct) value was assigned to each pcr reaction, and the amplification curve was visually assessed.of 191 patients, 32 (17%) were infected at least one causative virus, including human rhinovirus/enterovirus (n=11), human metapneumovirus (n=7), coronavirus 229e (n=4), coronavirus oc43 (n=3), adenovirus (n=2), respiratory syncytial virus (n=2) and coronavirus nl63 (n=1) ( table 2 ). two patients were simultaneously infected with two viruses each, one with adenovirus and human rhinovirus/enterovirus and one with adenovirus and human metapneumovirus ( table 2) (figure 1) . thus, the sars-cov-2 infection prevalence was 4%, while the influenza viral prevalence was 0% in this cohort ( figure 1 ). this comparative analysis suggests that sars-cov-2 was much more infectious than the influenza viruses were under the same conditions in the same region.the respiratory panel detected that 17% of the cohort (32/191 patients) were infected with causative viruses. seven viral species were detected, none of which were influenza viruses. at the start of the coronavirus epidemic, the infectivity of sars-cov-2 was unknown compared to that of influenza viruses. our data implies that influenza viral spread would be suppressed under the preventive measure.this study evaluated the differences in infectivity between sars-cov-2 and influenza viruses. infection prevention measures, such as handwashing and mask wearing, led to fewer influenza infections [9] . mask wearing is a common practice among japanese in the winter. after japanese government announced on the citizen to take preventive measures, "behavioural changes" (i.e. avoid crowded places, wearing a mask, handwashing with soap and hand sanitizers) were as clearly observed at the end of march [10] . sakamoto et al. analyzed epidemiological data from 2014-2020 and showed that the number of seasonal influenza cases was lower in 2020 than in previous years in japan [4] . these observations along with the current results suggest different infectious activity levels between seasonal influenza viruses and sars-cov2.we revealed the infection rate of respiratory viruses as well as sars-cov-2 (table 2) . recent study showed surgical mask is important to prevent viral shedding [9] . in particular, detection rate of common coronavirus and influenza virus decreased in droplet and aerosol after waring mask, but less effective for rhinovirus [9] . concordant with these results, our data showed highest infection rate is caused by the rhinovirus / enterovirus. although this was a prospective study, there were limitations. first, this study was conducted by a single-center in our district. national registry indicated a marked reduction in influenza viral infections at the end rather than at the beginning of winter [4] , which coincided with our study. second, it needs a comparator group. a retrospective and/or prospective study with data before and after preventive measure against would answer the difference of infectivity among viruses. third, the influenza vaccination status was not investigated. the this study showed that taking stringent measures may prevent influenza viruses, which have more strongly affected human life for a longer time. ethics approval the institutional review board at yamanashi central hospital approved this study and the use of an opt-out consent method. the requirement for written informed consent was waived. patients could refuse to participate in the study.the datasets in the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. in early 2003, severe acute respiratory syn-instance, hong kong and other sars-affected countries were originally banned from attending the drome (sars), swept through hospitals and com-2003 special olympics world summer games in munities in hong kong and subsequently to 32 other ireland because of contingency measures taken to countries or regions. [1] initially, there was internatackle the sars problem. it is extremely uncomtional panic as not much was known about sars. mon for a government, rather than an event or-nevertheless, in just over 2 months following the ganiser, to limit participation in a sporting event. first outbreak, there were more than ten books, hun-after long debates and explanations, on 9 june, dreds of scientific articles and countless newspaper 2003, the irish government finally rescinded and clippings being published in relation to sars. this allowed the hong kong team to attend the games. could be one of the new records in this 'age of however, a condition was imposed requiring the information'. however, there are facts as well as hong kong athletes to attend a 10-day quarantine fallacies in some of these publications.training camp in a city free from sars. the original sars had a significant impact on the local decision was undoubtedly a difficult one. it might healthcare system. it also affected sporting activities have been easier if the decision makers had been at all levels, from recreational to professional. there provided with the most up-to-date, complete and is always concern about the possibility of contagion appropriate information about sars. among athletes and spectators in competitive sports.as far as the sports physician is concerned, ade-many sports involve close contact and a major comquate and correct knowledge is necessary to effecpetition will usually draw a large crowd and may tively address any contagion from the perspective of bring people from different countries together. this prevention, early recognition and timely control of creates a situation that may enhance the risk of a spread. appropriate hygienic measures should be contagious disease spreading locally and even globtaken during sports training and competition, but it ally. not surprisingly, after the sars outbreak, may not be necessary to suspend all sports activities, many international events including both contact as happened in some settings during the 2003 sars and non-contact sports, which were originally outbreak. the purpose of this paper is, therefore, to scheduled in the first half of 2003, were cancelled or summarise the most current and appropriate inforpostponed. for not just single event competitions, but also sars is a serious infectious disease that is assomulti-event games were affected by sars. for ciated with a novel coronavirus. [2] [3] [4] [5] sars evolved into a global outbreak in march, 2003. [6-8] in no-epidemiological criteria include close contact vember, 2002, many cases of highly infectious and with sars cases or travel to an area with communisevere atypical pneumonia of unknown origin were ty transmission of sars. laboratory criteria have noted in guangdong province in southern china. in been added as evidence of infection with sarsretrospect, the clinical features fit into the who associated coronavirus (sars-cov). 'probable' case definition of sars; however, it was not report-cases refer to those meeting the clinical criteria for ed widely at that stage. sars was first recognised in severe respiratory illness of unknown aetiology and hong kong in late february, 2003. [9, 10] the index satisfying the epidemiological criteria. 'suspect' case, a doctor from southern china, had been unwell cases refer to those meeting the clinical criteria for before travelling to hong kong. he was admitted to moderate respiratory illness of unknown aetiology one of the public hospitals in hong kong with and satisfying the epidemiological criteria. symptoms of atypical pneumonia. immediately anthe mean incubation period of the sars virus is outbreak was triggered, firstly in the hospital and 4-6 days and 95% of patients experience the onset later spreading widely throughout the community.of symptoms within 14.22 days of infection.[1] pa-on 12 march, 2003, the who issued a global tients with sars usually present with high fever sars alert. [8] the who subsequently received re-(temperature >38ºc), dry cough, chills and rigor, ports of the syndrome from china, singapore, viet-and prodromal symptoms (malaise, myalgia, headnam, canada, the us and germany. on 21 march, ache and dizziness). [2, 9, 10, 12] the relative frequencies 2003, the who issued a preliminary clinical of all reported symptoms vary slightly in different description of sars. [11] according to the descrip-case clusters. tion, the majority of sars patients were previouslyin the first reported sars case series, lee et al. [9] healthy adults aged between 25 and 70 years. all reported that all patients presented with fever (tempatients presented with high fever (>38ºc), someperature >38ºc for >24 hours) and a majority with times associated with chills, rigor, malaise, myalgia chills and rigors (73%), prodromal symptoms and other respiratory symptoms. the mortality rate (50-60%) and coughing (57%). [9] productive cough, was high, reaching 20%. the literature to date sugsore throat, coryza, nausea and vomiting, and diargests that sars is associated with a novel coronrhoea were less common symptoms. based on their avirus. data, lee et al. [9] proposed that the presentation of the accepted case definition of sars is that sars was triphasic. the first phase, termed the proposed by the who and adopted by the us viral replication phase, occurred in the first week center of disease control and prevention (cdc). with most patients presenting with fever, myalgia current criteria for defining a case include clinical and chills. as the disease progressed into second data, epidemiological data and laboratory tests. ac-week, 70% of the patients developed early immune cording to the cdc, the sars case definition was response and cytokines were found in the blood revised on 23 may, 2003, with the clinical criteria stream. in this immune hyperactive phase, there was being categorised as: (i) asymptomatic; (ii) mild significant lung destruction and patients began to respiratory illness; (iii) moderate respiratory illness develop respiratory symptoms and observable chest (fever >38ºc, cough, dyspnoea or hypoxia); or (iv) radiographic changes. in the third week, patients severe respiratory illness (additional radiological entered the pulmonary destruction phase, which evidence of pneumonia or respiratory distress syn-clinically resembled acute respiratory distress syndrome).drome. canadian data suggest that the earliest symp-toms are fever, prodromal symptoms, cough or cov has been isolated after 36 hours from seating, dyspnoea and diarrhoea. [2] from the outbreak in paper, a formica surface, a plastered wall; after 72 amoy gardens in hong kong, peiris et al. [13] found hours from a plastic surface and stainless steel; and that many patients developed recurrent fever (85%) after 96 hours on a glass slide. it is, therefore, and watery diarrhoea (73%). possible that the virus can be transmitted by hands in general, physical examination on admission that have been in contact with these infected surwill show high temperature (>38ºc, generally rangfaces. ing from 35-40.3ºc ). tachycardia, tachypnoea and participation in sports training and competition borderline low blood pressure may be observed. may further add to the above list of possible trans-oxygen saturation level on normal air condition mission pathways. sharing sporting equipment and may be at borderline situation. inspiratory crackles practice surfaces can be another potential means of are usually heard at the base of the lung but wheeztransmission. sars-infected bodily fluids and reing is an uncommon finding. rash, lymphadespiratory secretions can contaminate sporting equipnopathy and purpura are rare. ment and practice surfaces. close personal contact during training and competition in contact sports(wrestling, judo, basketball, etc.) can further transin sports mit sars from person to person.a crowded changing room where dense steam the coronavirus is one of the two most common and vapour is generated from hot showers can be pathogens for upper respiratory tract infection (urdangerous in the sense that aerosolised viral parti-ti) [14] and it is also the most probable pathogen for cles can be transmitted from any viral carrier to the sars. [4] transmission methods may, therefore, be whole team. this is the most probable transmission similar for both infections. the who has reported pathway of the outbreak in amy gardens, hong that sars is not airborne but is carried in virus-kong. steam and vapour enhance the floating time laden droplets. [1] this suggests that transmission is of the virus-carrying droplets.[1] possible when aerosolised viral particles come into contact with the susceptible host's mucous mem-frequent travel may further increase the probabranes, most commonly the nose, but also with the bility of transmission in sports environments. staymouth and eyes. the virus has been found to be ing in relatively crowded aircraft or vehicles with stable in faeces (and urine) at room temperature for poor ventilation can be risky if there is an infected at least 1-2 days. [15] transmission through a defecperson travelling with the team. however, the tive sewage system was, in fact, proven in the case who [17] reported on 23 may, 2003, that symptoof the outbreak at amoy gardens estate in hong matic probable sars cases on only four flights kong. [16] the sars virus has been reported as have been associated with possible transmission occurring in saliva, tears and urine. [1] at the time of onboard. olsen et al. [18] concluded that sars may writing, no evidence of the sars virus in a patient's occur on an aircraft when infected persons travel sweat has been reported. nevertheless, it is still during the symptomatic phase of illness. therefore, reasonable to assume that the sars virus may be it is still advisable to take precautions to prevent present in a patient's sweat as it is in other bodily fluids. as summarised by the who, [1] the sars-possible transmission during flights.athletes with urinary and bowel stomas or difficulty with bladder and bowel control should pay special attention to sealing off any leakage before 3.1 avoiding contact exercise, particularly for water sport events.at time of writing, there have been no reports on avoiding contact with the virus is the ultimate the survival of the sars virus in patient's sweat; way to prevent infection. possible measures range however, sweat should be treated as a possible from avoiding unnecessary contact with people, esmeans of transmitting sars. showering after trainpecially those who are infected, wearing masks in ing is, therefore, recommended to help to control the high-risk areas to applying sound personal hygiene potential spread. in sports activities involving close practice.contact (e.g. wrestling), showering before training daily monitoring of body temperature before and competition is also recommended.[20] practice will help to identify infected athletes within the team. fever has been identified as one of the minor abrasions should be cleaned with soap and major symptoms of sars. [4] it is generally believed water before applying antiseptic cream and bandagthat sars patients will become infectious only after ing to prevent entry of the virus. clothing used the development of symptoms. it has also been during practice should be changed and laundered found that sars is most infectious on the tenth day everyday. sporting equipment should be sanitised of infection and it is rare for patients who have been with diluted bleach (1 part bleach in 99 parts water) isolated within 5 days of becoming ill to transmit daily. similarly, practice surfaces should be cleaned infection. [1] hence, isolating individuals with fever with diluted bleach both before and after training. will be one of the most effective and practical ways other personal hygiene practices should include to avoid contact. athletes experiencing fever should special precautions during meals to prevent cross not be allowed to train and immediate medical adcontamination when sharing food. the use of servvice should be sought.ing utensils should be encouraged. before serving, all food should be properly covered to minimise any 3.2 personal hygiene possible contamination.maintaining personal hygiene is another way to 3.3 improving immunity reduce the risk of infection. based on the fact that the sars virus can be found in excreta, [15] hand washing after using the bathroom should be strictly resistance to infection depends upon the general applied. frequent hand washing, especially after state of health of an individual as well as the individtouching public facilities and before rubbing one's ual's innate and adaptive immunological compeown nose, mouth and eyes, are effective in prevent-tence. [21] other factors that influence susceptibility ing the transfer of the virus from contaminated sur-include the dose and virulence of the infecting faces to the mucous membranes. covering the micro-organism. [8] as sars is an extremely virumouth and nose while sneezing and coughing is also lent virus, it is important to enhance the immune essential. used tissue paper should be treated prop-system to reduce the risk of infection. at the time of erly and put in a covered rubbish bin or flushed writing, no study has been published investigating down the toilet. universal precautions [19] should be the relationship between exercise, immunity and applied to the handling of blood and bodily fluids sars. therefore, studies examining the relation-(including vomitus, nasal secretions, etc.).ship between urti and exercise may improve our understanding of the relationship between sars be very high. fever is a consequence of the immune and exercise. system's response to eradicate the invading virus. therefore, it is usually only those who have weak there is a current consensus that moderate exerimmune systems, such as the elderly, [26] who will cise can enhance immune function and thus resisnot have an immune response to the invading virus. tance to viral infection. shephard [22] and peters [23] those who exercise regularly will have a better have stated that a high level of physical conditioning immune system and will have a normal immune had, in a few carefully controlled recent studies, response.[26] therefore, exercising with someone provided evidence of a lower incidence of infection who is active and has no symptoms of sars will symptoms and chronic immunomodulation helping probably constitute a low risk of contracting sars. to increase resistance to infection. nieman et al. [24] have noted that 45 minutes of exercise five times per on the other hand, nieman et al. [24] stated that week at 60% of the heart rate reserve reduced the runners training >96 km/week doubled their odds duration of respiratory symptoms but did not affect for sickness (urti) compared with those training the incidence of urti in 25-to 45-year-old women. <32 km/week. it has been suggested that athletes in a later study, nieman et al. [25] investigated the engaging in marathon-type events and/or engaged in relationship between poor immune function and low very heavy training are at increased risk of urti. [27] levels of physical activity in a group of elderly this may due to the fact that acute exercise (a single women. they concluded that any benefit of regular bout of intense exercise) temporarily decreases the physical activity was more obvious in this group. in activity of several of the immune system's cellular this study, they found that among 67-to 85-year-old components and increases athletes' susceptibility to women, the incidence of urti was lowest in a viruses. [28] however, shephard, [22] in his more rehighly conditioned subgroup, intermediate in a subcent review, stated that in terms of the adverse group of regular walkers and highest in callisthenic effects on the immune system due to very heavy and sedentary control subgroups. they suggested exercise and training, all of the expected epidemiothat t cells were the major component of the imlogical criteria associated with a cause and effect mune system to be altered with age and that a highly relationship have not been met in earlier studies. conditioned elderly woman might have t cells that therefore, very high-intensity exercise may not be function at levels above their sedentary counterparts the causal factor of the lowered immune system. but still somewhat lower than those of young women. on the other hand, natural killer cell activity this controversy may, in part, be due to the was considerably greater in highly conditioned eldvariation in defining 'heavy or very high-intensity' erly women than in either sedentary elderly or exercise. weidner [29] summarised that people who young women. hence, continuous regular moderate exceeded their individual exercise limit (activity exercise can boost the immune systems of elderly frequency, intensity and duration) might be fosterwomen.ing infection. for competitive athletes, it is impossible for them to train at low to moderate intensity, but one concern about sars and physical training is in order to avoid the adverse effects on the immune that there are reports that a small number of sars system due to high-intensity workouts, athletes' patients were asymptomatic. [1] this group consisted training must be systematically monitored to prelargely of elderly patients. if an individual is training vent training beyond individual limits and chronic with another individual who has contracted sars overtraining. but without obvious symptoms (fever), the risk will nieman [27] also concluded that following acute 4. exercise during and after bouts of prolonged high-intensity endurance exer-contracting sars cise, several components of the immune system are suppressed for several hours. this has led to the whether exercise is recommended during and concept of the 'open window' theory, which was after contracting sars is an interesting topic for described as the 1-to 9-hour period following prodiscussion. during the acute phase of the sars longed endurance exercise when the host's defences disease, it is almost impossible for the patient to are decreased and the risk of urti is increased.perform any exercise in the presence of severe during this 'open window' period, athletes should symptoms that may include fever (temperature, be advised to remain isolated from all the possible >38ºc for >24 hours), rigor, dry cough, dyspnoea, sources of infection. malaise, headache and hypoxaemia. [11] relative rest in addition to regular exercise, there are other is, therefore, recommended during this phase of the means to improve immunity against possible sars disease. infection. they include diet, proper rest and reducedcarefully prescribed exercise has been found to psychological stress. an efficient immune system be an essential part of treatment or rehabilitation requires a number of nutrients to sustain itself. essential amino acids, the essential fatty acid -linoleic programme for various chronic diseases such as acid, retinol (vitamin a), folic acid, pyridoxine (vicardiac disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary distamin b6), cyanocobalamin (vitamin b12), ascorbic ease, hypertension and asthma. [23, 29, 36, 40] it is, thereacid (vitamin c), tocopherol (vitamin e), zinc, copfore, expected that an individually prescribed exerper, iron and selenium have all been found to be cise programme that aims to improve cardiorespirabeneficial to the immune system. [30] other nutrients tory function and general wellbeing, will also be that may help to maintain a healthy immune system beneficial to stabilised sars patients. a muscle include arginine, glutamine, omega-3-fatty acids strengthening programme may be prescribed prior and nucleotides. [31, 32] sleep deprivation is known to to cardiovascular training. after weeks of bed rest, have a detrimental effect on the immune system. [33] muscle condition may decrease significantly. [40] getting enough sleep and proper rest is, therefore, therefore, muscle strengthening programmes, espealso important in ensuring an efficient immune system. furthermore, psychological stress and deprescially for lower body muscles are required before sion were found to be associated with immunosuprecovering patients can perform other locomotory pression. [34, 35] a 'stress, cytokine, depression' modrehabilitation programmes. however, extra attention el has been proposed as a biological pathway to should be given to the possible presence of any explain the link between stressful life events and postviral fatigue syndrome. this is the prolonged depression. [35] it is generally agreed that the stress period of debilitation sometimes observed during associated with competition may make athletes the recovery phase from an apparent viral infecmore susceptible to infectious illnesses. [36] declines tion. [24] although there has been no report to date, of in immune function can be related to heavy training any postviral fatigue syndrome in relation to sars, prior to competition, [23, 24] psychological stress relatthe risk of an extended clinical course resulting from ed to competition, [37] the exposure to extremes of attempts to work through this syndrome should be heat and cold, sleep deprivation and time-zone shifts. [38, 39] noted. [38] 5. exercise with a mask (<0.1%) was possible in n92 masks during violent sneezing or coughing. therefore, when using a sur-during the sars outbreak in hong kong, chilgical mask, reaerosolisation of the trapped virus is dren were required to wear surgical masks during possible under continuous high flow rate during school lessons. this was a safety measure imposed exercise. by the hong kong special administrative region government. however, should they wear surgical 5.2 effect on exercise masks for physical education (pe) lessons? before wearing a mask incurs some penalties associated answering this question, there are several aspects to with the interference between wearers and the envibe considered.ronment. johnson et al. [45] noted that workers wearing masks could not work as long or as hard as they 5 .1 safety concerns could when not wearing masks. such phenomena a mask serves the function of blocking the re-may also occur in exercise. lerman et al. [46] found lease of disease-causing aerosols from the patient to that with the increase in inspiratory resistance due to the external air space when they speak, exhale, wearing a mask during exercise testing, a significant cough or sneeze; and stopping or blocking the dis-decrease in physical performance and tidal volume, ease-causing aerosols being transferred to healthy an increase in the ratio of inspiratory to expiratory people when they inhale. therefore, the surgical time, peak inspiratory pressure and increased co2 mask must be able to inhibit aerosol penetration. retention were observed. they concluded that diffi-mccullough et al. [41] stated that the penetration rate culty in inspiration was significantly correlated with of aerosols through a surgical mask depended on the inspiratory resistance and seemed to be the main flow rate and the type of organism in the aerosols. reason for cessation of effort. wilson and raven [47] when mycobacterium abscessus and bacillus sub-also noted that wearing of respirator masks reduced tilis were assessed at a high flow rate (85 l/min), forced vital capacity by an average of 11.6% there was significantly higher penetration than what (0.65l); forced expiratory volume in 1 second by was seen at a low flow rate (45 l/min). the surgical 7.3% (0.33l) and maximum voluntary ventilation in mask was much less efficient in blocking aerosols 15 seconds by 7.4% (12.4 l/min). they hythan was the n95 mask. [41] the surgical mask with a pothesised that the difference in peak inspired flow filter had a 25% penetration rate of sub-micrometre-with and without the respirator was the best predicsized aerosols at a flow rate of 5 l/min to 70% at tor of performance time with the respirator during an 100 l/min. [42] the penetration rate through surgical endurance walk to exhaustion. therefore, the resismasks can be well over 25% when the children are tance of the mask results in a detrimental effect on working or exercising at moderate or maximal inten-exercise performance, especially at maximal loadsity. the maximal ventilation rate for children aged ing. 11.2 ± 1.4 years (in hong kong) has been found to one study found a statistically significant debe about 46.7 ± 10.1 l/min for girls and 50.3 ± 11.0 crease in maximal oxygen uptake (vo2max) for par-l/min for boys (unpublished data). therefore, proticipants wearing respirator masks compared with tection afforded by surgical masks may be minimal. those without masks. [45] the authors also found that reaerosolisation cannot be neglected when exer-the lactate and ventilation threshold were not affectcising with a mask. wang et al. [43] and willeke and ed by the mask condition. therefore, masks may qian [44] indicated that some reaerosolisation only cause significant impairment of exercise at intensities >80-85% of v o2max (at about the anaerobic threshold level). [48] in summary, taking the safety issue and effects on exercise capacity into consideration, children can only work or exercise at their submaximal level, below the anaerobic threshold, if they are wearing surgical masks. however, there are still some other factors that have to be considered, such as air temperature and relative humidity, before suggesting major team sports like basketball and soccer were suspended during pe lessons and after school activi-after the outbreak of sars in early march, the ties. as a result, a noticeable drop in students' education authority of hong kong announced that physical activity levels was indicated by pe teachall primary and secondary school classes were susers. based on subjective observation, secondary and pended in late march, 2003. all school children primary school pe teachers reported an average were advised to stay home and avoid physical con-32% and 40% decline in physical activity levels, tact with others. seven weeks later, when sars was respectively. over 50% of the respondents revealed under control, secondary and primary school classes that pe apparatus and equipment was not clean were resumed on 16 and 23 may, 2003, respectively. enough and there were insufficient staff members to the local education authority mandated that all clean up such apparatus before a pe class. moreostudents and teachers should wear masks all the time ver, 25% of the pe teachers revealed that the changin schools.ing rooms were unclean. over half (53%) of secon-a survey was conducted by a local hong kong dary and 47% of primary school pe teachers were university to determine how the school pe and worried about their students being infected during extra-curricular activity programmes were being af-pe classes. fected after classes had resumed. questionnaires were sent out to 400 secondary and 712 primary 6. conclusion school pe teachers. within 1 week, 276 secondary and 530 primary school pe teachers had responded.sars is a highly infectious disease, caused by table i shows a brief summary of the findings the novel coronavirus, with possible severe clinical concerning the special arrangements made by the sequelae. not only has it put enormous strain on the schools.healthcare system worldwide, it has also affected the in addition, the survey further investigated the physical, psychological and social behaviours of perceptions of the pe teachers on the influences on affected communities across the globe. without exthe pe programme of the sars preventive mea-ception, sports activities and sports medicine pracsures in school settings. half (50%) of the secondary tices have also been affected. with adequate knowland 46% of the primary school pe teachers reported edge of sars and common sense, we stand a better adjustments to their normal pe curriculum. most chance of avoiding the sars panic spreading curriculum time involved changes to individual worldwide.the emerging disease covid-19 caused by the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 was first identified in wuhan, china in december 2019. 1, 2 the virus has led to thousands of deaths in china, and the outbreak of covid-19 has been well controlled in china through tremendous efforts. 2 however, the virus has sparked a pandemic and is spreading rapidly in many countries. 3 to avoid the tragedy of wuhan in this february that the surge of too many patients overwhelmed the medical systems, 2-7 a simple and effective approach to slow the spread of the virus is emergently desired worldwide.handwashing and mask-wearing are important to slow the spread of sars-cov-2. [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] however, it is often difficult to wash hands in time, and current medical masks which are usually called this work was conducted in the college of veterinary medicine, qingdao agricultural university. surgical masks are in shortage in many countries. people in some countries have been encouraged to make masks by themselves at home to guard against sars-cov-2, but it remains unclear whether these homemade masks are effective to block the virus. moreover, many people have been confused about the claims of some politicians and scientists that medical masks are not useful to protect humans from the infection of sars-cov-2.in this study, we evaluated the efficacy of three types of masks in blocking avian influenza virus (aiv) in aerosols and the efficacy of instant hand wiping in removing aiv from hands. aiv was used to mock sars-cov-2 because they are both enveloped and pleomorphic spherical viruses with a diameter of around 80 to 120 nm.we also reviewed previous reports regarding the efficacy of masks. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] with these data, we propose a simple approach to slow the spread of the pandemic coronavirus.qingdao live bird market in 2019. the virus was propagated using embryonated eggs. virus quantification was performed using a realtime taqman reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay reported previously. 16 the efficacy of instant hand wiping in removing aiv from hands was evaluated using a towel soaked in water containing soap powder or sodium hypochlorite. in principle, if the virus amount declines by 50%, the c t value of the realtime taqman rt-pcr shall increase by 1. our experiment with three repeats showed that the virus amount declined by 50%, the c t value increased by 0.96 (95% confidence interval: 0.86-1.04), using 1:8 serially diluted allantoic fluid of inoculated embryonated eggs containing the aiv. taken together, we presumed that the virus amount declines by 50% if the c t value increases by 1, and the virus amount declines by (100 × (1 − 1/(2^y)))% if the c t value increases by y, in this study.we put 5 μl of the undiluted allantoic fluid containing the aiv on the hand of one author of this study, and spread the fluid around the palm, and kept for 3 minutes. we then wiped the palm three times from the root of the palm to the tips of the fingers, using a towel soaked in water containing soap or sodium hypochlorite and then wrung to remove most of the water inside. we eluted the hand using 5 ml phosphate-buffered saline (pbs), and rna from 200 μl of the eluted pbs was extracted for the detection of the amount of the virus using the taqman rt-pcr. each treatment and the control without wiping were conducted independently for three times. table 1 showed, as compared with the control without the towel wiping, the virus on the palm declined by 98.36%, 96.62%, and 99.98% through wiping using the wet towel soaked in water containing 1.00% (g/g) soap powder, 0.05% (g/g) active chlorine from sodium hypochlorite, or 0.25% (g/g) active chlorine from sodium hypochlorite, respectively. all the relevant c t values in table 1 were of significant difference (p < .01) by the t test, except those two pertaining to 1.00% soap powder and 0.05% active chlorine.the allantoic fluid containing the aiv was 1:10 diluted using pbs. the fluid was added into the nebulizer for producing the aerosols containing the virus. the aerosols were collected using a seamless f i g u r e 1 the system mocking human breath for evaluation of the efficacy of masks plastic bag (figure 1 ). the nebulizer was paused when the bag was bulging. the air containing the aerosols was inhaled into and out of the syringes for 100 times through the synchronous piston movement of the four syringes, to mock human breath. then the mask was unwrapped, and the sponge inside the syringe was taken out and added with 2 ml pbs. the sponge was pressed for five times using a 200-μl pipette tip. rna from 1 ml of the pbs was extracted for the detection of the amount of the virus using the taqman rt-pcr. each treatment was conducted independently for four times. table 2 showed that, as compared with the polyester cloth, the n95 mask because clean water is often unavailable at hand, people can be infected through hand-mouth, hand-nose, or hand-eye contact before handwashing. in this sense, it is important to have one item at hand, such as 75% alcohol, hand sanitizer gel, disinfecting wipes, for instant hand hygiene after we have touched something possibly contaminated by the virus. this is more important for those traveling long-distance using public vehicles or having touched some items frequently touched by other people. this study suggested that instant hand wiping using a wet towel containing soap or sodium hypochlorite removed most viruses from hands. water containing 1.00% soap powder is not only helpful for wiping away the virus using its surfactant activity but also efficiently inactivates enveloped viruses including coronavirus, as proved by multiple previous studies. [17] [18] [19] moreover, water containing 1.00% soap powder is safe for skin and other items including clothes. it is worth noting that the concentration of soap powder and sodium hypochlorite is vital for their wiping and virucidal effects.various studies have suggested that sars-cov-2 can be transmitted through droplets and aerosols, 1-7 and so hand hygiene is inadequate to prevent infection of sars-cov-2, and blocking masks are needed. this study showed that n95 masks blocked nearly all the mock virus, and medical masks blocked approximately 97% of the virus, and the homemade mask blocked approximately 95% of the virus. therefore, the medical masks are not fully protective in hospitals but are useful for common social occasions. when medical masks are in shortage, the homemade masks made of four-layer kitchen paper (each layer contains three thin layers) and one layer of polyester cloth should be helpful, as indicated by this study. the kitchen paper is effective in blocking the virus possibly because of its multiple layers, nonwoven structure, and virus-absorbing property. as we have tested by ourselves, the tested homemade masks are more breathable than the n95 masks. one advantage of the homemade mask is that the kitchen paper can be changed frequently. it is worth noting that the homemade masks shall be of less blocking efficacy if made of fewer layers of kitchen paper. other types of homemade masks, especially those made of cloth alone, may be unable to block the virus and thus confer no protection against the virus. 20,21 additionally, although a person inhales much more than 100 times a day, the mocking data are reliable because aerosols containing the virus to be inhaled by a person on most common social occasions are fewer than in this experiment. some randomized controlled trials (rcts) did not support the efficacy of medical masks because medical masks could not reduce infection rates of some viral respiratory diseases. 14, 15 consequently, people in some countries opposed to using medical masks on common social occasions. in effect, the conclusions of these rcts could be erroneous, as reflected by the following assumed scenario. supposed the virus could have ten opportunities to infect a human during a period of 30 days, wearing medical masks could block three of the 10 opportunities and thus reduce the infection risk by 30%, although it itself could not block the other seven opportunities during the 30 days. therefore, the fact that medical mask-wearing did not reduce the infection rate could suggest that medical mask-wearing is inadequate to prevent the infection, rather than useless for reducing the infection risk. some other rcts and many nonrandomized studies regarding the use of medical masks supported the notion that wearing medical masks could reduce infection risks of some viral respiratory diseases. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] moreover, medical mask-wearing can enhance one's vigilance, prevent direct hand-mouth or hand-nose t a b l e 1 percentage of aiv removed through instant wiping as compared without wiping material for towel soaking c t increase (x ± sd) percentage removed (95% ci) at the writing of this manuscript, the deadly novel coronavirus is on a rampage, having infected nearly 4.2 million people worldwide already, claiming about 6% of them. while airborne droplets, emitting from the cough and sneeze of the infected population is directly implicated for the spread of the disease, details on the risks associated with different human activities like sneezing, coughing and even talking aloud for transmission of this deadly virus are still emerging (beans 2020) . as a consequence, advisories on use of masks, especially by non-affected population outside the care-giving fraternity have seen significant revisions both at the national and international levels. although who advisory ( https ://www.who.int/emerg encie s/disea ses/ novel -coron aviru s-2019/advic e-for-publ/when-and-how-touse-masks 2020) had earlier recommended the use of n95 face masks for all healthcare professionals and the patients, it discouraged the use of n95 masks by common people -primarily to ease the pressure on n95 demand, so those who really need the masks can get them-the latest advisory (world health organization 2020) has listed benefits of mask use even by the unaffected population. similarly, the indian ministry of health and family welfare has modified its earlier advisory (ministry of health and family welfare 2020a) for the use of masks by only affected individuals and frontline caregivers, to recommend use of ordinary (i.e., non-n95 grade) homemade masks, made of cloth, by every individual (ministry of health and family welfare 2020b).the online version of this article (https ://doi.org/10.1007/s4140 3-020-00115 -9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. thus, there is now a general urgency for widespread production and use of protective masks to reduce risk of both infection by asymptomatic carriers and community-level infection of healthy individuals. in the present situation, it is difficult to supply masks to each and every corner of a large country like india. moreover, the high price of some available masks is prohibitive for a large a section of our population, thus preventing the widespread use of masks.a crucial piece of information for designing protective masks and assessing their efficacy is the fluid dynamic data related to coughing and sneezing, namely, volume flow rate of air ejected along with number density, size and velocity distributions of the ejected droplets and aerosols. both these factors play determining roles in the trajectory of the droplets and their longevity as air-borne particles. although such detailed studies in the context of covid-19 virus transmission are, expectedly, scarce in the peer-reviewed open literature, similar studies are available in the context of other air-borne infectious diseases, like influenza and earlier versions of corona virus, like sars and mers. highspeed flow visualization studies have shown that during violent respiratory events, like sneezing and coughing, the pathogen-carrying droplets of diameter 10 μm may remain suspended even at several meters away from the source (bouroiba et al. 2014) . moreover, such small droplets, from the cough or sneeze cloud can be re-suspended by the ambient air currents having velocities of the order of 1 cm/s. a study on the fluid dynamics of cough (gupta et al. 2009 ) has shown that the instantaneous volume flow rate of air could be represented as a combination of gamma functions, whose parameters vary with the medical condition of an individual. a typical cough was observed to generate peak flow rates in the range 3-8.5 l/s in males and 1.6-6 l/s in females, while the total volume exhaled was 400-1600 ml in males and 250-1250 ml in females. it was found that sequential coughs were combinations of single coughs. the first cough was found to be identical to a single cough, while the second one was a scaled-down version of the first. yang et al. (2007) reported that the average droplet size distribution was 0.58-5.42 μm and 82% of the droplets were in the range 0.74-2.12 μm. thus, face masks have dual challenges of preventing liquid penetration for high-velocity droplets from inside to outside during cough and sneeze, and also the ingress of suspended droplets from the ambient.here we discuss an effort by cast, jadavpur university, to develop a simple procedure for making a three-layer mask from low cost, readily available materials. the choice of materials, which, in this case are readily available in a house or in the neighborhood, is important since the supply of raw materials is an issue in these days of lock-down or restricted mobility. we ensured that by using these materials, the effectiveness of the mask has not been sacrificed. the process is simple enough to make a mask on one's own in any of the available diy designs templates chosen by the individual. at the same time, we paid particular attention to the salient functional requirements of the mask: (1) compared to the n95 masks (which is strictly recommended for acute patients and healthcare professionals), the masks are more breathable, so that people can wear it over longer duration without serious discomfort; this implies that the pore size is larger than the n95 filters; (2) the three layers should prevent escape of droplets as the wearer sneezes through it, and at the same time, the innermost layer of the mask should remain dry to ensure comfort; (3) the mask should prevent ingress of droplets from the ambient during inhalationboth through the fabric and the gap between the face and the mask; (4) the mask is easy to sanitize/disinfect for re-use.keeping in view the above requirements, the proposed mask is made of three layers of fabric-the innermost one, which is in contact with the person wearing it, the intermediate one, and the outermost layer. the innermost and outermost layers are made of a commonly-available, nonwoven, polypropylene fabric, which intrinsically has a mildly hydrophobic nature. presently, we have proposed the cloth carry bags (which are often used as a substitute for plastic shopping bags) as a quick option. the intermediate layer is made up of cotton/cellulosic fibers that are intrinsically hydrophilic. a material which can be used is a cloth duster or a cotton towel (the ubiquitous bengali gamchha) for this layer. one could also use old cotton cloth for this layer. figure 1a shows the sequential arrangement of the three layers. inset (a1) shows a magnified view (taken through a standard cellphone camera and a diy-kids' science kit microscope) of the polypropylene layer. the layer comprises of loosely-spun polypropylene (pp) fibers that are held together by periodic thermal stamps. zoomed-in views of the cellulosic (c) hydrophilic layer (inset a2) show the woven structure of the intermediate cellulosic fibers. when a ~ 5 µl size water droplet was dispensed on the polypropylene fabric and imaged using again a science toolbox usb camera (carprie 5.5/7 mm mini waterproof endoscope camera), it displayed a static contact angle of θ s = 120 o ± 3 o (inset a3) and advancing contact angle of θ adv = 131 o ± 2 o (inset a4). since the pp fabric is intrinsically hydrophobic, no apparent degradation of the surface wettability is noticed upon several (tested up to 5) cycles of washing with a standard detergent, followed by adequate rinsing and sun-drying. when viewed under the in-house goniometer, the observed change in the static and advancing contact angles remained below ± 2 o (based on 5 readings), which was within the error bars. the cellulosic layer exhibited rapid wicking (see the video played at 1/4th speed in (https ://www.dropb ox.com/s/1h30p rgk22 lrtaz /esi%20ved io.mp4dl =0 2020), thus rendering any contact angle measurement impossible.the combination of stacked hydrophobic-hydrophilichydrophobic layers typically follows the principle of liquid diode, which is characterized by preferential transport of liquid droplets (mates et al. 2014; chen et al. 2012) . a porous substrate having a hydrophobic top and an underlying hydrophilic layer will allow a liquid droplet to pass through the top and spread at the bottom layer when the droplet dispensed on the top has a momentum and/or capillary pressure exceeding the capillary resistance of the hydrophobic porous material (the hydrohead) (chatterjee et al. 2018) . a droplet impacting on a porous substrate with a velocity u will penetrate the substrate if its dynamic pressure (p d ∼ρu 2 ) exceeds the resisting capillary pressure (∼σ cos θ adv /d pore ), where ρ denotes the liquid density (~ 1000 kg/m 3 ), σ the liquid surface tension (0.07 n/m for water), and d pore the equivalent pore diameter (~ 100 μm for the polypropylene bag materials; see fig. 1a1 ), the penetration velocity of √(σ cos θ adv /ρd pore ) ~ 0.68 m/s. typical droplet velocity close to the mouth during sneezing and coughing, which exceeds ~ 6 m/s, (nishimura et al. 2013 ) implies that when a person wearing this mask sneezes, droplets penetrate the innermost polypropylene layer and get absorbed in the intermediate layer. further penetration through the intermediate layer is prevented due to the immediate wicking action of the hydrophilic cellulosic material. moreover, the combination of the hydrophilic intermediate layer followed by the hydrophobic outermost one behaves in the non-penetrative direction of the liquid diode (mates et al. 2014; chatterjee et al. 2018 ) thus preventing escape of droplets to the ambient around the wearer. the same physics also prevents backflow of the soaked liquid from the intermediate layer to the innermost polypropylene layer, thus keeping the contact surface (next to the skin) dry and ensuring human comfort and hygiene. any droplet suspended in the ambient has a possibility of impinging on the outermost hydrophobic layer during inhaling phase. however, these droplets will, in general be arrested on the hydrophobic layer since the droplet velocities will be below the prerequisite penetration velocity.once the three-layer fabric assembly has been prepared by stitching them together, the mask can be made following any suitable mask-making template available online. we have used one method to make a prototype (fig. 2) using a common sewing machine. in the absence of a sewing machine, the mask can be hand-stitched as well. care has been taken while adopting the correct template, so that the mask has the best possible conformity to the face, and the leakage through gaps between the mask and the skin is minimal. the students' group has played a key role in executing the quick fabrication. the group has also prepared videos (https ://www.youtu be.com/watch v=tboqo feaoo ct=127s2020) to disseminate the procedure among all people. on one hand, any organization can take up the procedure to make it and supply in large numbers; on the other hand, any person can make it for his/her own protection. feedbacks from the individual users have also been positive so far (for a dynamically updated feedback summary, see: https ://www.dropb ox.com/ s/8z1mn byy5h fdyb7 /user%20fee dback .pdf?dl=0). reckoning the raw material cost at the retail market and labor costs, the production cost of the mask was estimated to be rs. 4.5-6 per piece, which can go down by about 50% if the masks are made in large quantities. it is important to note that several improvements in the layout of the mask design and the template is possible (see the electronic supplementary information figure r1 for another design), which is left as a future exercise. the technology has already been picked up by msme entities, with minor modifications in the physical layout, for mass production (https ://www.sulek haink .co.in, product brochure 2020, page 5).the technical specifications of the readily available fabric layers were not available (the porosity and the liquid spreading coefficients of gamcha are not reported) and could not be measured sans the access to the university laboratory facilities due to the nationwide lockdown. therefore, the most important part of the development was testing the threelayer fabric for a near-real-life situation. a quick, in-house experiment was conducted to verify the effectiveness of the mask in arresting the droplets generated from sneezing of the person wearing a mask (see fig. 3a) . a finely-divided spray (photograph in fig. 3a ) of water droplets was impacted from close proximity (~ 50 mm) on the innermost polypropylene layer; each puff from the hand-sprayer dispensed ~ 112 µl of water (this is comparable with the typical volume (~ 75 µl) of fluid ejected in a single cough) (sze to et al. 2009; zhang 2017) . any trace of penetration from the outermost polypropylene layer was visually inspected by holding the mask against a mirror-finish surface during the spray, and checking the mirror surface and the outer surface of the mask for traces of liquid after the spray-test. the sprinkled water droplets were found to cross the innermost polypropylene layer, keeping its exposed (to the skin) surface dry. the middle cotton layer was found (after spraying dyed water and then cutting open the mask) to retain the liquid droplets by wicking (shown by the spread of dyed water in fig. 3b) . no noticeable trace of moisture on the mirror-finish test plate was observed on the outermost side ( fig. 3c ) even after 30 puffs of spray (i.e., 3.6 ml of liquid), indicating that the second polypropylene layer prevented droplet transmission to its outer exposed surface. droplet prevention in the reverse flow was also arrested by this design. when a finely divided mist was released on the outermost polypropylene layerthis time not with high impact, since they emulate droplets suspended in ambient air-the droplets could not penetrate the hydrophobic outer layer. the momentum of the droplets in this case could not overcome the capillary pressure needed to transport through the pores of the polypropylene layer. thus, they stayed on the outermost surface and eventually evaporated. b the stitched halves, and c the final mask. the mask shape can be made more conforming to the wearer's face by incorporating a thin bendable wire inside the top seam (fitting over the nose). this feature is not shown here hence, the mask is also expected to prevent ingress of airborne liquid droplets during inhalation. the performance of the mask did not degrade even after multiple (up to 5 times) washing cycles. it was also verified that a person could breathe comfortably after wearing this mask. further quantitative experimentation (e.g. pressure drop across the mask layers) can be carried out once the university laboratories become accessible again. a comparison was also made with a common triple-layer surgical mask available in the market. figure 3d shows the result of spray penetration test, where traces of moisture were found on the mirror surface, as well as on the exterior of the mask, under similar conditions of testing, indicating that the three-layer surgical mask failed (to prevent droplet penetration) upon 30 puffs of spray.a low-cost diy face mask has been prepared using three layers of porous fabric where a hydrophilic cellulosic intermediate layer is sandwiched between two moderately hydrophobic layers of non-woven commercially-available polypropylene. the combination of the innermost and the middle layer allow high-momentum droplets to penetrate the hydrophobic layer and get absorbed on the hydrophilic layer, while the outermost hydrophobic layer prevents any escape of droplets to the surroundings of the wearer. reverse flow from the outside through the outermost polypropylene layer, or from the middle layer to the innermost layer is also prevented. simple test using a garden sprayer shows the ability of the mask in restricting through transmission of the droplets, either outbound during a sneeze or cough or during inhaling. no trace of water found to penetrate the our triple-layer mask after impinging 30 puffs of the spray, while (d) a regular two-layer surgical mask from the market showed liquid penetrationcovid-19 coronavirus has spread dramatically over the entire globe affecting all health-care systems [29, 30] . in most countries around europe, a discussion has started on how to optimally protect health-care workers [12] [13] [14] 16] . there is a variety of different recommendations for health-care worker protection given by each country or hospital. however, there are to date no clear recommendations for personal protective equipment (ppe) and safety recommendations in the surgical field such as orthopaedics and traumatology.the recommendations should lead to an optimal protection and safety of all health-care workers. a covid-19 infection of just one health-care worker can have a dramatic effect for the health care itself. it is known that the average person infected with covid-19 is likely to infect 1.5 to 3.5 others [4] . a single covid-19 infection among essential health-care workers at a hospital might severely reduce the capacity of an entire hospital [14] . in wuhan, the outbreak region, around 1300 health-care workers became infected [24] . in italy to date, over 100 physicians have died of the disease [14] . the likelihood of becoming infected for health-care workers is more than three times as high as the general population.there is general consensus that all health-care workers should wear regular surgical masks and gloves for all patient interactions. in addition, avoiding unnecessary contact, keeping adequate distance, proper hand hygiene and disinfection is indicated. in most hospitals, positive or suspicious for covid-19 patients are separated from non-infected patients. handling of covid-19-negative patients is difficult, because many covid-19 patients are asymptomatic, the availability of screening tests is often limited and they have a high rate of false-negative findings [23] .there is an uncertainty regarding the optimal ppe for different tasks in our daily work. there is general agreement that respiratory masks should be used for aerosolgenerating procedures (agps). however, there has been confusion regarding the definition of agps in orthopaedic surgery and traumatology. in fact, recommendations for ppe have been influenced by the availability of adequate masks, gloves, gowns, helmets and goggles rather than the science for their use.although elective surgery might have been postponed in some countries, trauma and orthopaedics is at the frontline with coronavirus, because emergency orthopaedic operations are still amongst the most common emergency surgical procedures. many orthopaedic surgeons do not know what is safe to wear and recommended. with increasing numbers of fatalities among doctors, we aimed to raise awareness of the issues surrounding ppe by reviewing current evidence and recommendations for ppe in orthopaedic surgery and traumatology.a systematic review of the available literature was performed using the keyword terms "covid-19", "coronavirus", "surgeon", "health-care workers", "protection", "masks", "gloves", "gowns"; "helmets", "aerosol", "telemedicine" in several combinations. the following databases were assessed: pubmed (https ://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites / entre z/), cochrane reviews (https ://www.cochr ane.org/revie ws/), google scholar (https ://schol ar.googl e.com/).all the publications from 01.01.2004 to 01.04.2020 were searched. the search was limited to english and german studies only. studies in other languages were not included in this review. in addition, articles were obtained from other references, who or via google search.all peer-reviewed articles were considered. randomized controlled trials (rcts), prospective trials and retrospective studies as well as reviews and case reports were included in this systematic review. two authors independently screened the titles and abstracts of all the articles identified. if the abstract was unavailable, the paper was excluded. in the event of disagreement, a consensus was reached by discussion, if needed with the intervention of the senior author.this systematic review was conducted in accordance with the established guidelines from preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis (prisma).however, due to the heterogeneity of available data it was decided to present the review in a narrative manner.one author extracted data from all the selected original articles, which was repeated by two other authors. if there was no agreement between the three, the senior author was consulted. where required, the corresponding authors were contacted for additional information. data were extracted from each included article and entered into a spreadsheet for analysis. pertinent information extracted included author, date and journal of publication, study design (and level of evidence), and patient demographics (mean age, mean follow-up, total and group's number of patients, outcome).four studies were found which deal with the question of aerosol generation during surgery.in the landmark article by nogler et al., which was published in 2001, the authors performed three laminectomies (c4-c6) in cadavers using a high-speed 0.6-mm ball cutter [25] . they investigated the environmental and body contamination through contaminated aerosols generated by this high-speed cutter. the irrigation solution was marked with staphylococcus aureus and after surgery used for tracing of aerosol contamination. the authors found a contamination at an area of 5 × 7 m around the operating field and everyone in the room showed face and body contamination. the surgeon and the surgical assistant showed a more severe contamination than other or staff [25] .in another cadaver study with a similar setup by nogler et al., the authors investigated environmental and body contamination by an ultrasound device and a high-speed cutter in the revision of cemented total hip arthroplasty [26] . the authors found an environmental contamination of 6 × 8 m. both the ultrasound and the high-speed cutter contaminated all members of the surgical team consisting of an anaesthesiologist, a surgeon, a surgical assistant and a scrub nurse [26] .heinsohn et al. investigated the exposure of operating room (or) personnel to blood aerosols and found that the upper respiratory tract was exposed to aerosolized blood in the operating room [15] .jewett et al. assessed whether different surgical power tools such as bone saws and bone drills or electrocautery in cutting and coagulation mode lead to aerosol generation in an or setting [18] . all of the tools tested led to bloodcontaining aerosol particles < 5 µm.aerosol-generating procedures should be defined as respiratory or surgical. respiratory agps, such as intubation, are a high risk of transmitting respiratory virus infections, such as covid-19. surgical agps, such as the use of highspeed power tools, are a high risk of transmitting virus particles in body fluids and pieces of body tissue; covid-19 is known to be present in all body fluids.a narrative review by wong et al. highlighted the fact that based on current evidence, aerosols might be generated during use of high-speed orthopaedic power tools [34] . they concluded that every person present during surgery should wear ppe including surgical gloves, a water-resistant surgical gown with long sleeves, a surgical mask, and full-face protection with a face shield [34] . in cases of possible airborne transmitted diseases (such as covid-19), additional respiratory ppe should be used. in addition, they recommended to avoid use of electrocautery and power tools and to use wound irrigation with bulb syringes instead of pulsed irrigation (jet lavage) [34] .sterile surgical gowns are part of the standard protection in the or. in every surgery, the or team consisting of the surgeon, the surgical assistants and the scrub nurse wear sterile surgical gowns to reduce intraoperative wound contamination and to minimize the patients` infection risk. it is also a personal protection against blood and body fluids, which are often sprayed in an area of 3-8 m around the operating table [25, 26] .different types of surgical gowns offer different degrees of barrier protection to surgeons. the american society for testing and materials (astm) f2407 is an umbrella document, which describes testing for surgical gowns: tear resistance, seam strength, lint generation, evaporative resistance, and water vapour transmission [3] .the critical zone of a surgical gown comprises the front area of the gown from chest to knees and the sleeves from the cuff to above the elbow. the safety levels of gowns for medical use can be classified in levels 1-4 [3] . level 1 gowns should be used in minimal risk environment such as basic care or for visitors [3] . level 2 gowns should be used in low-risk procedures such as venous blood draw [3] . level 3 gowns are generally used for moderate-risk procedures such as arterial blood draw, or in the er [3] . level 4 gowns are preserved for high-risk procedures such as surgery or when infectious diseases are suspected [3] .helmets or togas might also be an option for protection against body spray, but only protect against airborne transmission of covid-19 in combination with respirator masks.generally, there are three different types of disposable masks available: single-use face masks, surgical masks, and respiratory masks.single-use face masks, which are typically thin and consist of only one layer, are only capable of filtering rather larger particles (3 μm). surgical masks are generally more effective than single-use face masks in filtering virus-sized particles. a medical or surgical mask may be sufficient to prevent droplet transfer, while a respirator mask is required for airborne infection. however, the exact filtration characteristics of surgical masks are rather variable and depend on the layers used.most of the health-care workers currently use surgical masks to protect themselves against pathogens spread by droplet transmission such as covid-19. although it is well established that these provide insufficient protection against airborne transmission, there is conflicting evidence from a systematic review by leung et al., which found that surgical masks can efficaciously reduce coronavirus detection and viral copies in large respiratory droplets and in aerosols [21] . however, this only suggests that it could be used by covid-19-positive patients to limit further covid-19 transmission.clearly, this study has no relevance for or staff protection [21] .the general consensus among surgeons is that conventional surgical masks do not offer protection against highrisk agps. multiple surgical masks also fail to filter virus loaded particles. they should not be used as a substitute for respirator masks unless there is no alternative and the compromise for a lower level protection is made due to lack of availability [2, 13, 14] .for protection against airborne transmission, air-purifying respirator masks should be used. respirator masks generally filter more smaller sized particles (0.3 μm) than surgical masks. the european standard (en 149:2001) classifies respirator masks into three different categories: filtering facepiece 1 (ffp1), ffp2, and ffp3. ffp2 is comparable to us standard n95 [20] . the filtration effectiveness of different masks is presented in table 3 .in comparison to surgical masks, respirator masks show protection factors 11.5-15.9 times greater than those of surgical masks [20] . in addition to the type of masks used, the fitting and sizing of the mask is of utmost importance. only a perfect-sized and well-fitted mask leads to efficient sealing of the respiratory tract. intact masks can be worn for up to 8 h continuously [20] .powered air-purifying respirators [11] were mainly used during the sars outbreak for health-care personnel involved in high-risk invasive procedures or agps. these respirators in the form of a hood or a full-face mask consist of a motordriven fan guiding the possibly contaminated air towards a filter, which then actively filters it and finally delivers the clean air to the user's face and/or mouth.a recent systematic review of four randomised controlled trials by bartoszko et al. compared medical masks to n95 respirator masks in their efficacy to prevent coronavirus in health-care workers [7] . the authors found and concluded that low certainty evidence exists that medical masks and n95 respirators offer similar protection against viral respiratory infection including coronavirus in health-care workers during non-aerosol-generating care [7] .eye protection is critical for orthopaedic surgeons, as many procedures such as the use of power tools frequently lead to contamination of every or personnel in the room and surface contamination in the or in an area of up to 6 maround the operating table [25, 26] .in addition, a splash injury to the eye region, although less frequent than in the mouth and nose region, is a common event in surgeries such as total hip and knee arthroplasties, mainly affecting the operating surgeon and the assistant [1] . therefore, orthopaedic surgeons must protect themselves from conjunctival contamination.in a prospective study of conjunctival contamination during common orthopaedic operations, 43 (65%) of 66 goggles worn by surgeons were contaminated. the contamination rate of the protective flaps at the sides of the goggles was relatively low (5%), suggesting that ordinary spectacles, which are more convenient and comfortable than standard goggles, provide adequate protection during routine use [9, 10] . however, in an in vitro study aiming to compare the effectiveness of various types of protective eyewear in preventing conjunctival contamination during a femoral osteotomy, disposable plastic glasses were found to be associated with the lowest rate of conjunctival contamination (3%) and the authors recommended that eye protective devices should provide protection above and below the eye as well as contoured side protection to minimize the risk of contamination [22] . modern prescription glasses provided no more benefit than the use of no eye protection, so that they should not be used as sole eye protection during surgical procedures.although there is no evidence to date, it is considered possible that sars-cov-2 is transmitted to the conjunctiva by aerosol. preventive measures should thus include the systematic wear of goggles covering the eyes and the periocular skin for all health-care workers present in the room during potentially infectious aerosol-generating procedures.most patient care activities require the use of a single pair of nonsterile gloves made of either latex, nitrile, or vinyl. sterile gloves are considered as standard protection in the or, as they reduce the risk of exposure to blood-borne pathogens. for most orthopaedic surgeries, double gloving is recommended.in orthopaedics and traumatology surgeries, surgical glove perforations have been reported to occur in 18.5% of conventional and 5.8% of arthroscopic procedures. they were more often seen in emergency surgeries compared to elective surgeries and mainly concerned the principal surgeon [19] . also, more glove perforations occur during operations on bone compared with soft tissue operations [31] .the risk of contamination from blood is known to be 13 times higher when using single compared with double gloves, so that the use of double gloving is a recommended practice [19] . exposure of surgeons to blood could indeed be reduced from 54 to 10%, by double gloving [31] . finally, to reduce the risk of contamination and perforation [8] , increasing the number of outer glove renewals during certain stages of total hip arthroplasty implantation such as prosthesis reduction, surgical incision, or femoral cementing is also recommended [31] .limited data have shown that viral rna could be detected in blood samples and it is not yet clear whether blood transmission of sars-cov-2 is possible. preventive measures should include double gloving with outer glove renewals during at-risk procedures.telemedicine has been recognized as an efficient tool for providing electronic personal protective equipment (eppe) to health-care workers [32] . it might help to protect staff and save ppe while providing rapid access to emergency care in orthopaedics. under certain circumstances, the service can be provided with limited direct physical patient contact. in most orthopaedic centres around the world, outpatient work had to be reduced or postponed due to covid-19 crisis. only patients with urgent orthopaedic conditions are seen face to face under ppe conditions. consequently, video or telephone consultations are considered or done for many orthopaedic patients.to date, there is only a paucity of studies dealing with the impact of telemedicine in orthopaedics. prada et al. presented a tele-orthopaedic strategy and evaluated its efficiency and impact on waiting times for orthopaedic specialty consultations in a rural hospital in chile [27] . the authors found that of 89 patients referred to the orthopaedic surgeon by telemedicine, 69.7% required one or more follow-ups through tele-orthopaedic service and 30.3% were referred for on-site assessment by the orthopaedic surgeon [27] . the waiting times of the referrals decreased on average from 201 to 40 days [27] .the authors concluded that by the use of telemedicine, it was possible to significantly reduce waiting list times and optimize travel times and expenditures [27] . in health-care crisis in which health-care resources are limited or restrictions for seeing patients in outpatient seeing are put in place, telemedicine might be a valuable option to protect healthcare personnel against disease transmission and still provide sufficient service to a considerable number of orthopaedic patients. however, the authors also highlighted the fact that when using videoconferencing as a mode of consultation, the orthopaedic surgeon and traumatologist need to have specific physical examination skills as a manual examination is not possible [27] .during the current covid-19 crisis, many orthopaedic surgeons have been forced to explore different methods other than face-to-face consultations, which is the conventional way for initial contact with the patient or clinical followups. video-or telephone consultations are increasingly recognized in these times due to regulatory restrictions, but also as many patients try to avoid showing up for a follow-up in hospital or the outpatient environment because they are afraid of nosocomial infections. it has also been shown that the use of telemedicine for the first consultation to an orthopaedics oncology service is highly cost-efficient, as it leads to a decrease in health-care cost between 12.2% and 72% [5] .the deaths of doctors during the covid-19 pandemic may simply be a result of having been exposed in their work to people infected with the disease, whilst the general population has been in lockdown [4] . if this is borne out by the evidence, then sadly, this could have been avoided by providing full ppe as used in countries such as china and south korea. secondly, high viral load exposure has been linked with a more severe disease [6] . this may also have been avoided by providing full ppe for all patient contact, regardless of their infection status.orthopaedic and trauma surgery are the most common type of surgery in the emergency setting. the present literature review of the published evidence for ppe during orthopaedic surgery in a covid-19 environment has highlighted the need for raised awareness of the types of ppe available for the surgical team, when they should be used and the definition of surgical agps. interestingly, the who guidance on ppe for covid-19 omitted the operating room, whereas uk nhs guidance evolved during the first few weeks of the uk lockdown [28, 33] . uk authorities eventually recognized surgery with high-speed devices as an agp. respiratory agps require ffp3 masks or powered air-purifying respirators, whereas surgical agps only require ffp2 masks [28] . another option would be powered air-purifying respirators. veterinary surgeons protect their surgical team from aerosilised herpes virus particles using powered air-purifying respirators such as the 3 m versaflo system with hepa filter and an s533 cape [17] .it is widely accepted that covid-19 virus is transmitted via droplets from the respiratory system of infected patients; however, the virus is also found in the blood and other bodily fluids. the clinical significance of non-respiratory tract viral transmission is unclear. the prevalence and importance of viral loads in the different fluids are widely unknown.bony surgery around the head and neck (ent, neurosurgery and ophthalmic surgery) generates aerosols from the respiratory tract and exposes the surgeon to high viral levels. orthopaedic surgery, particularly to the lower limb, produces vast amounts of aerosols including blood, fine bone table 1 ). the use of power tools is fundamental to osteotomies, joint arthroplasty and trauma surgery, where reaming, sawing and drilling are needed for bone preparation. saline irrigation is necessary to reduce local tissue thermal damage, but can significantly add to aerosol generation.electrocautery generates smoke plumes, which contain bio-aerosols with viable and non-viable cellular material that subsequently poses a risk of infection (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis b virus, human papillomavirus) and causes irritation to the lungs [2] . covid-19 is an rna virus; however, transmission via this route is not known ( table 2) .european and us respiratory masks are classified into three protection classes. european respiratory masks and filtering face piece (ffp) are classified on their assigned protection factor and provide a level of protection to the user based on the concentration of the occupation exposure limit (oel) (figs. 1, 2) . ffp1 reduces oel by a factor of 4, ffp2 by a factor of 10 and ffp3 by a factor of 20.in the usa, the respiratory mask protection classification is based upon the percentage of filtration of very small particles (0.3 μm). they are classified into n95, n99 and n100 masks. the n95 mask blocks 95% of particles, the n99 blocks 99% and the n100 blocks 99.97% (table 3 ). the european ffp1 does not offer protection against covid-19. the european ffp3, equivalent to the us n99, is recommended for aerosol protection against covid- 19 (figs. 3, 4) .with this review, it was found that different surgical power tools such as saws or burrs as well as electrocautery in cutting and coagulation mode lead to aerosol generation in the or. according to the current knowledge, which is based on deductions from previous literature findings rather than specifically oriented research, aerosol generation puts the health-care workers at high risk for covid-19 disease transmission. hence, the recommended ppe for orthopaedic surgeons should consist of level 4 surgical gowns, face shields or googles and double gloves. in case of proven or suspected covid-19 infection, orthopaedic surgeons should use ffp2-3 or n95-99 respirator masks (table 4) .there is a number of limitations to be acknowledged with regard to the present review and ppe recommendations. there is currently ongoing change in evidence about ppe, hence this review is not meant to be a guideline; moreover, it aims to describe ppe in particular for orthopaedic surgeons and discuss the relevant clinical evidence. a systematic review was not possible due to the heterogeneity of available information. the covid-19 crisis has alerted us to review current practice and evidence of personal protective equipment for orthopaedic and trauma surgeons. during orthopaedic and trauma procedures such as the use of power tools, burrs or electrocautery, potentially infective aerosol is generated. the major aim of our efforts should be to avoid an occupational transmission of covid-19 by aerosolization of blood or other body fluids and hence adequate personal protective equipment should be available and used during surgery. in addition, efforts have to be made to improve the current evidence in this regard.funding there was no external funding obtained for this review.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no competing interests.the review was done in agreement with gcp guidelines.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.covid-19 coronavirus has spread dramatically over the entire globe affecting all health-care systems [29, 30] . in most countries around europe, a discussion has started on how to optimally protect health-care workers [12] [13] [14] 16] . there is a variety of different recommendations for health-care worker protection given by each country or hospital. however, there are to date no clear recommendations for personal protective equipment (ppe) and safety recommendations in the surgical field such as orthopaedics and traumatology.the recommendations should lead to an optimal protection and safety of all health-care workers. a covid-19 infection of just one health-care worker can have a dramatic effect for the health care itself. it is known that the average person infected with covid-19 is likely to infect 1.5 to 3.5 others [4] . a single covid-19 infection among essential health-care workers at a hospital might severely reduce the capacity of an entire hospital [14] . in wuhan, the outbreak region, around 1300 health-care workers became infected [24] . in italy to date, over 100 physicians have died of the disease [14] . the likelihood of becoming infected for health-care workers is more than three times as high as the general population.there is general consensus that all health-care workers should wear regular surgical masks and gloves for all patient interactions. in addition, avoiding unnecessary contact, keeping adequate distance, proper hand hygiene and disinfection is indicated. in most hospitals, positive or suspicious for covid-19 patients are separated from non-infected patients. handling of covid-19-negative patients is difficult, because many covid-19 patients are asymptomatic, the availability of screening tests is often limited and they have a high rate of false-negative findings [23] .there is an uncertainty regarding the optimal ppe for different tasks in our daily work. there is general agreement that respiratory masks should be used for aerosolgenerating procedures (agps). however, there has been confusion regarding the definition of agps in orthopaedic surgery and traumatology. in fact, recommendations for ppe have been influenced by the availability of adequate masks, gloves, gowns, helmets and goggles rather than the science for their use.although elective surgery might have been postponed in some countries, trauma and orthopaedics is at the frontline with coronavirus, because emergency orthopaedic operations are still amongst the most common emergency surgical procedures. many orthopaedic surgeons do not know what is safe to wear and recommended. with increasing numbers of fatalities among doctors, we aimed to raise awareness of the issues surrounding ppe by reviewing current evidence and recommendations for ppe in orthopaedic surgery and traumatology.a systematic review of the available literature was performed using the keyword terms "covid-19", "coronavirus", "surgeon", "health-care workers", "protection", "masks", "gloves", "gowns"; "helmets", "aerosol", "telemedicine" in several combinations. the following databases were assessed: pubmed (https ://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites / entre z/), cochrane reviews (https ://www.cochr ane.org/revie ws/), google scholar (https ://schol ar.googl e.com/).all the publications from 01.01.2004 to 01.04.2020 were searched. the search was limited to english and german studies only. studies in other languages were not included in this review. in addition, articles were obtained from other references, who or via google search.all peer-reviewed articles were considered. randomized controlled trials (rcts), prospective trials and retrospective studies as well as reviews and case reports were included in this systematic review. two authors independently screened the titles and abstracts of all the articles identified. if the abstract was unavailable, the paper was excluded. in the event of disagreement, a consensus was reached by discussion, if needed with the intervention of the senior author.this systematic review was conducted in accordance with the established guidelines from preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis (prisma).however, due to the heterogeneity of available data it was decided to present the review in a narrative manner.one author extracted data from all the selected original articles, which was repeated by two other authors. if there was no agreement between the three, the senior author was consulted. where required, the corresponding authors were contacted for additional information. data were extracted from each included article and entered into a spreadsheet for analysis. pertinent information extracted included author, date and journal of publication, study design (and level of evidence), and patient demographics (mean age, mean follow-up, total and group's number of patients, outcome).four studies were found which deal with the question of aerosol generation during surgery.in the landmark article by nogler et al., which was published in 2001, the authors performed three laminectomies (c4-c6) in cadavers using a high-speed 0.6-mm ball cutter [25] . they investigated the environmental and body contamination through contaminated aerosols generated by this high-speed cutter. the irrigation solution was marked with staphylococcus aureus and after surgery used for tracing of aerosol contamination. the authors found a contamination at an area of 5 × 7 m around the operating field and everyone in the room showed face and body contamination. the surgeon and the surgical assistant showed a more severe contamination than other or staff [25] .in another cadaver study with a similar setup by nogler et al., the authors investigated environmental and body contamination by an ultrasound device and a high-speed cutter in the revision of cemented total hip arthroplasty [26] . the authors found an environmental contamination of 6 × 8 m. both the ultrasound and the high-speed cutter contaminated all members of the surgical team consisting of an anaesthesiologist, a surgeon, a surgical assistant and a scrub nurse [26] .heinsohn et al. investigated the exposure of operating room (or) personnel to blood aerosols and found that the upper respiratory tract was exposed to aerosolized blood in the operating room [15] .jewett et al. assessed whether different surgical power tools such as bone saws and bone drills or electrocautery in cutting and coagulation mode lead to aerosol generation in an or setting [18] . all of the tools tested led to bloodcontaining aerosol particles < 5 µm.aerosol-generating procedures should be defined as respiratory or surgical. respiratory agps, such as intubation, are a high risk of transmitting respiratory virus infections, such as covid-19. surgical agps, such as the use of highspeed power tools, are a high risk of transmitting virus particles in body fluids and pieces of body tissue; covid-19 is known to be present in all body fluids.a narrative review by wong et al. highlighted the fact that based on current evidence, aerosols might be generated during use of high-speed orthopaedic power tools [34] . they concluded that every person present during surgery should wear ppe including surgical gloves, a water-resistant surgical gown with long sleeves, a surgical mask, and full-face protection with a face shield [34] . in cases of possible airborne transmitted diseases (such as covid-19), additional respiratory ppe should be used. in addition, they recommended to avoid use of electrocautery and power tools and to use wound irrigation with bulb syringes instead of pulsed irrigation (jet lavage) [34] .sterile surgical gowns are part of the standard protection in the or. in every surgery, the or team consisting of the surgeon, the surgical assistants and the scrub nurse wear sterile surgical gowns to reduce intraoperative wound contamination and to minimize the patients` infection risk. it is also a personal protection against blood and body fluids, which are often sprayed in an area of 3-8 m around the operating table [25, 26] .different types of surgical gowns offer different degrees of barrier protection to surgeons. the american society for testing and materials (astm) f2407 is an umbrella document, which describes testing for surgical gowns: tear resistance, seam strength, lint generation, evaporative resistance, and water vapour transmission [3] .the critical zone of a surgical gown comprises the front area of the gown from chest to knees and the sleeves from the cuff to above the elbow. the safety levels of gowns for medical use can be classified in levels 1-4 [3] . level 1 gowns should be used in minimal risk environment such as basic care or for visitors [3] . level 2 gowns should be used in low-risk procedures such as venous blood draw [3] . level 3 gowns are generally used for moderate-risk procedures such as arterial blood draw, or in the er [3] . level 4 gowns are preserved for high-risk procedures such as surgery or when infectious diseases are suspected [3] .helmets or togas might also be an option for protection against body spray, but only protect against airborne transmission of covid-19 in combination with respirator masks.generally, there are three different types of disposable masks available: single-use face masks, surgical masks, and respiratory masks.single-use face masks, which are typically thin and consist of only one layer, are only capable of filtering rather larger particles (3 μm). surgical masks are generally more effective than single-use face masks in filtering virus-sized particles. a medical or surgical mask may be sufficient to prevent droplet transfer, while a respirator mask is required for airborne infection. however, the exact filtration characteristics of surgical masks are rather variable and depend on the layers used.most of the health-care workers currently use surgical masks to protect themselves against pathogens spread by droplet transmission such as covid-19. although it is well established that these provide insufficient protection against airborne transmission, there is conflicting evidence from a systematic review by leung et al., which found that surgical masks can efficaciously reduce coronavirus detection and viral copies in large respiratory droplets and in aerosols [21] . however, this only suggests that it could be used by covid-19-positive patients to limit further covid-19 transmission.clearly, this study has no relevance for or staff protection [21] .the general consensus among surgeons is that conventional surgical masks do not offer protection against highrisk agps. multiple surgical masks also fail to filter virus loaded particles. they should not be used as a substitute for respirator masks unless there is no alternative and the compromise for a lower level protection is made due to lack of availability [2, 13, 14] .for protection against airborne transmission, air-purifying respirator masks should be used. respirator masks generally filter more smaller sized particles (0.3 μm) than surgical masks. the european standard (en 149:2001) classifies respirator masks into three different categories: filtering facepiece 1 (ffp1), ffp2, and ffp3. ffp2 is comparable to us standard n95 [20] . the filtration effectiveness of different masks is presented in table 3 .in comparison to surgical masks, respirator masks show protection factors 11.5-15.9 times greater than those of surgical masks [20] . in addition to the type of masks used, the fitting and sizing of the mask is of utmost importance. only a perfect-sized and well-fitted mask leads to efficient sealing of the respiratory tract. intact masks can be worn for up to 8 h continuously [20] .powered air-purifying respirators [11] were mainly used during the sars outbreak for health-care personnel involved in high-risk invasive procedures or agps. these respirators in the form of a hood or a full-face mask consist of a motordriven fan guiding the possibly contaminated air towards a filter, which then actively filters it and finally delivers the clean air to the user's face and/or mouth.a recent systematic review of four randomised controlled trials by bartoszko et al. compared medical masks to n95 respirator masks in their efficacy to prevent coronavirus in health-care workers [7] . the authors found and concluded that low certainty evidence exists that medical masks and n95 respirators offer similar protection against viral respiratory infection including coronavirus in health-care workers during non-aerosol-generating care [7] .eye protection is critical for orthopaedic surgeons, as many procedures such as the use of power tools frequently lead to contamination of every or personnel in the room and surface contamination in the or in an area of up to 6 maround the operating table [25, 26] .in addition, a splash injury to the eye region, although less frequent than in the mouth and nose region, is a common event in surgeries such as total hip and knee arthroplasties, mainly affecting the operating surgeon and the assistant [1] . therefore, orthopaedic surgeons must protect themselves from conjunctival contamination.in a prospective study of conjunctival contamination during common orthopaedic operations, 43 (65%) of 66 goggles worn by surgeons were contaminated. the contamination rate of the protective flaps at the sides of the goggles was relatively low (5%), suggesting that ordinary spectacles, which are more convenient and comfortable than standard goggles, provide adequate protection during routine use [9, 10] . however, in an in vitro study aiming to compare the effectiveness of various types of protective eyewear in preventing conjunctival contamination during a femoral osteotomy, disposable plastic glasses were found to be associated with the lowest rate of conjunctival contamination (3%) and the authors recommended that eye protective devices should provide protection above and below the eye as well as contoured side protection to minimize the risk of contamination [22] . modern prescription glasses provided no more benefit than the use of no eye protection, so that they should not be used as sole eye protection during surgical procedures.although there is no evidence to date, it is considered possible that sars-cov-2 is transmitted to the conjunctiva by aerosol. preventive measures should thus include the systematic wear of goggles covering the eyes and the periocular skin for all health-care workers present in the room during potentially infectious aerosol-generating procedures.most patient care activities require the use of a single pair of nonsterile gloves made of either latex, nitrile, or vinyl. sterile gloves are considered as standard protection in the or, as they reduce the risk of exposure to blood-borne pathogens. for most orthopaedic surgeries, double gloving is recommended.in orthopaedics and traumatology surgeries, surgical glove perforations have been reported to occur in 18.5% of conventional and 5.8% of arthroscopic procedures. they were more often seen in emergency surgeries compared to elective surgeries and mainly concerned the principal surgeon [19] . also, more glove perforations occur during operations on bone compared with soft tissue operations [31] .the risk of contamination from blood is known to be 13 times higher when using single compared with double gloves, so that the use of double gloving is a recommended practice [19] . exposure of surgeons to blood could indeed be reduced from 54 to 10%, by double gloving [31] . finally, to reduce the risk of contamination and perforation [8] , increasing the number of outer glove renewals during certain stages of total hip arthroplasty implantation such as prosthesis reduction, surgical incision, or femoral cementing is also recommended [31] .limited data have shown that viral rna could be detected in blood samples and it is not yet clear whether blood transmission of sars-cov-2 is possible. preventive measures should include double gloving with outer glove renewals during at-risk procedures.telemedicine has been recognized as an efficient tool for providing electronic personal protective equipment (eppe) to health-care workers [32] . it might help to protect staff and save ppe while providing rapid access to emergency care in orthopaedics. under certain circumstances, the service can be provided with limited direct physical patient contact. in most orthopaedic centres around the world, outpatient work had to be reduced or postponed due to covid-19 crisis. only patients with urgent orthopaedic conditions are seen face to face under ppe conditions. consequently, video or telephone consultations are considered or done for many orthopaedic patients.to date, there is only a paucity of studies dealing with the impact of telemedicine in orthopaedics. prada et al. presented a tele-orthopaedic strategy and evaluated its efficiency and impact on waiting times for orthopaedic specialty consultations in a rural hospital in chile [27] . the authors found that of 89 patients referred to the orthopaedic surgeon by telemedicine, 69.7% required one or more follow-ups through tele-orthopaedic service and 30.3% were referred for on-site assessment by the orthopaedic surgeon [27] . the waiting times of the referrals decreased on average from 201 to 40 days [27] .the authors concluded that by the use of telemedicine, it was possible to significantly reduce waiting list times and optimize travel times and expenditures [27] . in health-care crisis in which health-care resources are limited or restrictions for seeing patients in outpatient seeing are put in place, telemedicine might be a valuable option to protect healthcare personnel against disease transmission and still provide sufficient service to a considerable number of orthopaedic patients. however, the authors also highlighted the fact that when using videoconferencing as a mode of consultation, the orthopaedic surgeon and traumatologist need to have specific physical examination skills as a manual examination is not possible [27] .during the current covid-19 crisis, many orthopaedic surgeons have been forced to explore different methods other than face-to-face consultations, which is the conventional way for initial contact with the patient or clinical followups. video-or telephone consultations are increasingly recognized in these times due to regulatory restrictions, but also as many patients try to avoid showing up for a follow-up in hospital or the outpatient environment because they are afraid of nosocomial infections. it has also been shown that the use of telemedicine for the first consultation to an orthopaedics oncology service is highly cost-efficient, as it leads to a decrease in health-care cost between 12.2% and 72% [5] .the deaths of doctors during the covid-19 pandemic may simply be a result of having been exposed in their work to people infected with the disease, whilst the general population has been in lockdown [4] . if this is borne out by the evidence, then sadly, this could have been avoided by providing full ppe as used in countries such as china and south korea. secondly, high viral load exposure has been linked with a more severe disease [6] . this may also have been avoided by providing full ppe for all patient contact, regardless of their infection status.orthopaedic and trauma surgery are the most common type of surgery in the emergency setting. the present literature review of the published evidence for ppe during orthopaedic surgery in a covid-19 environment has highlighted the need for raised awareness of the types of ppe available for the surgical team, when they should be used and the definition of surgical agps. interestingly, the who guidance on ppe for covid-19 omitted the operating room, whereas uk nhs guidance evolved during the first few weeks of the uk lockdown [28, 33] . uk authorities eventually recognized surgery with high-speed devices as an agp. respiratory agps require ffp3 masks or powered air-purifying respirators, whereas surgical agps only require ffp2 masks [28] . another option would be powered air-purifying respirators. veterinary surgeons protect their surgical team from aerosilised herpes virus particles using powered air-purifying respirators such as the 3 m versaflo system with hepa filter and an s533 cape [17] .it is widely accepted that covid-19 virus is transmitted via droplets from the respiratory system of infected patients; however, the virus is also found in the blood and other bodily fluids. the clinical significance of non-respiratory tract viral transmission is unclear. the prevalence and importance of viral loads in the different fluids are widely unknown.bony surgery around the head and neck (ent, neurosurgery and ophthalmic surgery) generates aerosols from the respiratory tract and exposes the surgeon to high viral levels. orthopaedic surgery, particularly to the lower limb, produces vast amounts of aerosols including blood, fine bone particles, synovial fluid and saline from the irrigation when high-speed power tools are used ( table 1 ). the use of power tools is fundamental to osteotomies, joint arthroplasty and trauma surgery, where reaming, sawing and drilling are needed for bone preparation. saline irrigation is necessary to reduce local tissue thermal damage, but can significantly add to aerosol generation.electrocautery generates smoke plumes, which contain bio-aerosols with viable and non-viable cellular material that subsequently poses a risk of infection (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis b virus, human papillomavirus) and causes irritation to the lungs [2] . covid-19 is an rna virus; however, transmission via this route is not known ( table 2) .european and us respiratory masks are classified into three protection classes. european respiratory masks and filtering face piece (ffp) are classified on their assigned protection factor and provide a level of protection to the user based on the concentration of the occupation exposure limit (oel) (figs. 1, 2) . ffp1 reduces oel by a factor of 4, ffp2 by a factor of 10 and ffp3 by a factor of 20.in the usa, the respiratory mask protection classification is based upon the percentage of filtration of very small particles (0.3 μm). they are classified into n95, n99 and n100 masks. the n95 mask blocks 95% of particles, the n99 blocks 99% and the n100 blocks 99.97% (table 3 ). the european ffp1 does not offer protection against covid-19. the european ffp3, equivalent to the us n99, is recommended for aerosol protection against covid- 19 (figs. 3, 4) .with this review, it was found that different surgical power tools such as saws or burrs as well as electrocautery in cutting and coagulation mode lead to aerosol generation in the or. according to the current knowledge, which is based on deductions from previous literature findings rather than specifically oriented research, aerosol generation puts the health-care workers at high risk for covid-19 disease transmission. hence, the recommended ppe for orthopaedic surgeons should consist of level 4 surgical gowns, face shields or googles and double gloves. in case of proven or suspected covid-19 infection, orthopaedic surgeons should use ffp2-3 or n95-99 respirator masks (table 4) .there is a number of limitations to be acknowledged with regard to the present review and ppe recommendations. there is currently ongoing change in evidence about ppe, hence this review is not meant to be a guideline; moreover, it aims to describe ppe in particular for orthopaedic surgeons and discuss the relevant clinical evidence. a systematic review was not possible due to the heterogeneity of available information. the covid-19 crisis has alerted us to review current practice and evidence of personal protective equipment for orthopaedic and trauma surgeons. during orthopaedic and trauma procedures such as the use of power tools, burrs or electrocautery, potentially infective aerosol is generated. the major aim of our efforts should be to avoid an occupational transmission of covid-19 by aerosolization of blood or other body fluids and hence adequate personal protective equipment should be available and used during surgery. in addition, efforts have to be made to improve the current evidence in this regard.funding there was no external funding obtained for this review.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no competing interests.the review was done in agreement with gcp guidelines.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2), formally named as the novel coronavirus-2019 (ncov-2019) by the world health organization (who) after identifying a cluster of pneumonia cases during late december 2019 in the province of hubei, china [1] . however, coronavirus (cov) is not the first-ever occurrence as it was initially discovered in the 1960s and belongs to a family coronaviridae [2] . since then, several types of cov were identified amongst which severe acute respiratory syndrome-cov (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome-cov (mers-cov) are of importance [3] . as of 27 march 2020, a total of 509,164 confirmed cases and 23,335 deaths of coronavirus disease (covid-19) have been reported globally, effecting 151 countries, where around half of those reported cases and deaths are solely attributed to china [4] . however, within a short span of time, the cumulative proportion of cases and deaths outside china has been outstripped by the total number of cases and deaths in china, which has raised significant concern among the public around the globe. as a result, considering the rapid disease transmission of covid-19 within and across the countries, on 11 march 2020, who has declared the covid-19 outbreak as a global pandemic [5] .although initial investigations reported that the spread of covid-19 would be possibly from animals-to-humans, later investigations have stated that human-to-human transmission also could occur [6] . at this initial stage, the definite modes of this pandemic are not completely known; however, health officials suggest that it could primarily spread through the droplets when an infected person coughs or sneezes and by direct contact with the infected individuals [7] .unfortunately, no drug has been officially approved for the treatment of this global pandemic, although drugs such as hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir are under clinical investigation [8] . in . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . this manner, acquiring and being adherent to the universal safety precautions (usp) is the only choice in controlling the widespread of covid-19 across the world.maintaining personal hygiene is an essential practice to be protected against any type of respiratory illness, such as covid-19. of this note, hand washing has been considered as an effective measure in preventing the cross-transmission from one to another [9] . social distancing is a technique where actions are taken to reduce the frequency of contacts and to maintain a proper distance between individuals in order to limit the transmission of any communicable disease [10] . usually, social distancing would be in-place where the spread has been believed to happen in a broader community. other social distancing measures include isolation and quarantine, which also play a major role, particularly among those individuals presenting with symptoms, including confirmed cases. isolation is an act of separating the ill-persons with a contagious disease from a non-infected person to reduce the spread [11] . usually, isolation procedures are commonly observed in hospital settings. while, quarantine is considered as one of the effective methods in controlling communicable outbreaks and pandemics such as covid-19, at a community level, where the movement of a person is restricted to the home or a designated facility, who are presumed to have been exposed to a contagious disease, but without having any symptoms [12] .if all the above detailed social distancing measures are insufficient in reducing the widespread of the infection, community containment would be implemented where an entire community or neighbourhood is restricted to reduce personal interactions, except for inevitable situations.besides, usage of personal protective equipment (ppe) would be another precautionary measure to be taken in controlling further spread during outbreaks, although ppe is considered as less effective compared to other control measures. routinely, ppes are widely used in healthcare settings as a standard to protect healthcare workers from infections [13] . among different types of ppes, face masks and hand gloves are the most commonly used in situations during emergency outbreaks, especially by the sick people in order to avoid the spread. face masks have always been popular and well-known public interventions used as a self-protection measure. the use of face masks has been included in their pandemic plans by most of the developed countries such as the united states, france and australia [14] . who states that wearing a face mask incorrectly may actually increase the chance of being infected, rather than decreasing [15] . thus, the correct use of face masks is particularly essential while dealing with the situations during pandemics such as covid-19. implementing the above-mentioned non-pharmacological usps during the covid-19 pandemic would relieve the concerns of over-loaded healthcare systems as well as the public to a remarkable extent.although fewer studies have attempted in assessing the knowledge aspects related to the covid-19 among the healthcare workers, authors of this study strongly believe that focusing on the usps such as, maintaining personal hygiene, washing hands, adhering to social-distancing techniques, self-isolation practices, usage of face masks and hand sanitizers would significantly contribute in lowering the spread and eventually flatten the curve. so far, the course of the covid-19 in india seems under control with lower rates of incidence despite the large population. however, looking at the dynamics of sars-cov-2, especially its higher rates of transmission, things could alter unpredictably, leading to adverse situations, at any time. of concern in this regard, examining the knowledge and beliefs regarding usps and mitigating strategies among the general public in india during this pandemic would be a chief priority.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint this is a prospective, cross-sectional, and web-based online survey conducted using a questionnaire with an intention to obtain the responses regarding usps and mitigating strategies towards covid-19 among the general public in india during march 2020.a 20-items, semi-structured and selfadministered questionnaire was developed using factsheets, course materials, information leaflets and booklets developed by health protection surveillance centre (hpsc) [16] , public health agency (hsc) [17] , centre for disease control and prevention (cdc) [18], national health service (nhs) [19] , and who [20] for the purpose of covid-19 prevention. the study questionnaire has two domains, i.e., knowledge and belief domain, which have ten questions each.of particular interest towards preventive measures, questions in both the domains have focussed on aspects such as personal hygiene, proper handwashing, use of face masks, and social distancing techniques such as quarantine and isolation.reliability & validity of survey instrument: firstly, the developed questionnaire was validated using face and content validation methods by the selected faculty members and researchers to ensure the readability. secondly, it was assessed for reliability using test-retest and split-half methods through a pilot study that was pre-tested among 30 random respondents for the clarity, acceptability and relevance, prior to the full-fledged survey. lastly, the survey questionnaire was distributed among the public after revising the comments and considering the pre-test results to facilitate better comprehension.distribution of the survey questionnaire: following the reliability and validity assessments, the survey questionnaire was distributed across the social media and professional platforms such . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint sampling method: with the fact that this is an online web-based survey which is exploratory in nature, a non-probability sampling method with an invitation online sampling technique was used.participants were explained about the purpose of the study and requested to provide the consent of voluntary willingness before participating in the survey. all the procedures performed in this study involving human participants were in adherence to the ethics of the 1964 helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. this study was conducted and reported according to the checklist for reporting results of internet e-surveys guidelines (cherries) [22] .statistical analysis: data were entered into microsoft excel spreadsheets and cross-checked for accuracy and the statistical analysis was performed using ibm spss software for windows, version 24 (armonk, ny, usa) [23] . descriptive statistics on sample characteristics were computed, including means, standard deviation, and frequency distributions.variables included in the analysis were age, sex, educational level, occupation and economic status (as per modified kuppuswamy scale) [24] . the chi-square test was used in assessing the associations among the study variables and a p-value of < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.of 1287 participants that filled out the survey, a total of 1117 participants have given their consent of willingness and completed the questionnaire with a response rate of 86.8%. the mean age of . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint the study participants was 28.8 ± 10.9 years, where more than half of the participants belong to the age category <25 years. sex was equally distributed among the participants, while more than 90% of them had either doctoral (28.4%), post-graduate (32.9%) or under-graduate (30.1%) degree as their educational background. the majority of the participants were professional job holders (45%) and then followed by the students (32%), while around 40% of the study participants belong to the upper-middle economic class. all other socio-demographic characteristics are detailed in table 1 . knowledge towards universal safety precautions: although more than two-thirds of the study participants provided the correct response, the rest of the 30% were not aware of the ideal length of time to wash hands in preventing the infection. surprisingly, around half of the participants were not aware of the ideal strength of the alcohol that a hand-sanitizer should contain to be used during outbreaks, while more than two-thirds of the participants were not known about the ideal distance to be maintained as part of social distancing measures. around three-fourth and two-fifth of the participants were not aware of the quarantine and isolation procedures that are usually followed during outbreaks. however, the majority of the participants (i.e., 84%, 77% & 94%) are knowledgeable about the self-isolation time period, type of the face mask to be used, and social distancing procedures, respectively. the rest of the information about the knowledge of the general public towards usps are detailed in table 2 . furthermore, correct responses for the respective questions with their 95% confidence intervals are represented in figure 1 . believe that maintaining good personal hygiene, washing hands frequently using soap, avoiding handshaking behaviour and avoiding placing fingers in eyes, nose and mouth would prevent the spread of the infection. while more than 96% of the participants believe that adhering to social distancing measures and staying at home would be a good practice in combating the spread.however, notably, three-fourth of the participants (75%) believe that wearing a face mask is considered appropriate and protective even in the absence of the symptoms. the rest of the information about the beliefs of the general public towards usps are detailed in table 3 . the correct responses for the respective questions with their 95% confidence intervals are represented in figure 2 . furthermore, the association of socio-demographic variables with the general public's beliefs were assessed using the chi-square test and presented in table 4 . all the correct responses and the statistically significant p-values (< 0.05) were bolded.this current study is believed to be the first of its kind among the general public in india to assess the knowledge and beliefs towards usps in combating the spread of covid-19. our study results noticed that although the knowledge of the participants regarding the self-isolation time periods author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint intentions, concluded that sending high-threat and coping messages to the public would increase their handwashing intentions [25] . however, at times, threat messages would be ineffective and might also lead to counter-productive effects that have to be kept in mind.generally, educating the public with an emphasis on personal hygiene, such as washing hands, would take a lot of time and effort, especially in developing countries such as india. in a large cross-sectional comparative study conducted in bangladesh from 2006 to 2011, including participants from 50 sub-districts inferred that there exists a significant gap between perceptions and practice of proper handwashing behaviours among their study participants. it also found that handwashing behaviour before eating food was lower, and unfortunately, only 8% of their study participants stated that they use soap for washing their hands at the baseline. it also noticed that handwashing knowledge and practices were relatively lower before cooking, serving and eating food [26] . furthermore, socioeconomic status, including education, have shown a positive association with handwashing, which are similar to our current study findings. during outbreaks such as covid-19, information regarding safety measures should be selflessly promoted by the news channels, print media, radio stations, and social media, as almost every individual relates to either of these platforms at some point in a day. around three fourth of respondents in a descriptive cross-sectional study conducted in nigeria have stated that they have acquired good handwashing measures by watching health education messages from social media, newspapers and radio channels [27] .in contrast with the current study findings, a study conducted during an outbreak of h1n1 influenza a pandemic in 2009 at a large public university has found poor compliance with the mitigation strategies such as staying at home while ill in avoiding the spread of the virus. in addition, around half of their study participants, including students, staff and faculty members, had . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint attended the social gatherings despite acute respiratory infection and feeling ill [28] . besides government and healthcare organizations, efforts should be made by the local researchers in conducting awareness and education camps by actively taking part in participatory, communitybased research, which could have a remarkable impact on the safety practices among the public.a systematic review that looked at identifying the handwashing techniques in primary and community levels concluded that only a few studies have demonstrated the proper handwashing techniques and noticed that there is a lack of evidence for handwashing techniques are being used in practice today. moreover, it also found that most of the studies that assessed the handwashing measures were poorly designed along with the inconclusive statements [29] .among various infection control strategies, usage of personal protective equipment (ppe) is necessarily essential during outbreaks such as covid-19 among healthcare workers and infected people with an intention to prevent the transmission of the disease. although ppes are not recommended as the front-line defence measures, these should be in place along with the other administrative and environmental control measures [30] . ppes such as face masks, respirators, hand gloves, goggles and face shields are of the utmost importance when the outbreak or pandemic is in its early stage, especially when there are no vaccines or medications available.unfortunately, a recent systematic review that looked at the use of ppes to protect against respiratory infections in pakistan has inferred that ppes were not available at many facilities, and its use was limited during high-risk situations [30] . furthermore, it observed lower compliance towards ppes among healthcare workers with reuse of ppes behaviour. respective countries should implement stringent policies to avoid such practices, which could potentially lead to the spread of the infection. in a cross-sectional survey that evaluated the knowledge, use and barriers towards the ppes for airway management among emergency medical technicians during sars . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint outbreak in canada have reported that most of their study participants opined that n-95 respirator mask is the safest and should be used during outbreaks which are in-line with the current study findings [13] . however, the appropriate selection and efficacy of the respiratory protective apparatus have always been a controversy. as these coronaviruses are extremely small, they will have the ability to pass through the pores of both the surgical mask and the n-95 mask. although the n-95 respirator apparatus has a good structure, which prevents the passage of virus, if it is contaminated and reused, there are high chances for it to become the source of infection instead [31] . the current study findings related to the proper use of a face mask are in accordance with a cross-sectional study that assessed the usage of face masks in a primary care outpatient setting in hong kong, where more than half of their participants have demonstrated the correct steps in wearing a face mask [32] .although usage of face masks itself might not be an effective intervention in combating the spread of infection, it could be used as an adjunct measure, especially among those who are ill and infected patients. adopting the use of face masks during outbreaks could be affected by various factors such as social acceptability, perception of the disease risk, need for the mask, and comfort & fit of the mask [33] . interestingly, a cochrane intervention review by verbeek jh et al. concluded that usage of ppes, especially face masks, might not lead to more containment but may have more user satisfaction [34] .on the flip side, implementing mitigation strategies such as isolation, quarantine and community containment during outbreaks would have major challenges, which includes early case detection in order to self-isolate, need for psychological support and availability of basic needs while being separated from the public, and the most importantly, dealing and managing with the ethical codes, principles, self-determination, individual conflicts and rights of liberty of the public are major . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint challenges that should be considered while implementing such strategies during pandemics such as covid-19 [11] . furthermore, a systematic review that critically evaluated the role and impact of social distancing measures during influenza pandemic had attempted various mitigating interventions such as school & workplace closure, home working, self-isolation, quarantine of contacts, mobility restriction, and cancellation of mass events along with their effectiveness [35] .firstly, it observed that either proactive or reactive school closure found to be moderately effective in reducing the transmission of influenza and could only delay the peak of the pandemic by a week; however, it was associated with the high secondary cost. it also mentioned that the main purpose of the school closure policy during the pandemic might not be optimally achieved as most of the children may engage in outdoor activities during the school closure period. secondly, a similar type of results was noticed with the workplace closure and home working interventions, where they are modestly effective and acceptable, while increases the secondary cost. instead, these interventions would affect workplace business productivity and might not be equally convenient for all the employees. in this regard, it also stated that working from home with the use of recent technologies would only be beneficial for service sector employees but not for industries, which needs physical presence and outputs. thirdly, voluntary self-isolation and quarantine of contacts are considered effective and acceptable. also, when combined measures are in place, these can reduce the peak caseload and attack rate as well; however, there is an increased risk of intrahousehold transmission from index cases to contacts. it also added that those who are isolated and quarantined are likely to undergo distress due to fear and risk perceptions. lastly, it reported that mobility restrictions are effective only if high travel restrictions are in place, and surprisingly, cancellations of mass events and gatherings have not proven to be effective during the influenza pandemic.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint besides, in a recent epidemic network model by leung ky et al. , demonstrated the potential negative effects of social distancing during an epidemic at the population level [36] . the whole idea of the authors of this study is that rational preventive measures during epidemics could have a counter effect on the population in the long run as these measures might impact the behavioural changes of the public towards others, which could worsen the epidemic outcomes. however, policies and decision-making regarding mitigation strategies should not be generalized depending upon the dynamics of other pandemic modelling studies. looking at the current role that is being played by the usps and social distancing measures in combating the spread of covid-19, it is worth and wise to implement and adhere to such strategies. in regard to this, the uk government has changed its action plan in dealing with the covid-19 following a modelling study that estimated 260,000 potential deaths [37] . as a result, it decided to implement a combination of social distancing of the entire population, home isolation of infected cases and to quarantine the family members of those who are being infected, and possible school and university closures in order to prevent those huge number of potential deaths. covid-19 pandemic has taught various lessons to the respective government bodies and healthcare sectors in dealing with this outbreak and how to be prepared in facing such types of outbreaks in the future [38] .lastly, careful considerations of usps and mitigating measures should be kept in mind when making pandemic plans, especially aspects such as public compliance and resource planning.timely implementation of these safety measures in the community would significantly prevent the widespread of the infection. however, future research focussing on the transmission dynamics of the infection would be warranted. there are certain limitations that should be considered when interpreting the findings of the current study. firstly, as this is a cross-sectional survey, causal inferences cannot be made, and chances for the recall and information bias may exist. secondly, . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint as the questionnaire is self-administered and thus, by depending upon the self-reported data, it is difficult to predict and understand whether the respondents are filling the survey honestly, i.e., social desirability bias and the responses provided by the participants may not reflect the reality.lastly, as this is an internet-based online survey, it might not capture the responses from the regions with the restricted access to the social media, and thus may introduce demographic selection bias and might have received the responses mostly from the younger and internet-active population leading to coverage bias.in light of the recent pandemic, i.e., covid-19, although knowledge and beliefs of the general public in india towards usps are encouraging, there is a need for long term educational interventions as the dynamics and severity of covid-19 has been keep changing day-by-day rapidly. the findings of this study could guide the public health authorities in making and implementing decisions to combat this pandemic. however, further assessment of factors influencing compliance with such measures is warranted.authors of this study would like to extend their gratitude towards all the study participants for investing their time, interest and voluntary participation in providing the essential information.this study received an exemption for minimal risk research by the kle university institutional review board, karnataka, india on march 2, 2020.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint study design, development of survey instrument, literature review, drafting the manuscript-skg; data collection and analysis-mc; reliability & validity of the questionnaire, pilot testing, distribution of the survey questionnaire, proofreading-ku, rv, sn & kkt.this study has received no source of funding.all the information related to the study is embedded within the manuscript.the authors declare no conflicts of interest.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20047126 doi: medrxiv preprint coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) due to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which is closely related to bat sars related coronaviruses [1] , is the second pandemic of the 21 st century following the influenza a h1n1 pandemic of 2009.with the rapidly galloping epidemic due to globalization and international travel, world health organization (who) declared covid-19 to be a pandemic on 11 march 2020 [2] , which is 72 days after the first official announcement of clusters of patients with communityacquired pneumonia in wuhan, hubei province of china on 31 december 2019 (day 1) [3] .as of 8 april 2020 (day 100), over 1.35 million people have been infected worldwide with nearly 80,000 deaths [4] . in response, proactive infection control measures have been implemented in hospital settings [5, 6] . in addition, non-pharmaceutical public health interventions including border control or closure, quarantine and testing of all incoming travelers or returnees, massive reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) testing for case detection, rapid contact tracing and quarantine, frequent hand hygiene, and later social distancing measures including school closure, home office, cancellation of all mass gatherings, later stay-at-home order, and cessation of all socioeconomic activities except essential services, were also adopted to various degrees and at different time points in different geographical areas to reduce the risk of community transmission. many of these measures had been used for the control of community transmission of severe acute respiratoryadministrative region of china (hksar) and other parts of the world [7, 8] . however, the efficacy of community-wide masking of the population during these past epidemics or the present covid-19 pandemic has not been clearly investigated. unlike 2003 sars which is generally manifested with high fever and progressive pneumonia with a mortality of about 10%, covid-19 can be associated with very mild symptoms and a mortality of less than 4%.thus subclinical or asymptomatic sars-cov-2 shedders may play an important role in perpetuating the pandemic [9, 10] . we hypothesized that community-wide masking in hksar may break the chain of transmission of sars-cov-2 by reducing the infectiousness of the subclinical virus shedders while offering some protection to the susceptible population.in hksar, community-wide masking was practiced by the general population at an early stage of the local covid-19 epidemic. here, we described the comparative epidemiology of covid-19 during the first 100 days. we also analyzed the incidence of covid-19 in geographical areas with or without community-wide masking for most individuals, and also the number of covid-19 clusters of covid-19 in relation to workplace (mask-on setting) or non-workplace recreational settings (mask-off setting) of hksar.hksar is a cosmopolitan city of 7.45 million people in southern china. occupying only 1,104 square-kilometers, it is the third most densely populated area in the world with around 6,700 people per square-kilometer. soon after the official announcement of a cluster of patients with community-acquired pneumonia in wuhan by the national health commission of the people's republic of china, on 31 december 2019 (day 1), the centre for health protection (chp) of the department of health, the hksar government alerted members of the public to maintain good personal and environmental hygiene, with specific emphasis on hand hygiene, refraining from work or attending class at school, avoiding crowded places, seek medical advice promptly and wear a surgical mask if they develop respiratory symptoms [3] .step-wise introduction of other community interventions later to control the spread of covid-19 was described. as an objective parameter of communitywide preparedness, compliance of face mask usage by the general public monitored by staff working in infection control unit, and department of microbiology, queen mary hospital for three consecutive days from 6 april to 8 april 2020 (day 98 to day 100). each staff member would count the number of persons not wearing a mask among the first 50 persons encountered in the street during their morning commute. the residential district of the staff was recorded.a multi-pronged screening strategy to identify patients infected with sars-cov-2 was implemented [5, 6] . the epidemiology of newly confirmed cases was announced in the daily press conference jointly held by chp and hospital authority. major clusters arising from mask-on (workplace) and mask-off (recreational) settings were analyzed to evaluate the efficacy of wearing face masks.the epidemiology of covid-19 of hksar was compared to that of the representative countries in north america, europe, and asia using publicly accessible information from the website of who to understand the overall effect of our control measures used in hksar. countries with well-established healthcare system, where face mask usage was not universally adopted in the community, and having over 100 confirmed cases at day 72 when who declared a pandemic were selected for comparison.clinical specimens including nasopharyngeal aspirates, nasopharyngeal swabs, throat swab, saliva, sputum, endotracheal aspirates, or bronchoalveolar lavage were subjected to nucleic acid extraction by the emag extraction system (biomérieux, marcy-l'étoile france) as we previously described [5, 6] . the presence of sars-cov-2 rna in specimens was first determined by the lightmix modular sebeccov e-gene commercial kit (tib molbiol, berlin, germany) at all public hospitals under the hospital authority and the public health laboratory service of the department of health, and further confirmed by in-house real-time rt-pcr assay targeting the sars-cov-2 rna-dependent rna polymerase/helicase gene as described [11] .incidence rates were compared using the exact poisson test using r software.proportions were compared using the chi-squared test. a p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. up to day 100 of the epidemic, a total of 961 cases of covid-19 were confirmed in hksar. transmission of covid-19 was divisible into four phases: phase 0 (from day 1 to 21) with no confirmed cases of covid-19 in hksar; phase 1 (from day 22 to 30) with 10 imported cases; phase 2 (from day 31 to 71) with 111 cases (predominantly local cases) and; phase 3 (from day 72, who declared covid-19 pandemic, onwards) with 840 cases (predominantly imported cases with local clusters of cases) ( figure 1 ). among the 961 confirmed cases, there were 11 clusters of 113 persons that were directly engaged in mask-off activities such as dining and drinking in restaurant or bar, singing at karaoke, and exercise in fitness clubs. there were only three clusters involving 11 persons engaged in mask-on settings at the workplace. using the chi-square test of goodness-of-fit with williams' continuity correction, there were significantly more covid-19 clusters involving mask-off settings than might be expected assuming that the null hypothesis of equal number of clusters involving mask-on and mask-off settings was true (p = 0.036).the incidence and cumulative number of covid-19 cases in hksar and the representative countries or areas since the first laboratory-confirmed case of sars-cov-2 are illustrated in figure 2a & 2b. the incidence of covid-19 in hksar was significantly less than that of the selected countries (with well-established healthcare system and having over 100 confirmed cases at day 72 when who declared a pandemic) in asia, europe, and north america, where face mask usage was not universally adopted in the community (table 1) .singapore's land area and population density are comparable to hksar [4] . on day 100 (8 april 2020), the incidence of covid-19 per million population in singapore was significantly higher than that in hksar (129.0 per million population vs 259.8 per million population, p <0.001) ( table 2 ). in south korea, the number of molecular diagnostic tests per million population was comparable to hksar. the proportion of local cases in south korea related to mask-off settings was significantly higher than that in hksar [5150 / 10,384 (49.6%) vs 113 / 961 (11.8%), p<0.001] because of super-spreading events at a church which was also a mask-off setting ( table 2) .evidence for using face masks to prevent transmission of respiratory viruses in the community remains limited to a few studies conducted in the household setting [12, 13] .although there is no expert consensus on this issue, universal masking is voluntarily adopted by people in our hksar community soon after the first imported case of covid-19 was reported. this public action was linked to the painful experience of the 2003 sars outbreak (1755 cases with 299 deaths in 6.73 million population) when hksar people adopted universal masking in addition to other non-pharmaceutical interventions such as hand hygiene, social distancing and school closure [7] . these community hygienic measures during the sars outbreak resulted in a significant reduction of positive specimens of all circulating respiratory viruses including influenza viruses in 2003 compared with preceding periods [14] .in a case-control study conducted in beijing during 2003 sars, consistent wearing of a face mask outdoors was associated with a 70% risk reduction, compared to those not wearing a face mask [15] .hksar is the only area practicing universal masking despite the recommendation of who and cdc that mask should be reserved for those with symptoms and in healthcare settings. we therefore compared the number of covid-19 clusters in mask-on settings at workplace with that of the mask-off settings such as dining and drinking in restaurant or bar, singing at karaoke, and exercising in gymnasium, where there was a large gathering of people sharing food, drinks, and instruments. in effect, these mask-off settings allowed the sharing of their saliva and respiratory droplets which may contain a viral load of 100 million per ml directly or indirectly [16, 17] . in hksar hospitals, wearing face masks is mandatory during the pandemic. it is also the practice among many community service providers and those who are working indoors. since the supply of face mask was tight in the community as well as in the healthcare setting, it is the practice of our general public of not using more than one face mask per person per day. we observed that the overall compliance of face mask usage was 97% in all administrative districts in the morning. thus we have the reason to believe that their compliance to face mask usage would remain high throughout the day at the workplace.it is therefore not surprising that the number of covid-19 clusters was significantly higher in the mask-off recreational settings in hksar.universal masking in the community may mitigate the extent of transmission of covid-19 and may be a necessary adjunctive public health measure in a densely populated city like hksar, with an average of 170,000 people entering hksar from mainland and overseas per day [18]. our incidence of covid-19 was also lower than that of other areas with local transmission, vindicating this approach. in particular, our incidence of covid-19 was significantly lower than that of singapore, a city comparable with hksar in terms of area, population density, healthcare infrastructure, bcg vaccination [19] , as well as adopting social distancing strategies and sars-cov-2 testing infrastructure [20] . besides a lower ambient temperature and a higher risk of importation of covid-19 cases from the mainland which are factors promoting covid-19 transmission in hksar, the most important difference between the two cities is the community-wide usage of face masks in hksar but not in singapore. moreover, 50% of local transmission of covid-19 in south korea was attributed to religious activities where face mask usage was discouraged. mask-off activities clearly have potential implications for covid-19 transmission in the community.however, the use of face mask in the community remains controversial [21, 22] .who issued an interim guideline regarding the use of masks in the context of covid-19 on 6 april 2020, stating no evidence that wearing a mask by health persons in the wider community setting can prevent acquisition of covid-19 [23] . european centre for disease prevention and control issued a technical report on 8 april 2020 that the use of face masks in the community could be considered, especially when visiting busy, closed spaces, despite not knowing how much the use of masks in the community can contribute to a decrease in transmission in addition to the other counter measures [24] . on 3 april 2020, cdc recommends the use of cloth face coverings, especially in areas of significant communitybased transmission [25] . the shift of paradigm from not recommending to promoting the use of face masks was based on the rationale of pre-symptomatic shedding of sars-cov-2 and presence of asymptomatic patients with high viral load in the community [9, 26] . the use of face mask may serve as source control by preventing dispersal of droplets during talking, sneezing, and coughing [27] , and also reduce the risk of environmental contamination by sars-cov-2. masking is a continuous form of protection to stop the spreading of saliva and respiratory droplets to others or from others, and to the environment or from the environment to the susceptible by hands through touching of nose, mouth and eye. touching nose and mouth is a subconscious behavior [28] . hand hygiene is always the cornerstone to prevent transmission of covid-19 but it is a one-off discontinuous process where hand contamination may occur easily between each alcoholic handrubbing or hand washing.although we have successfully implemented directly observed hand hygiene (dohh) by delivery alcohol-based hand rub to conscious hospitalized patients and persons in residential care homes for the elderly before meal and medication rounds [29] [30] [31] , it may be difficult to practice dohh in the community. studies have also shown that wearing a mask with frequent hand hygiene significantly reduced transmission of seasonal influenza virus in the community setting. but once the effect of the use of surgical mask was removed, the effect of hand hygiene became insignificant [32] . with the understanding that the supply of face masks should primarily be reserved for usage in healthcare settings, we believe that it is still advisable to encourage people to wear face masks in the public based on the precautionary principles [33] . moreover, wearing a cloth mask with less filtration efficiency may still be better than no mask at all in communities of high transmission.sars-cov-2 is a highly transmissible respiratory virus which causes upper and lower respiratory tract infection leading to a high viral load in respiratory secretions and saliva as shown in clinical studies and transmission studies by close contact in animal models [34] . moreover, sars-cov-2 can suppress the host innate immune response in terms of interferon and cytokine response which in turn leads to a higher level of viral replication than that by the 2003 sars-cov in an ex vivo lung tissue explant model [10] . these ex vivo findings supported the suggestion that an important proportion of covid-19 patients may be pre-symptomatic or mildly symptomatic virus shedders. these groups of patients are unlikely to be tested or isolated and may contribute to the perpetuation of the pandemic. therefore community-wide mask usage irrespective of symptoms may reduce the infectivity of these silent covid-19 cases to the susceptible individuals.there are several limitations in our study. first, we did not analyze the mask-off settings in the family because the modes of transmission among close household contacts can be multimodal. if the 15 family clusters were also counted within the mask-off settings, the difference would be even more significant (p<0.001). second, the type of mask used in the community cannot be controlled. the compliance of wearing face mask in terms of not touching the external surface of mask or face, and hand hygiene before or after touching the mask cannot be assessed. third, we cannot count the mask compliance directly for every community settings. however, in the absence of effective antiviral and vaccines, the pandemic spread covid-19 to many countries provide an unique opportunity to study the [35] south korea takes new measures to have enough face masks domestically amid coronavirus. abc news. https://abcnews.go.com/international/south-korea-takes-measuresface-masks-domestically-amid/story?id=69254114 accessed 16 april 2020.[36] mandatory for all in singapore to wear mask when out, except for kids under 2 and those doing strenuous exercise. the straits times.https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/coronavirus-mandatory-for-all-to-wear-a-maskwhen-out-with-exceptions-for-kids-under-2-and accessed 16 april 2020. there is postulation of countries with bcg vaccination program tends to have lower incidence and death due to covid-19 [19] figure legend the novel coronavirus diseases 2019 caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) caused over 1.7 million confirmed cases and cumulative mortality up to over 110,000 deaths worldwide as of 14 april 2020 (world health organization (who), 2020b), provided with its early transmission dynamic of human-human transmission among close contacts . it is estimated in a model that covid-19 would have resulted in 7.0 billion infections and 40 million deaths globally in 2020 in the absence of any intervention (walker et al., 2020) . wuhan city, the capital of hubei province in china, became the first outbreak center of covid-19 since december 2019 (phelan, katz & gostin, 2020) . during the chinese new year holidays, chinese people have the traditional habit of traveling to their hometowns for a family reunion and gathering to celebrate the beginning of the lunar new year. hence, many people, including groups of macao citizens, were obligated to stay in hubei province after the announcement of "lockdown"/sanitary cordons by the local government on 23 january 2020, that is, 2 days before chinese new year. it was not until 7 march 2020 that the macao sar government escorted a special team to wuhan, china to pick up 57 macao citizens from 31 families, who stayed in 10 different cities in hubei province (macao sar government portal, 2020b) . covid-19 was ruled out in all of them afterwards.a cross-sectional survey was conducted to have in-depth questionnaire interview of these people who were all uninfected by sars-cov-2 in a high-risk area, hubei province, china. this study aims to identify the common grounds and personal behavior leading to a zero-infection rate among participants that might provide crucial hints on global covid-19 pandemic control.a citizen who presented with body temperature equal to or greater than 37.5 degree celsius in hubei province was not allowed for boarding. after arrival to macao, all 57 citizens were sent to public health clinical center for a 14-day quarantine. a total of three serial nasopharyngeal swabs were obtained on day 2, day 7 and day 13 for viral rna detection by real-time rt-pcr techniques, which were all negative (100%) (macao sar government portal, 2020a) . sera antibodies of sar-cov-2 were tested with all negative results (100%) on day 14 before citizens released from quarantine. all citizens did not complain any symptoms during quarantine period. a questionnaire was designed to obtain demographic information, activity in hubei province, contact history, personal health behaviors such as habit of handwashing, mask usage and home cleaning. participants aged 15 or over were eligible for this study. the questionnaire survey was delivered to the isolation ward and was implemented by self-administration. the written consents were collected as digital format.infants and children with age under fifteen were considered ineligible for this survey. this study was approved by the hospital medical ethical committee of centro hospitalar conde de são januário, macao sar, china.descriptive statistic was used to summarize demographic information, high-risk activities and common preventive measures via standard parameter such as percentage, mean and median. then we compared behavior changes before and during covid-19 outbreak using wilcoxon signed rank test in continuous variables or mcnemar test in dichotomized variables. the statistical significance level was determined at a = 0.05. the statistical analysis was conducted using r (version 3.5.2, r core team, 2018).a total of 42 effective questionnaires were analyzed in final after exclusion of 14 infants and children with age less than 15 years old and missing of one questionnaire (response rate: 97.7%). the demographic information was summarized in table 1 . the majority of the participants aged between 20 and 44 years old (52.4%) and had received secondary education or above (97.6%). the proportion of female composed more than 70% of this group of returners. the most common comorbid diseases were hypertension (7.1%), followed by diabetes mellitus (4.8%) and hepatitis (4.8%). more than half of the respondents were non-smokers (61.9%). the main reason for visit hubei is to visit relatives (88.1%). more than 85 percent of participants thought the most important reason of not getting covid-19 was to keep distance ("stay away") from the crowd and decrease cluster or gathering incidence, followed by good personal protective measures (73.8%).mobility and participation of high-risk activities were restricted for these participants in hubei province according to the emergency response policy and these were specified by these respondents (table 2) : 97.6% of them did not visit crowded places; 90.5% of them did not use any public transportation; 90.5% did not go to any supermarket. about three-quarters of respondents received daily supply at home via unified delivery. none of them visited or traveled to other provinces or cities (0%). all the participants (100%) denied any contact with suspected or confirmed covid-19 patients while 4.8% of the participants stated there was confirmed covid-19 cases in their local community.a further survey of comparison of personal preventive measures before and during disease outbreak showed increased alert and practice of personal protection and hygiene during the spread (table 3) , such as wearing a mask when outdoor (16.7% and 95.2%, p < 0.001), wearing a mask every time when contact or talk with people (10% and 95%, p < 0.001), often wash hands with soap/liquid soap (85.7% and 100%, p = 0.031), use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers or disinfected wipes as substitute if handwashing facility not available (71.4% and 95.2%, p = 0.006), cleaning clothes and personal belongings immediately once get back home (35.7% and 78.6%, p < 0.001), cleaning mobile phone regularly (43.9% and 65.9%, p = 0.012). only 11.9% of respondents attend meal gatherings regularly during the spread compared to 59.5% before (p < 0.001). the increase in personal measures is significant and may possibly reflect the effectiveness of public health interventions. the aims of this research was to investigate the reasons that contributed to the negativeness of covid-19 in this high-risk population in hubei province. on the one hand, good physical health could be one factor, as the majority of participants were below the age of 45 (61.9%), non-smokers (61%) and 85.7% had no underlying chronic diseases. however, further studies are needed to determine the exact effect of physical health on the risk of covid-19 infection. on the other hand, it was also important to stop the transmission chain via political measures or personal health behaviors. on 23 january 2020 (2 days before the chinese new year), the china government imposed a "lockdown" in wuhan and other cities in hubei to quarantine this center, which is commonly referred to as the "wuhan lockdown" (health-commission, 2020). all public transport, including buses, railways, flights and ferry services were suspended with all stations and airports closed. the residents of wuhan were not allowed to leave the city without permission which was unprecedented in public health history. besides, measures on social aspects including the ban on massive gatherings such as concerts or competitions, close of entertainment venues and public facilities, schools closure and mandatory orders of wearing masks in public areas, were applied to mitigate the outbreak by controlling the source of infection and block transmission routes (pan et al., 2020) . as a result, the respondents of our study reported the highly restricted mobility in wuhan, china. a total of 97.6% of them denied visiting crowded places which required high self-discipline and other public measures to cooperate. to achieve this level of mobility restriction, local authority organized a team of volunteers to facilitate the delivery of foods and other supply to each home quarantine family (chinanews.com, 2020) , 76.2% of participants received essential materials via this method that decreased the chance of outdoor activity and interaction with other. nonetheless, 85% of respondents said that table 2 high-risk activities and daily supply conditions among respondents during covid-19 outbreak in early 2020 in hubei, china. "staying away from crowds" was the major reason to be not infected. moreover, there were emerging evidence suggesting these "lockdown" measures had certain roles on decreasing covid-19 incidence (colbourn, 2020; gostin & wiley, 2020; klompas et al., 2020; phelan, katz & gostin, 2020 ; the lancet respiratory medicine, 2020). it was estimated that the wuhan travel ban delayed the epidemic progression by 3-5 days in mainland china, (chinazzi et al., 2020; tian et al., 2020) while reducing case importations to other countries by nearly 80% through mid-february (chinazzi et al., 2020) . furthermore, the rates of confirmed cases and the effective reproduction number (rt), that is, the mean number of secondary cases generated by a typical primary case at time t in a population, declined since 24 january 2020, and fell below 1.0 since 6 february 2020, in a recent investigation (pan et al., 2020) . although intensive physical distancing and "lockdown" could help "flattening the curve" on covid-19 and preventing the sharp upward demand of health system capacities, the consideration of social and economic effects of "lockdown" and knock-on effects on health such as mental health and interpersonal violence is necessary (parmet & sinha, 2020 ). yet, our data showed that over half of the participants (57.1%) felt "calm" during stay in hubei province, which was somehow counterintuitive. we hypothesized that the provision of sufficient logistic support to the isolated families by local authorities and clear information delivery to the public during a "lockdown" will help to ease the stress and minimize subsequent psychological impact (brooks et al., 2020) . therefore, local governments should be advised to create a comprehensive strategy and to prudentially evaluate the following concerns including racisms, adequate explanations to the public about the rationale and upside, logistic power and resources, and cultural factors which may hinder the compliance before implementing large-scale mobility restrictions (parmet & sinha, 2020) . the administration of "lockdown" could even lead to precarious situations that could heighten transmission in some countries if corresponding supports are not tailor-made and comprehensive based on their own economic and social conditions, such as workers may be packed in state-run shelter during india "lockdown" (pulla, 2020) . likewise, the announcement of closing the gambling industry during the first half of february in macau was accompanied with foreseen policies of financial and resources supply could be one of the references of administration of any kind of measures (macao sar government portal, 2020c) . additionally, the significant behavior changes among participants before and during outbreak consisted of more wearing a mask outdoor, wash hands more frequently, clean and disinfect home more frequently, and less meal gatherings. although the transmission of sars-cov-2 was commonly believed via droplet and contact, no evidence of wearing a surgical mask alone by healthy persons can prevent them from infection with respiratory viruses including covid-19 currently while inappropriate use/disposal may even increase risk (world health organization (who), 2020a). however, none of the participants in our study agreed that it was less important to wash hands after wearing masks, and all of them (100%) believed that the incidence of accidental touching the face or nose after wearing a mask would be reduced. the effectiveness of personal protective measures in preventing pandemic influenza transmission by meta-analysis showed a significant protective effect of hand hygiene but mixed results for mask use and thus wearing mask was suggested to be applied alongside with hands hygiene (saunders-hastings et al., 2017) . wearing mask might also act as a "symbolism" on increasing individual awareness of good hygiene practice (klompas et al., 2020) . however, the universal mask-wearing scheme in public should be emphasized on the concurrent hand hygiene practice and social distancing as a bundle, while the allocation and availability of resources should be taken into account first to ensure adequate protection for healthcare workers (emanuel et al., 2020) .there were some limitations in this study. the e.l.i.z.a kits used for antibody detection were qualitative and not able to provide titers information. although the sample size of this questionnaire was limited and recall bias was inevitable, its implication may indirectly reflect the effectiveness of public health interventions in wuhan, china, including sanitary cordon, traffic restriction, social distancing, home confinement, centralized quarantine and universal symptom survey. such interventions were aimed at preventing individuals from face-to-face interaction and preventing asymptomatic covid-19 patients from spreading the coronavirus within the community. the lack of infected citizens limits for further comparison of difference of measures or behavior and further studies are warranted to determine the effectiveness of each preventive measure on covid-19 at the individual level. moreover, some of the participants had stayed in their relative home where the cleaning duty was not their responsibilities. hence the question of home cleaning might partially reflect the attitudes from their relatives/friends.our findings were in line with common preventive measures advised by the world health organization. good personal hygiene and adequate preventive measures such as less gathering, frequent handwashing, in addition to wearing a mask outdoor, were common grounds among 42 uninfected participants during the stay in hubei province under covid-19 outbreak. furthermore, the success of the "lockdown" and self-quarantine policy in hubei province could contribute to the local authority's strong logistical provision and transparency of information about the policy's rationale in order to maintain better mental health and thus increase compliance and efficacy of preventive measures.iek hou leong conceived and designed the experiments, analyzed the data, prepared figures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.the following information was supplied relating to ethical approvals (i.e., approving body and any reference numbers):the medical ethical committee of centro hospitalar conde de são januário, macau sar, china, granted ethical approval to carry out the study within its facilities.the following information was supplied regarding data availability:the raw measurements are available in the supplemental file.supplemental information for this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/ peerj.9428#supplemental-information.the pandemic of covid-19 is growing, and a shortage of masks and respirators has been reported globally.policies of health organizations for healthcare workers are inconsistent, with a change in policy in the us for universal face mask use. the aim of this study was to review the evidence around the efficacy of masks and respirators for healthcare workers, sick patients and the general public.a systematic review of randomized controlled clinical trials on use of respiratory protection by healthcare workers, sick patients and community members was conducted. articles were searched on medline and embase using key search terms.a total of 19 randomised controlled trials were included in this study -8 in community settings, 6 in healthcare settings and 5 as source control. most of these randomised controlled trials used different interventions and outcome measures. in the community, masks appeared to be more effective than hand hygiene alone, and both together are more protective. randomised controlled trials in health care workers showed that respirators, if worn continually during a shift, were effective but not if worn intermittently.medical masks were not effective, and cloth masks even less effective. when used by sick patients randomised controlled trials suggested protection of well contacts.the study suggests that community mask use by well people could be beneficial, particularly for covid -19, where transmission may be pre-symptomatic. the studies of masks as source control also suggest a benefit, and may be important during the covid-19 pandemic in universal community face mask use as well as in health care settings. trials in healthcare workers support the use of respirators continuously during a shift.the use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (covid-19) has been controversial, with differing guidelines issued by different agencies (1) . coronavirus disease is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus2 (sars-cov-2), a beta-coronavirus, similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus2 (sars cov) (1). seasonal alpha and beta coronaviruses cause common colds, croup and broncholitis. the transmission mode of coronaviruses in humans is similar, thought to be by droplet, contact and sometimes airborne routes (2) (3) (4) . the world health organization recommends surgical mask for health workers providing routine care to a coronavirus disease patient (5), whilst the us centers for disease control and prevention recommend a respirator (6) . most authorities are recommending that community members not wear a mask, and that a mask should only be worn by a sick patient (also referred to as source control) (7) . there are more randomised controlled trials of community use of masks in well people than studies of the use by sick people (source control). the aim of this study was to review the randomised controlled trials evidence for use of masks and respirators by the community, health care workers and sick patients for prevention of infection.we searched medline and embase for clinical trials on masks and respirators using the key words "mask", "respirator", and "personal protective equipment". the search was conducted between 1 march to april 17 2020 and all randomised controlled trials published before the search date were included. two authors (crm and aac) reviewed the title and abstracts to identify randomised controlled trials on masks and respirators. we also searched relevant papers from the reference lists of previous clinical trials and systematic reviews. studies that were not randomised controlled trials, were about anaesthesia, or not about prevention of infection were excluded. animal studies, experimental and observational epidemiologic studies were also excluded. studies published in english language were included.we found 602 papers on medline and 250 on embase. 820 papers were excluded by title and abstract review. full texts were reviewed for 32 papers and 18 were selected in this review. results were reported according to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) criteria (8) .in general, the results show protection for healthcare workers and community members, and likely benefit of masks used as source control. we found eight clinical trials (9-16) on the use of masks in the community (table 1 ). in the community, masks appear to be more effective than hand hygiene alone, and both together are more protective (9, 12) . however, the randomised controlled trials which measured both hand hygiene and masks measured the effect of hand hygiene alone, but not of masks alone (9, 12, 16) . masks were only examined in combination with hand hygiene. therefore the protective effect of masks and hand hygiene combined could be due to both interventions together, or the effect of masks alone. the use of hand hygiene alone in these trials was not effective. in more than one trial, interventions had to be used within 36 hours of exposure to be effective (9, 15, 16) .to date, six randomised controlled trials (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) has been conducted on the use of masks and/or respirators by healthcare workers in health care settings ( table 2 ). the healthcare workers trials (table 2) used different interventions and different outcome measures, and one was in the outpatient setting. a japanese study had only 32 subjects, and likely was underpowered to find any difference between masks and control (18) . two north american trials of masks and respirators against influenza infection found no difference between the arms, but neither had a control arm to differentiate equal efficacy from equal inefficacy (17, 22) . without a control group to determine rates of influenza in unprotected healthcare workers, neither study is able to determine efficacy if no difference was observed between the two interventions. a serologic study showed that up to 23% of unprotected healthcare workers (a rate identical to that observed in loeb the trial, which also used serology) contract influenza during outbreaks (23) , which suggests lack of efficacy. studies of nosocomial influenza generally find lower influenza attack rates in unprotected healthcare workers than observed in the loeb trial (24) .further problems with this study are that the majority of subjects were defined as having influenza on the basis of serological positivity (22) . the 10% seroconversion to pandemic h1n109 (with no pandemic virus isolation or positive pcr) observed in the trial, suggests that pandemic h1n109 was circulating in ontario before april 2009, which is unlikely. the overall flu rate was 38%, higher than the expected attack rate in a pandemic (22) . the majority of subjects defined as having influenza were by serology.a serological definition of influenza can be affected by vaccination. the authors claim they excluded influenza vaccinated subjects in the outcome, but according to figure 1 , these subjects (130 in total) are included in the analysis. if they had been excluded and even if no other subjects were excluded, the total analysed would be 348, which is lower than the 422 subjects analysed (22) . these 130 vaccinated subjects should have been excluded entirely from the analysis. the vaccination status of subjects with seropositivity is not provided in the paper, but it appears people with positive serology due to vaccination may have wrongly been counted as influenza cases (22) .in both the north american trials, the intervention comprised wearing the mask or respirator when in contact with recognized ili or when doing a high risk procedure, which is a targeted strategy (17, 22) . one was in an outpatient setting. (17) we conducted a randomised controlled trial comparing the targeted strategy tested in the two north american studies, with the wearing of respiratory protection during an entire shift, and showed efficacy for continual (but not targeted) use of a respirator (19) . the study also did not show efficacy for a surgical mask worn continually, and therefore no difference between a surgical mask and targeted use of a respirator (19) , which is consistent with the findings of the north american trials (17, 22) . in summary, the evidence is consistent that a respirator must be worn throughout the shift to be protective. targeted use of respirators only when doing high risk procedures and medical mask use is not protective. another randomised controlled trial we conducted in china showed efficacy for continual use of a respirator, but not for a mask, and also found fit-testing of the respirator did not affect efficacy (20) .however, this may be specific to the quality of the tested product, and is not generalisable to other respirators -fit testing is a necessary part of respirator use (25) .for healthcare workers, there is evidence of efficacy of respirators if worn continually during a shift, but no evidence of efficacy of a mask (19, 20) . for hospitals where covid-19 patients are being treated, there is growing evidence of widespread contamination of the ward environment, well beyond 2 meters from the patient, as well as aerosol transmission (2, 26, 27) . several studies have found sars-cov-2 on air vents and in air samples in intensive care units and covid-19 wards (26, 28, 29) , and an experimental study showed the virus in air samples three hours after aerosolization (30). the weight of this evidence and the precautionary principle(31, 32), favors respirators for healthcare workers. we showed lower rates of infection outcomes in the medical mask arm compared to control, but the difference was not significant (20) . it could be that larger trials are needed to demonstrate efficacy of a mask, but any protection is far less than from a respirator. a trial we conducted in vietnam of 2-layered cotton cloth masks compared to medical masks showed a lower rate of infection in the medical mask group, and a 13 times higher risk of infection in the cloth mask arm (21) . the study suggests cloth masks may increase the risk of infection (21), but may not be generalizable to all home-made masks. the material, design and adequacy of washing of cloth masks may have been a factor (33) . there are no other randomised controlled trial of cloth masks published, but if any protection is offered by these it would be less than even a medical mask. table 3 shows the trials of source control. there were five randomised controlled trials identified of masks used by sick patients (34) (35) (36) (37) . one was an experimental study of 9 influenza patients, which did not measure clinical endpoints (34) . participants with confirmed influenza coughed onto a petri dish wearing a n95 respirator or a mask. no influenza grew on the medium. a trial of 105 sick patients wearing a mask (or no mask) in the household found no significant difference between arms (36). however, the trial was terminated prematurely and did not meet recruitment targets, so was probably underpowered. one randomised controlled trial was conducted among hajj pilgrims, with both well and sick pilgrims wearing masks, and low rates of ili were reported among contact of mask pilgrims (37) . our randomised controlled trial is the largest available, and studied 245 patients randomised to mask or control (35) . compliance was suboptimal in the mask group and some controls wore masks. the intention to treat analysis showed no difference, but when analysed by actual mask use, the rate of infection in household contacts was lower in those who wore masks (35) . a trial with an experimental design was published in april 2020, examining a range of viruses including seasonal human coronaviruses (38) . this showed that coronaviruses are preferentially found in aerosolized particles compared to large droplets, and could be expelled by normal tidal breathing. wearing a surgical mask prevented virus from being exhaled.there are more randomised controlled trials of community use of masks in well people (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) than studies of the use by sick people (also referred to as "source control"), and these trials are larger than the few on source control (34) (35) (36) . the evidence suggests protection of masks in high transmission settings such as household and college settings, especially if used early, if combined with hand hygiene and if wearers are compliant (9, (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) . if masks protect in high transmission settings, they should also protect in crowded public spaces, including workplaces, buses, trains, planes and other closed settings. the trial which did not show efficacy used influenza as the outcome measure (10) , which is a rare outcome, so requires a larger sample size for adequate power and may have been underpowered.for healthcare workers, the only trials to show a difference between respirators and masks demonstrated efficacy for continuous use of a respirator through a clinical shift, but not masks (19, 20) . the two trials which showed no difference are widely cited as evidence that masks provide equal protection as respirators (17, 22) . however, without a control arm, the absence of difference between arms could reflect equal efficacy or inefficacy, and it is not possible to draw any conclusions about efficacy. the high rates of influenza in the loeb trial suggest equal inefficacy, and further, there were likely misclassified outcomes in the trial by inclusion of seropositive, vaccinated healthcare workers, which would have biased the results (22) . the outpatient setting in the us trial may have had lower exposure risk than the inpatient setting of other trials. (17) in both the north american trials, the intervention comprised wearing the mask or respirator when in contact with recognized ili or when doing a high risk procedure (17, 22) . the underlying assumption that the majority of infections in healthcare workers occur during self-identified high-risk exposures is not supported by any evidence. it assumes healthcare workers can accurately identify when they are risk in a busy, clinical setting, when the majority of infections may occur when healthcare workers are unaware of the risk (such as when walking through a busy emergency room or ward where aerosolized virus may be present). conversely, infections could occur outside the workplace. this could explain the lack of difference if there was no actual efficacy of either arm and if much of the infection occurs in unrecognised situations of risk either within or outside the workplace.in practice, hospital infection control divides infections into droplet or airborne spread, and recommends droplet (mask) or airborne (respirator) precautions accordingly (39) . in a pooled analysis of both healthcare worker trials, we showed that continual use of a respirator is more efficacious in protecting healthcare workers even against infections assumed to be spread by the droplet route (39) . medical masks did not significantly protect against viral, bacterial, droplet or other infection outcomes. however, the summary odds ratio for masks was less than one, which suggests a low level of protection. targeted use of respirator protected against bacterial and droplet infections, but not against viral infections, suggesting viral infections may be more likely to be airborne in the hospital setting (39) .the five available studies of mask use by sick patients suggest a benefit, but are much smaller trials than the community trials, two without clinical endpoints, and with less certainty around the findings (34) (35) (36) (37) . only 3/5 trials examined clinical outcomes in close contacts (35) (36) (37) .many systematic reviews have been conducted on masks, respirators and other ppe in past (40) (41) (42) (43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) . these reviews generally examined multiple interventions (e.g. masks and hand hygiene etc), often combined different outcome measures that were not directly comparable and were inconclusive. moreover, most of these reviews did not include more recent randomised controlled trials (17, 21) . this systematic review only focuses on masks and respirators and contains all new studies.in summary, there is a growing body of evidence supporting all three indications for respiratory protectioncommunity, healthcare workers and sick patients (source control). the largest number of randomised controlled trials have been done for community use of masks by well people in high-transmission settings such as household or college settings. there is benefit in the community if used early, and if compliant. they also found no evidence of efficacy of hand hygiene or health education, suggesting mask use is more protective than hand hygiene.respirators protect healthcare workers if worn continually, but not if worn intermittently in self-identified situations of risk. this supports the suggestion that the health care environment is a risk to healthcare workers even when not doing aerosol generating procedures or caring for a known infectious patient. for covid-19 specifically, the growing body of evidence showing aerosolisation of the virus in the hospital ward highlights the risk of inadvertent exposure for healthcare workers and supports the use of airborne precautions at all times on the ward (26, 28, 29) . further, the rule of 1-2 m of spatial separation is not based on good evidence, with most research showing that droplets can travel further than 2m, and that infections cannot be neatly separated into droplet and airborne (39, 50) . in the uk, one healthcare trust found almost one in five healthcare workers to be infected with covid-19 (51) . the deaths of healthcare workers from covid-19 reflect this risk (52) . the use of masks by sick people, despite being the who's only recommendation for mask use by community members during covid-19 pandemic, is supported by the smallest body of evidence. source control is probably a sensible recommendation given the suggestion of protection and given specific data on coronaviruses showing protection (38) . it may help if visitors and febrile patients wear a mask in the healthcare setting, whether in primary care or hospitals. universal face mask use is likely to have the most impact on epidemic growth in the community, given the high risk of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission (53) . research fellowship) and sanofi currently. she has received funding from 3m more than 5 years ago for face mask research.abrar ahmad chughtai had testing of filtration of masks by 3m for his phd more than 5 years age. 3m products were not used in his research. he also has worked with cleanspace technology on research on fit testing of respirators (no funding was involved). the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) outbreak emerged in china in december 2019 and it was recognised as a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on 11 march [1] . as of 3 may 2020, a total of 3,349,786 cases and 238, 628 deaths have been reported worldwide [2] . nosocomial spread and infection of healthcare workers (hcws) are a major concern. in italy hcws are paying a heavy price in addition to their professional and humanitarian efforts, with 21,338 cases (more than 10,4% of total italian cases [3] ) and 154 deaths [4] among physicians. protecting hcws from sars-cov-2 is therefore of great importance for individual hcw and for their role in fighting this devastating pandemic effectively. claims of insufficient protection of hcws by personal protective equipment, in particular with regards to the use of surgical masks, have fuelled the scientific and social media debate in several countries. while both surgical masks and n95 respirators are worn by hcw for self protection, they have different intended uses [5] . surgical masks do not prevent inhalation of small airborne particles and fit the face loosely while n95 respirators are able to do so by fitting tightly to the wearer's face and fulfil strict filtration requirements. in fact, except for aerosol generating procedures requiring higher level of respiratory protection with filtering respirators (ie. n95 respirators), who considers surgical masks adequate for the routine care of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) patients [6] . instead, the centers for disease control (cdc) and the european center for disease control guidelines (ecdc) have a more cautious approach, acknowledging that the exact role of airborne (aerosol) route in the transmission of sars-cov-2 is still largely unknown [7, 8] . the direct evidence supporting the who guidelines is based on very few case reports on the absence of sars-cov-2 in air samples taken in highly protected environments where a rapid dilution of aerosols occurs, the absence of infection of hcws exposed for a limited time or limited viral loads, or on modelling of epidemiologic patterns of transmission [9] [10] [11] [12] . in contrast, the airborne (aerosol) opportunistic route of transmission has been documented for sars and mers caused by closely related coronaviruses responsible of severe nosocomial infections among hcws. aerosol filtering respirators were consequently recommended for sars during 2002-03 outbreak [13] . it is worth remembering that canadian health authorities modified their earlier recommendations in favour of a more strict respiratory protection after the deaths of several hcws [14] . the presence of sars-cov-2 in aerosols has been documented in experimental [15] and real life conditions in crowded, poorly ventilated hospital areas unrelated to aerosol generating procedures [16] . also, spontaneous cough generates aerosols, not only droplets [17, 18] and covid-19 patients may infect hcws in this way, especially if they are unable to wear facemasks due to hypoxia and need of oxygen therapy. moreover, none of the above mentioned guidelines adopted the suggested grading of recommendations assessment, development and evaluation (grade) approach for directing public health policy decisions and they did not explicitly consider the potentially catastrophic consequences of deferring the recommendation of n95 respirators for hcws while awaiting more robust evidence.there are already some systematic reviews addressing the role of n95 respirators in protecting hcws, offering however a debatable interpretation of the estimates of the effect (ie. reviews' analyses did not take into account the clustered design of rcts) [19] [20] [21] [22] . we therefore undertook a systematic review with a different perspective and methodology, given the exceptional disease burden expected from this pandemic [23] , the central role of protecting hcws and the need of a careful definition of the outcomes, which are critical for unbiased public health policy decisions [24] . indeed strengthening the preparedness and resiliency of health care systems to this pandemic crisis occurs not only avoiding sars-cov-2 infection but also preventing any hcw respiratory infection causing absenteeism from work. we therefore conducted a systematic review aimed at assessing the efficacy of n95 respirators versus surgical masks for the prevention of respiratory tract infections transmission among hcws. the evidence from the review can then be used for the development of an appropriate grade framework for public health policy guidelines.we conducted this systematic review following the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses statement (prisma) [25] and the cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions [26] .types of studies. randomized controlled trials (rcts) run in healthcare settings were considered eligible. randomization was allowed both at individual and cluster level.population. hwcs exposed to sars-cov-2 or any other respiratory infection. subgroups: in-patient versus out-patient hospital setting.types of interventions. n95 respirators versus surgical masks. an n95 respirator is a particulate-filtering facepiece respirator that meets the u.s. national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) n95 classification of air filtration, meaning that it filters at least 95% of airborne particles. n95 respirators are considered functionally equivalent to certain respirators regulated under non-u.s. jurisdictions, such as ffp2 respirators of the european union and kn95 respirators of china. whereas, the term "surgical mask" was considered equivalent to medical masks (defined surgical, procedural, isolation, laser, fluid resistant or face masks) that meet bacterial and particle filtration efficiency standards required by the us food and drug administration (astm standard f2100-11) but are not certifiable as n95 respirators. [22] types of outcomes and assessment measures. as suggested by the cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions [26] , we identified a priori the following outcomes: outcome definitions are reported in s1 appendix. outcomes and assessment measurements.we searched pubmed, embase, and the cochrane library databases from inception to march 21, 2020, to identify published randomized controlled trials (rcts) on evaluating the use of masks for preventing epidemic influenza. relevant reviews were consulted for additional studies to consider. the full search strategy is reported above. the full search strategy is reported in s1 appendix. search strategy.two reviewers independently screened the articles based on the titles, abstracts and full texts. then, two reviewers independently extracted the following data from the included studies: first author, publication year, country, type of influenza detected, season of interest, details of study population and intervention, study design, sample size, settings, and outcome findings. all disagreements were resolved by discussion.two reviewers independently assessed the risk of bias (rob) of the selected rcts using the cochrane risk of bias tool. also, in cluster-rcts specific risk of bias were considered. further details are reported in s1 appendix. risk of bias assessment.we pooled data from studies with similar interventions and outcomes (for the intention-totreat analysis) to calculate relative risk (rr) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (cis). for cluster rcts, we applied the specific method described in the cochrane handbook [27] to account for the clustering and obtain an adjusted cis. when the cluster rct did not considered the clustering in the analysis, we multiplied the standard error of the effect estimate (from the analysis ignoring the clustering) by the square root of the design effect: both the number of participants and the number experiencing the event were divided by the same design effect [27] . we then calculated the pooled estimates by using both the fixed-effects and the dersimonian and laird random-effects model [28, 29] . in the absence of heterogeneity, the fixed-effects and the random-effects models provide similar results, whereas the randomeffects model is considered more appropriate when heterogeneity is found. heterogeneity between study-specific estimates was tested with the cochran q test [30] and measured with the i 2 statistic [31] . we performed a subgroup analysis based on the settings, ie. in-patients vs out-patients. publication bias was evaluated with funnel plot if a sufficient number of studies was present. a probability level <0.05 was considered statistically significant, except for heterogeneity, whose level of statistical significance was set at p < 0.10. all statistical analyses were performed using review manager (revman) version 5.3 [32] .given the emergency context of this systematic review and the evidence available insofar, we used the results of our meta-analysis to quantify as precisely as possible what value an immediate adoption of n95 respirators for hcws managing covid-19 patients could have compared to the added benefit derived from further research. we therefore used the claxton model [33] to obtain the best estimate of immediate implementation of the n95 respirators through the point estimate of the rr of the corresponding meta-analysis, while the value of deferring the n95 implementation until further research would be available was measured through the upper 90% ci with a time horizon limited to an infectious outbreak. we adopted the worst-case scenario for public health decisions: the least likely benefit which is represented by the lower limit of a confidence interval placed around the treatment effect point estimate [34] . in fact cis with different levels of confidence can demonstrate that there is differential evidence for different degrees of benefit or harm. for example, it might be possible to report the same analysis results (i) with 95% confidence that the intervention does not cause harm; (ii) with 90% confidence that it has some effect; and (iii) with 80% confidence that it has a patient-important benefit. these elements may suggest both usefulness of the intervention and the need for additional research [35] . see s1 appendix. data analysis and synthesis of results.we evaluated the overall quality of the evidence for primary and secondary outcomes using the grade approach [32] . adjusted estimates were considered for judging the quality of the evidence. for primary outcomes, absolute effects were calculated at 95% ci and 90% ci [36] .a 'summary of findings' including the quality of the evidence, reasons for limitation and main findings were displayed in table. see s1 appendix. quality of the evidence-grade approach.a total of 390 records resulted from the search on the electronic databases. overall, we included four rcts from five publications, of which one was an individual participants randomized trial [37] and three were cluster randomized trials [5, 38, 39] . one publication included additional outcomes related to one cluster rcts [40] . fig 1 shows the flow diagram of the study selection process. the list of excluded studies in reported in s1 appendix. (s1 appendix. list of excluded studies).overall, 8736 participants were considered, with the number of participants for each trial ranging from 446 to 5180. three cluster randomized studies were performed in an inpatient [5, 38, 39] and one in an outpatient [41] setting. table 1 . general characteristics of included rcts.in the s1 appendix (s1 appendix. results of risk of bias assessment) we show the risk of bias of included studies: loeb et al. 2009 [37] was judged at low risk of bias, the remaining [5, [38] [39] [40] were assessed for additional bias related to clustering of which two out of three cluster rcts were assessed as high risk of bias for imbalance at baseline. overall, all trials have unclear allocation.no rcts addressing the prevention of sars-cov-2 infection among hcws was found. for cri, we included two cluster rcts with 2594 hcws from in-patient hospital setting [38, 39] . adjusting data for clustering, using n95 respirators reduced meaningfully the risk of developing cri respect to surgical masks (2 rcts, rr 0.43, 95% ci 0.29, 0.64; i 2 = 0%) (fig 2) , with low quality of evidence and an absolute effect of preventing 73 more (95% ci from 91 more to 46 more) infections per 1000 hcws wearing n95 respirators (table 2 ). according to the claxton model [33] , in the worst case scenario the added benefit of more research in reducing uncertainty would be of reducing to 51 infections (upper 90% ci limit) prevented per 1000 hcws wearing n95 respirators compared to surgical masks) (fig 3) .the quality for the evidence was very low for all the secondary outcomes ( [38] : data are reported through descriptive statistics in s1 appendix. outcome results-forest plots of adjusted metaanalysis.the exceptional threat to the resilience of health care systems posed by this pandemic is well known and protecting hcws is among the most important interventions for successfully managing the covid-19 pandemic. there is no agreement among healthcare organisations on whether hcws should wear surgical masks or n95 respirators during the routine care (not involving aerosol generating procedures) of covid-19 suspected or affected patients [6] [7] [8] . while some observational evidence suggests that an airborne (aerosol) route of diffusion of sars-cov-2 may occur also outside the aerosol generating procedures (such as tracheal intubation, sputum induction and airway suctioning) so far no rct has directly compared the effect of filtering respirators with surgical masks in preventing sars-cov-2 infection and related deaths among hcws. also, it is unlikely that such a trial could be ethically acceptable in the near future if the evidence of an aerosol diffusion of sars-cov-2 grows even more. indeed, in our meta-analysis we found that during an infectious outbreak wearing n95 halves the risk of any clinical respiratory infection in hcws compared to wearing only surgical masks. in order to support public health decisions regarding the emergency of covid-19, we introduced the 90% cis providing a simple extension of standard metanalysis by comparing the potential health benefits of further research and the immediate implementation the findings of existing research. on this basis, an immediate implementation of the intervention (wearing n95 respirator by hcws) could actually avoid 73 respiratory infections per 1000 hcws whereas the added value of further research would be to avoid no more than 51 infections per 1000 hcws, in the worst case scenario, making deferral of this intervention while awaiting more studies unreasonable. the favourable (albeit not significant) trend of n95 for laboratory confirmed respiratory infections and ili deserves some comment. in fact, these findings could be viewed as evidence against the benefit of respirators as laboratory-confirmed influenza seems to be. instead, given the blurred distinction between airborne and droplet diffusion of respiratory viruses [42] it could also be considered as indirect evidence of the opportunistic airborne route of transmission of respiratory viruses in the healthcare environment, where prolonged exposures, high viral loads, asymptomatic carriers, overcrowding and poor ventilation could enhance the opportunistic airborne diffusion among hcws of viruses such as sars-cov-2. regarding the lack of apparent benefit of n95 for influenza in the only trial where this outcome was assessed, both the outpatient setting (with lower viral exposure loads) [43] and the droplet route of transmission believed to be operative for influenza are worth of consideration. finally, we suggest to integrate the perspective and the findings of this review into the appropriate grade framework, considering the added difficulties of urgency and uncertainty, which make the production of a reliable guideline even more challenging [44] . such guidelines should explicitly consider among other factors the human and organizational costs of delaying the adoption of n95 respirators versus the benefits of an immediate adoption and, finally, the key value of safeguarding hcws in the context of sars-cov-2 pandemic.several limitations should be considered. first, a review protocol of this systematic review was not made publicly available in prospero due to the need to publish timely a review on covid-19. second, wearing n95 respirators is only one component among a series of complex procedures, so that the identified effect cannot exclusively be attributed to this intervention. the source of infection (community rather than the workplace) cannot be ascertained in any of the trials. third, one rct required hcws to wear n95 respirators only when caring for patients with febrile respiratory illness [37] , whereas all others specified continuous respirator use. while, one study was performed in an outpatient setting that can be considered at moderate risk of transmission [5] . finally, our meta-analyses did not investigate the adherence of wearing an n95 respirator. one of the included trials reported discomfort of using n95 respirators [38] . as well, we did not anticipate mortality as outcome in the review because of the low mortality rate of sars-cov-2 irrespectively of being hcws or not. indeed, the mortality rate among hcws should be related to the infection rate, which was our primary outcome. thus, we call for future studies investigating the mortality rate in hcws.the main strength of our study was the use of appropriate cochrane methods for analysing cluster randomized studies. by inflating variances this method allows to obtain adjusted estimates of relative risks. indeed, if clustering is ignored, p values will be artificially small resulting in false positive conclusions about the effectiveness of the intervention. in addition, we adopted the claxton model to quantify the trade-off between immediate implementation of the intervention versus deferring it while awaiting further evidence. finally, we offered a solid ground for the development of future evidence-based clinical guidance based on the quality of evidence by grade approach which can be applied in a variety of decision-making contexts, including urgent responses as the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 pandemic [45, 46] .this is the first systematic review on the efficacy of n95 respirators versus surgical masks among hcws accounting for possible bias derived from cluster trials and evaluating the findings from a public health policy perspective. we found evidence that n95 respirators halve the risk of any respiratory infection compared to surgical masks. considering that the absenteeism from work due to healthcare related infections hampers heavily the resilience of healthcare systems facing an infectious pandemic, the protective effect of n95 respirators for this primary outcome could produce large benefits in the current context. furthermore, the immediate implementation of the intervention, rather than deferring it until more studies will be available, seems justified on a sound quantitative basis. the evidence from the current study could be used to inform the production of trustworthy grade based guidelines for the prevention of sars-cov-2 infection among hcws. m a n u s c r i p t 5 the source of the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic was traced to civets in live animal markets, and ultimately to chinese horseshoe bats in the wild. [1] [2] [3] the epidemiological significance of the large number of bat sars-related coronaviruses subsequently found in horseshoe and other bat species was not fully appreciated for the last 17 years. 4, 5 in late 2019, infection due to a novel betacoronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which is phylogenetically close to bat sars-related coronaviruses, was reported in patients with epidemiological link to a market with wild mammal trade in wuhan, china. [6] [7] [8] disease 2019 (covid-19) was initially recognized as an acute febrile pneumonia with lymphopenia and multifocal peripheral ground glass changes on thoracic computerized tomography. 9 -11 covid-19 is often self-limiting, but may have severe manifestations such as silent (asymptomatic until sudden collapse) hypoxia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), thrombocytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulation with diffuse microvascular thrombosis, deep venous thrombosis with pulmonary embolism, and/or multiorgan failure. 9, 10, 12, 13 gastrointestinal manifestations such as diarrhea, neurological manifestations such as meningoencephalitis and guillain-barré syndrome, and kawasaki syndrome-like multi-systemic inflammatory disorder in children have also been reported. [14] [15] [16] however, most symptomatic patients have mild to moderate respiratory illness with manifestations such as rhinorrhea, sore throat, cough, conjunctivitis, anosmia, and ageusia. 17, 18 furthermore, a high proportion of patients with covid-19 have subclinical infections, which is believed to enable efficient person-to-person transmission in both community and hospital settings. this renders symptom screening at borders ineffective, entails extensive testing and isolation of infected individuals, require labor-intensive contact tracing measures, and necessitates social distancing or lockdowns. as a result, the ongoing a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 6 pandemic has already affected more than 4 million patients with over 280,000 deaths in just 5 months. 19 although covid-19 is believed to be transmitted by respiratory droplet and direct or indirect contact, no clear experimental evidence for this has been reported. based on in silico estimates of the binding affinity of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) of common laboratory mammals and the receptor-binding domain of the surface spike protein of sars-cov-2, we recently established a golden syrian hamster model for covid-19. 20 sars-cov-2-infected hamsters developed clinical signs of rapid breathing, weight loss, and histopathological changes of ards. 20 using this animal model, we showed that sars-cov-2-challenged index hamsters consistently infected co-housed naïve hamsters, confirming virus transmission by direct or indirect contact. 20 however, the controversies of whether there is transmission by respiratory droplets or airborne droplet nuclei, and whether the wearing of surgical mask by the virus shedder or by the susceptible individual is useful for the prevention of transmission, are still unsettled. in this study, using our hamster model for covid-19, we confirmed non-contact transmission of sars-cov-2 which could potentially be prevented by surgical mask worn by the infected or by the susceptible host.sars-cov-2 was isolated from the nasopharyngeal aspirate specimen of a laboratoryconfirmed covid-19 patient in hong kong. 21 the plaque purified viral isolate was amplified by one additional passage in veroe6 cells to make working stocks of the virus as described previously. 21 all experiments involving live sars-cov-2 followed the approved standard operating procedures of the biosafety level (bsl)-3 facility of the university of hong kong (hku). 22, 23 a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 7approval was obtained from the hku committee on the use of live animals in teaching and research. male and female syrian hamsters, aged 6-10 weeks old, were obtained from the chinese university of hong kong laboratory animal service centre through the hku laboratory animal unit. the animals were kept in bsl-2 housing and given access to standard pellet feed and water ad libitum until virus challenge in our bsl-3 animal facility.the animal rooms were kept at 25°c and 50% humidity.to study the transmissibility of sars-cov-2 among hamsters through non-contact transmission, we housed sars-cov-2-challenged index hamsters and naïve hamsters together in closed systems. the closed systems were kept in isolators (tecniplast spa, varese, italy) to prevent leakage of contaminated air to the external environment ( figure 1a ). three sets of experiments were conducted using our isolator non-contact transmission model.in the first experiment, no mask partition was placed between the two cages in each system to investigate whether non-contact transmission occurred among the hamsters (figure 2 ). a total of five systems housing 20 hamsters were included in the first experiment. in the second experiment, to simulate the situation when surgical masks are worn by a sars-cov-2infected person, a fully knitted partition layer using surgical mask was placed on the polyvinyl chloride air porous partition between the cages with the outer fluid-repellent layer (the blue side) facing the exposed-naïve hamsters to prevent emitted respiratory droplets containing sars-cov-2 from the challenged index hamster from reaching exposed naïve hamsters ( figure 3a ). a total of four systems housing 16 hamsters were included in the second experiment. in the third experiment, to simulate the situation when close contacts of a sars-cov-2-infected person wear surgical masks, the surgical mask partition with the outer fluid-repellent layer (the blue side) facing the challenged index hamsters was placed on the polyvinyl chloride air porous partition between the cages to prevent droplets containing sars-cov-2 emitted by the challenged index hamster from reaching the exposed naïve hamsters ( figure 3b ). a total of four systems housing 16 hamsters were included in the third experiment. the air velocities from the challenged index hamster's cage to the expose naïve hamsters' cage in the three experiments were shown in table 1 .at day 0, a challenge dose of 100µl of dulbecco's modified eagle medium (dmem) containing 10 5 plaque-forming units of sars-cov-2 was intranasally inoculated to the index hamster in each system under intraperitoneal ketamine (200mg/kg) and xylazine (10mg/kg) anaesthesia as we described previously. 20 twenty-four hours later, three naïve hamsters were transferred to the cage adjacent and exposed to the cage housing the virus-challenged index hamster per system. the animals were monitored daily for clinical signs of disease. two of a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 9 the three exposed naïve hamsters in each system were sacrificed at 5 days post-inoculation (dpi) (4 days after exposure). the challenged index animal and remaining exposed naïve animal in each system were then sacrificed at 7dpi. the animals' organ tissues at necropsy were separated into two parts, one immediately fixed in 10% pbs-buffered formalin for histopathological analysis, and the other immediately frozen at -80°c until use for viral load studies as we described previously. 20, 24, 25 serum samples were used for neutralizing antibody detection as we described previously. 20 to compare the histopathological changes at 5dpi, an additional control sars-cov-2-challenged hamster was sacrificed at 5dpi.all data were analysed with graphpad prism software (graphpad software,inc). fisher's exact test was used to compare the rate of infection between the different groups of hamsters with or without surgical mask partition. student's t-test was used to determine significant differences in clinical scores and virus loads between different groups. 20 p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.consistent with our previous findings, all 13 (n=5, 4, and 4 for experiments 1, 2, and 3, respectively) sars-cov-2-challenged index hamsters developed clinical signs of lethargy, ruffled furs, hunched back posture, and rapid breathing starting at 2dpi, and had virological and histological evidence of infection. 20 in the first experiment, six of the ten (60%) exposed naïve hamsters sacrificed at 5dpi (4 days after exposure) also developed similar clinical signs.the overall mean clinical score of the 10 exposed naïve hamsters was 1.800±1.687 ( table 2 ). the 6 naïve hamsters which developed clinical signs were confirmed to be infected with a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 10 sars-cov-2 as evidenced by positive rt-pcr results ( table 3) . the viral loads ranged from around 0.1 to 1000 genome copies/β-actin (nasal turbinate), 0.1 to 100 genome copies/β-actin (trachea), and 0.02 to 10 genome copies/β-actin (lung) ( figure 4a ). at 7 dpi (6 days after exposure), the remaining 5 naïve hamsters had a mean clinical score of 2.400±1.517. four of the five (80.0%) exposed naïve hamsters were found to be infected, with viral loads of around 100 to 1000 genome copies/β-actin (nasal turbinate), 10 to 100 genome copies/β-actin (trachea), and 0.1 to 100 genome copies/β-actin (lung) ( figure 4b ).none of the index and naïve hamsters died.having demonstrated that non-contact transmission of sars-cov-2 occurred among the hamsters in our model, we next investigated the effectiveness of surgical mask partition to reduce the risk of non-contact transmission. surgical mask partition between cages was installed with the external fluid-repelling surface facing the exposed naïve hamsters or the challenged index hamsters to mimic the situation of the mask being worn by index hamsters or by exposed naïve contact hamsters, respectively.in the second experiment in which the external surface of the mask was facing the naïve hamsters, at 5 dpi (4 days after exposure), two of the three naïve hamsters in each system (n=8) were sacrificed. only 1 out of 8 (12.5%) naïve hamsters was sars-cov-2 rt-pcr-positive (table 3) . the viral loads of this hamster were about 1 (nasal turbinate), 100 (trachea), and 10 (lung) genome copies/β-actin ( figure 4a ). at 7 dpi, the remaining exposed naïve hamster (n=4) and the sars-cov-2-challenged index hamster (n=4) in each system were also sacrificed. only one of the four (25.0%) remaining naïve hamsters were rt-pcrpositive, with viral loads of around 0.5 (lung) to 100 (nasal turbinate) genome copies/β-actin a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 11 ( figure 4b ). this transmission rate (16.7%) was significantly (p=0.019) lower than that of the exposed naïve hamsters without surgical mask partition (66.7%).in the third experiment, the external surface of the mask was facing the challenged index hamsters. at 5 dpi (4 days after exposure), two of the three naïve hamsters in each system (n=8) were sacrificed. three out of 8 (37.5%) exposed naïve hamsters developed clinical signs and were sars-cov-2 rt-pcr positive ( table 3 ). the viral loads ranged from around 1 to 10 genome copies/β-actin (nasal turbinate), 0.01 to 100 (trachea) genome copies/β-actin, and 1 to 1000 genome copies/β-actin (lung) ( figure 4a ). at 7 dpi, the remaining exposed naïve hamster (n=4) and the challenged index hamster (n=4) in each system were also sacrificed. one of the four (25.0%) remaining naïve hamsters were rt-pcr positive, with viral loads of around 1 (lung) to 100 (nasal turbinate) genome copies/β-actin ( figure 4b ). this transmission rate (33.3%) was also lower than that of the exposed naïve hamsters without surgical mask partition (66.7%), although not reaching statistical significance (p=0.128).at 7 dpi (6 days after exposure of the naïve hamsters to the challenged index hamsters), all challenged index hamsters (n=13) exhibited high titers of serum neutralizing antibodies, ranging from 1:320 to ≥1:640, which is consistent with our previous observation ( figure 5 ).interestingly, three of the five exposed (60%) naïve hamsters without surgical mask partition sacrificed at 7 dpi also developed serum neutralizing antibody titers of 1:160 to 1:640, which suggested that these three rt-pcr-positive infected naive hamsters likely acquired the virus very early after exposure to the challenged index hamsters as it required 5 to 7 days before serum neutralizing antibodies were detectable in this animal model. in contrast, none of the 8 a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 12 exposed naïve hamsters with surgical mask partition facing either side sacrificed at 7 dpi, including the two rt-pcr-positive hamsters, developed detectable serum neutralizing antibody (all <1:20). these results suggested that even though these two exposed naïve hamsters were infected, they likely acquired the virus much later than the infected naïve hamsters without protection by surgical mask partition.the representative histological and immunofluorescent staining findings of the infected naïve hamsters are shown in figure 6 . at 5dpi (4 days after exposure), the histopathological changes of the infected naïve hamsters in experiments 1, 2, and 3, were generally milder than those of the challenged control hamster ( figure 6a the use of surgical mask partition to protect naïve hamsters reduced the transmission rate to 33.3%, although this did not reach statistical significance, likely because of the relatively small number of animals (p=0.128). as expected, the histopathological changes and the amount of respiratory tract viral n antigen expression of these protected naïve hamsters were also significantly lower than those of the challenged index hamsters.the finding of sars-cov-2 being transmitted by the non-contact route of respiratory droplets or airborne droplet nuclei is not unexpected as this is the case for other respiratory viruses. for seasonal influenza viruses, similar transmission has been demonstrated with syrian hamster, ferret, and guinea pig models. [26] [27] [28] seasonal influenza viruses could be isolated by plaque assay from naïve hamsters by day 4 post-exposure, whereas sars-cov-2 could be detected by rt-pcr in our infected naïve hamsters as early as day 4 postexposure. 26 however, in the case of nipah virus which is more of a neurotropic than were amongst the lowest in the world at the timing of writing. 33 although we could not differentiate whether transmission occurred by respiratory droplets or airborne aerosols in this study, both types of non-contact transmission might have happened because surgical masks is most efficient in filtering out large respiratory droplets of more than 10µm, but not the airborne aerosol particles of less than 5µm. therefore, noncontact transmission still occurred in our hamster model despite a reduction of transmission when the naïve hamsters were protected by mask partitioning. alternatively, the filtration efficiency of the masks might have declined over time during the study period. interestingly, a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 15 transmission to the exposed naïve hamsters was significantly reduced when surgical mask partition was placed to prevent emission from the challenged index hamsters. this was not completely unexpected because the masking of infectious patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis on a hospital ward in south africa reduced airborne transmission by 56% from these patients to guinea pigs which were breathing the ward air, compared with the percentage of transmission to guinea pigs during periods when masks were not worn. 34 this report clearly showed that surgical masks could be partially effective in reducing the however, the presence of a significant proportion of asymptomatically infected patients who were not aware of the need of testing, wearing mask, or isolation has markedly impaired these control measures. in the case of the princess diamond cruise outbreak, 6 out of 9 returnees were found to be asymptomatically infected during the 14 days of quarantine and serial virological monitoring after returning to hong kong. 37 our findings on the use of surgical mask partition for protection against non-contact transmission in this hamster model supported the use of community-wide masking to reduce the amount of virus shedding from the asymptomatically infected patients and to protect susceptible individuals. this should be a reasonable approach for the epidemic control of a densely populated city like hong kong without resorting to city lockdown, and an important measure during the stepwise loosening of social distancing measures in the days ahead.our study had limitations. the speed of the unidirectional airflow could not be unified when the surgical mask partitions were installed, but that would also apply when surgical masks were worn by different individuals in real life, and this could indeed be a mechanism for protection during mask usage. we could not determine the exact timing of acquisition of a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 17 sars-cov-2 by the exposed naïve hamsters as we only started sampling them 4 days after exposure. moreover, we could not determine if contact transmission has occurred among exposed naïve hamsters housed in the same cage. this might have resulted in an underestimation of the protective efficacy of masks, which would otherwise be even more significant. further studies on the relative importance of large respiratory droplets and small airborne aerosols are warranted. hamsters to exposed naïve hamsters without surgical mask partition between the cages (experiment 1). sars-cov-2 was intranasally inoculated to the index hamsters (n=5) at day 0. twenty-four hours later, three naïve hamsters were transferred to the adjacent cage and exposed to the cage housing the virus-challenged index hamster. two exposed naïve hamsters in each system were sacrificed at day 5 post-inoculation (4 days after exposure).the challenged index animal and the remaining exposed naïve animal in each system were then sacrificed at 7 dpi. a total of 5 systems (n=20) were included in experiment 1. (n=13, orange diamonds), the naïve hamsters exposed to the challenged index hamsters without surgical mask partition in experiment 1 (n=5, red squares), the naïve hamsters exposed to masked challenged index hamsters in experiment 2 (n=4, black circles), and the masked naïve hamsters exposed to the challenged index hamsters in experiment 3 (n=4, blue introduction many countries including pakistan are currently using face masks in their pandemic control plans being highly prevalent, the correct use of these masks is particularly important, as an incorrect use and disposal may actually increase the rate of transmission the purpose of this study was to investigate the knowledge, attitude, and practices of healthcare workers (hcws) in wearing a surgical face mask to limit the spread of the new coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) materials and methods this survey was conducted by interviewing hcws using a questionnaire consisting of the basic demographic characteristics, and the knowledge, attitude, and practices regarding the use of surgical face mask to limit the new covid-19 exposure each correct answer was scored 1 and each incorrect answer scored 0 the total number of questions was 16, and the final score was calculated and then labeled according to the percentage (out of 16) of correct responses as good (&gt;80%), moderate (60-80%), and poor (&lt;60%) results a total of 392 participants with a mean age of 42 37 +/- 13 34 years (341 males and 51 females) were included in the study the overall final results were good in 138 (35 2%), moderate in 178 (45 4%), and poor in 76 (19 3%) around 43 6% of participants knew about the correct method of wearing the masks, 68 9% knew that there are three layers, 53% stated that the middle layer act as a filter media barrier, and 75 5% knew the recommended maximum duration of wearing it the majority (88 2%) of participants knew that a cloth face mask is not much effective, around 79 8% knew that used face mask cannot be re-used, and 44 8% knew about the yellow-coded bag for disposal conclusions knowledge, attitude, and practice of hcws regarding the use of face masks were found to be inadequate studied hcws had a positive attitude but moderate-to-poor level of knowledge and practice regarding the use of face mask hcws and general public awareness campaigns regarding the proper use of face mask by utilizing all social media available resources would be helpful during this pandemicknowledge, attitude, and practices of healthcare workers regarding the use of face mask to limit the spread of the new coronavirus disease (covid-19)coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a respiratory illness caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which first emerged in china in december 2019, and has since spread to most countries around the world, resulting in the 2019-2020 coronavirus pandemic [1] [2] [3] . the virus primarily spreads between people through respiratory droplets, which are produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, or by touching contaminated surfaces or objects and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes. the risk of getting severe covid-19 is higher in health care workers (hcws) who are in close contact with confirmed covid-19 cases. the latest figures show thousands of hcws getting infected with a large percentage of them dying [4] .in order to minimize risk, hcws are required to follow accepted infection control practices. aside from hand hygiene, one of the infection control measures is the routine use of a face mask. many countries including pakistan are currently using face masks in their pandemic plans. face mask works by providing a physical barrier between the mouth and nose of the wearer and potential contaminants in the immediate environment [5] .in resource-limited settings, where the incidence of infectious disease is high and the environmental conditions of hospitals are often poor, hospitals may rely heavily on a face mask to protect medical staff against covid-19 and to prevent cross-contamination among patients and hcws. the use of a face mask among hcws is strongly recommended by the world health organization (who) and the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) as a standard for transmission-based precaution [6, 7] . moreover, the correct use of these masks is particularly important especially during this time when its use is becoming highly prevalent [8] .the who states that incorrect use and disposal of this mask may actually increase the rate of transmission. if you wear a mask, then you must know how to use it and discard it properly [7] . there is evidence that the hcws have inadequate knowledge and poor practice regarding the use of surgical mask [9] . the purpose of this study was to investigate the knowledge, attitude, and practices of hcws in wearing a face mask particularly a standard surgical face mask to limit the spread of covid-19.this cross-sectional community-based survey was conducted at the department of orthopedic surgery, dr. ruth k. m. pfau civil hospital, affiliated to dow university of health sciences, karachi, pakistan, in march 2020 (one month).the study participants were hcws, that is, consultant, medical officer, postgraduate trainee, house officer, and paramedical staff. a convenient sampling method was used and a sample size of 384 was calculated, considering 5% precision, 95% confidence interval, and 52% as the correct practice of using face masks [5] . keeping a minimum sample size of 384 in mind, a total of 392 patients were registered in the study duration.the study was conducted by interview using a semi-structured questionnaire. the questionnaire was developed with the help of previous literature on the proper use of surgical face mask and the guidelines of the centre for health protection and the cdc and consisted of two parts:(1) basic demographic characteristics (age, gender, job designation), and (2) knowledge, attitude, and practices regarding the use of a face mask to limit covid-19 exposure [5, 10, 11] . prior to the inception of the study, the nature and purpose of the study were explained to each respondent, and informed consent was obtained. for the convenience of analyses, each correct response in the knowledge category, good practice, or positive attitude was scored 1, and each incorrect response, bad practice, or negative attitude was scored 0. the total number of questions was 16, and the final score was calculated and then labeled according to the percentage (out of 16) of correct responses as good (>80%), moderate (60-80%), and poor (<60%).the information obtained from the participants was entered and analyzed using statistical package for the social sciences (sdss) statistics for windows, version 22.0 (ibm corp., armonk, ny, usa). mean with standard deviations were calculated for age and frequency with percentages for categorical variables. face masks are used as a protective barrier to reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms between patients, hcws, and the environment [12] . however, in order for face masks to provide effective protection, the hcws must have an intimate knowledge of wearing and disposing of those. in this study, 88.5% of participants thought that they knew the proper steps of wearing a surgical face mask; however, only 35% obtained a good score by answering the procedural questions correctly. these results may be because of its simplest design, which leads many participants to mistakenly assume that they know the proper steps of wearing it.there was higher male participation in our study (86.9%) compared with female participation (13%). this finding can be attributed to the higher male enrolment in our institution.in this study, 64.7% of participants obtained an overall moderate-to-poor score regarding the correct usage of a surgical face mask. this low knowledge and practice may be because of recently circulating messages on social media claiming the proper way to wear the threelayered surgical mask, like "colored side facing out if you are sick, and the white side facing out if you want to 'stop the germs from getting in'". this is, however, false and misleading, according to nawhen, a columnist for medical mythbusters malaysia, a non-governmental organization that works to counter myths and inaccurate facts on medical matters; the correct way to wear a surgical mask is by wearing the colored side facing out independent of your health status. the outer colored layer is hydrophobic or is a fluid-repelling layer and its main function is to prevent germs from sticking to it, whereas the inner one is a hydrophilic layer that absorbs moisture from the air we breathe out. if you wear it the other way round, the moisture from the air will stick onto it, thus making it easier for germs to stay there. there is a middle layer that actually filters the microorganism [13] .cloth mask, re-use of a surgical mask, and its extended use are commonly seen in pakistan during the extended outbreak of the covid-19 pandemic. it is highly unlikely for low-income countries that they will be able to provide disposable face masks for that extended period of time and may have to ration the use of these products. in this study, around 88.2% hcws agreed that cloth mask is not as effective as a regular surgical mask and about 79.8% knew that used surgical face mask cannot be re-used. around 75.6% knew the correct maximum duration of using it. other studies also highlighted similar findings concluding that cloth mask, re-use, and extended use of mask makes it ineffective, still hcws are sometimes forced to do it due to the increasing shortage of these masks. we observed that wearing the same mask without removing it between patient encounters and disposing it properly at the end of the day is better than re-using it. still if re-using it due to shortage, it is better to fold the mask in such a way that the outer contaminated surface is held inward followed by storing it in a clean sealable paper bag or container [14] [15] [16] .there is not enough evidence to prove that wearing a surgical mask protects every person from covid-19. the who currently recommended that only hcws and people who are ill and those who are caring for the ill need to wear a mask to protect themselves from covid-19. however, in low-income countries like pakistan, where the incidence of infectious disease is high and the hospital environmental conditions are often poor, our hcws rely almost entirely on a face mask to limit the spread of covid-19 [17] .the who established a color-coded bin system for proper disposal of biomedical waste in hospitals [18] . however, when it was asked from our participants, 44.9% disposed it in the yellow-coded bag for disposal of face mask; this shows poor knowledge of hcws regarding the safe disposal of biomedical waste.some of the limitations of this study include the cross-sectional nature of study design limited to a single governmental hospital. further longitudinal studies should be carried out on a larger sample size, and both private and government hospitals should be included before the results could be generalized. moreover, different types of masks can be compared.knowledge, attitude, and practice of hcws regarding the use of surgical face masks were found to be inadequate. studied hcws had a positive attitude but moderate-to-poor level of knowledge and practice regarding the use of surgical face mask. hcws and general public awareness campaigns regarding the proper use of face mask by utilizing all social media available resources would be helpful during this pandemic.since the positive laboratory test result of "patient 1" in codogno, italy, on 21 february 2020, italian medical health personnel have been fighting the covid-19 disease caused by a new coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). in the past two decades, two other coronaviruses switched hosts into humans; sars-cov in the guangdong province (china), finally contained on 5 july 2003, and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus, which has caused around 2500 cases since september 2012 [1] . the sars and middle east respiratory syndrome outbreaks were characterised by the so-called "super spreading events", often occurring in hospitals [2] .how can we minimise contagion among healthcare professionals, what are the measures to take and what are the methods of ventilatory support at lower risk of contamination?this article tries to answer these fundamental questions through a diversified approach.accordingly, this document is divided into three parts, as follows. 1) risk of transmission during oxygen administration/high flow nasal cannula (hfnc) oxygen therapy, continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) and noninvasive ventilation (niv). 2) safety measures to minimise covid-19 transmission through contact/droplets. 3) precautions to minimise transmission in the case of aerosol-generating procedures in covid-19 patients.1. risk of transmission during oxygen administration via nasal cannula/hfnc/cpap/niv the risk of transmission of respiratory infections for healthcare workers depends on several conditions; some of them are nonspecific such as prolonged exposure, inadequate hand hygiene and personal protective equipment (ppe), insufficient spacing or rooms without negative pressure or insufficient air changes every hour [7] . in healthcare workers' clinical practice, another important variable to consider is the exhaled air dispersion distance during oxygen administration and ventilatory support.all data relating to exhaled air dispersion during such procedures come from scientific studies conducted in a negative pressure room, on a high-fidelity human patient simulator (hps) that represents a 70 kg adult male sitting on a 45°inclined hospital bed. exhaled air dispersion distance from the hps has been evaluated using a laser smoke visualisation method and calculated on the median sagittal plane. table 1 shows the maximum dispersion distances, the medium values are as follows.oxygen therapy via nasal cannula: exhaled air spreads from the hps's nostrils towards the end of the bed almost horizontally to 66 cm when the oxygen flow setting is 1 l·min −1 , to 70 cm when it is increased to 3 l·min −1 and 1 m when it is 3-5 l·min −1 [8] . oxygen therapy via oronasal masks: the exhaled air jet reaches 40 cm with an oxygen flow of 4 l·min −1 [9] . oxygen therapy via venturi mask: exhaled air dispersion distance reduces with increasing lung injury.delivering 24% oxygen with a flow rate at 4 l·min −1 in a normal lung and severe lung injury setting produces an air dispersion of 40 cm and 32 cm, respectively. when 40% oxygen is delivered at an 8 l·min −1 flow rate the exhaled air dispersion distance is, in the same two lung settings, 33 cm and 29 cm, respectively [10] . these distances were studied in a general ward without negative pressure, but with double exhaust fans for room ventilation. when they were off, the air ventilation rates on the ward dropped significantly and the exhaled smoke filled the ward within 5 min. oxygen therapy via non-rebreathing mask: exhaled air dispersion distance is <10 cm irrespective of oxygen flow rate (6-8-10-12 l·min −1 ) in either normal lung or severe lung injury [6] . cpap via oronasal mask: (cpap 5, 10, 15 or 20 cmh 2 o) exhaled air disperses evenly in all directions through the mask's vent holes at a very low normalised smoke concentration irrespective of the severity of lung injury [11] and, therefore, it was not feasible to measure distinct exhaled air dispersion. cpap via nasal cannula (nasal pillows): there is an increase of air dispersion with increasing cpap and a reduction of air dispersion with worsening lung injury. using two types of nasal pillows, at a maximum cpap of 20 cmh 2 o and with a normal lung, maximum air dispersion distances are 26.4 cm (nuance pro gel) and 33.2 cm (swift fx) [11] . hfnc: in a normal lung, there is an increase of air dispersion distance with increasing flow to a maximum of 17.2 cm at 60 l·min −1 . with this flow rate, when nasal cannula is tightly connected lateral air dispersion is negligible, otherwise it can reach 62 cm. worsening lung injury causes a reduction in air dispersion distance from hps [11] . niv via full-face mask: in the bilevel setting (inspiratory positive airway pressure (ipap) 10 coughing, without wearing a mask, produces an exhaled air jet on a median sagittal plane of 68 cm from hps (the patient); wearing a surgical mask reduces this distance to 30 cm, while wearing a n95 mask the distance was reduced to 15 cm. it is necessary to be aware that wearing a mask does not prevent air leakage between the mask and the skin; air dispersion distance is 28 cm with a surgical mask and 15 cm with a n95 mask [13] .thus, we can state that cpap via an oronasal mask and niv via a helmet equipped with an inflatable neck cushion are the ventilatory support methods that allow the minimum room air contamination. however, we can argue that pressures set during niv via helmet ventilation are relatively low. moreover, all examined studies used smoke as the air exhaled marker, while viral transmission seems to happen through droplets; droplets are, indeed, heavier thus they should follow a briefer trajectory than the smoke. all results shown should, therefore, represent the upper limit of exhaled air dispersion and thus overestimate it. it's interesting to note, however, that all studies (except the one that used a venturi mask) were conducted in a negative pressure room with at least six air changes per hour (minimum air changes recommended by who is 12 per hour) [4, 14] . in medical wards not equipped with negative pressure rooms, like those which admit most covid-19 patients because of reduced bed availability, it is reasonable to imagine a higher exhaled air dispersion and contamination.exhaled aerosol size depends on the characteristics of the fluid, the force and pressure at the moment of emission, and environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, relative humidity and air flow). large size particles remain suspended in the air for a short period and settle within 1 m from the source. smaller particles evaporate rapidly, while dry residues slowly settle and remain suspended for a variable amount of time. infectious respiratory aerosols are as follows. 1) droplets: respiratory aerosol >5 µm diameter; 2) droplets nuclei: dry part of the aerosol (<5 µm diameter) which results from the evaporation of coughed or sneezed droplets or from exhaled infectious particles [14] . according to the available evidence, sars-cov-2 transmission occurs through droplets.preventive measurements for patients, healthcare workers and community• wash your hands often with an alcohol-based (>65%) detergent if your hands are not apparently dirty, with soap and water if they are contaminated. always wash your hands after contact with respiratory secretions• avoid contact with eyes, nose and mouth • sneeze and cough into a bent elbow or tissue and then throw it away • wear a surgical mask if respiratory symptoms appear and immediately afterwards wash your hands • keep a distance of at least 1 m from patients with respiratory symptomsprevention and control of suspected covid-19 syndrome patient placement patients should be placed in isolation rooms with negative pressure (at least 12 air changes per hour) a dedicated bathroom and, if possible, an anteroom. if negative pressure rooms are not available, choose rooms with natural ventilation with airflow of at least 160 l·s −1 per patient [4] . if single rooms are not accessible, patients with suspected sars-cov-2 infection should be placed in the same room. patients' beds should be located at least 1 m away from each other. it is critical that the area prepared to receive suspect patients is equipped with all the necessary ppe. all patients should wear a medical mask. it is critical to limit the number of healthcare professionals in contact with confirmed or suspected cases of covid-19. it is better to put together a team of healthcare professionals who deal exclusively with suspected or confirmed cases to minimise the risk of transmission. a reminder to all the people who enter the patient's room is recommended, including healthcare workers and family members.fabric masks (cotton or gauze) should not be used and are not recommended in any circumstance. medical or surgical masks could be flat or plated (some are cup-shaped) and suitable for covering the nose and mouth. secure them to the head with elastics or laces. these devices are made to guarantee one-way protection for healthcare workers, in order to capture their droplets. respirators are tight masks that must seal off the wearer's face and work in a bidirectional sense, in particular for the protection of the wearer (e. g. from dust or fibres present in the air). the american system classifies ventilators according to the percentage of particles with a diameter >0.3 µm that can be filtered by the masks themselves, while the european system distinguishes them according to the ffp1/2/3 classification. the n95 mask according to the american classification system is able to remove 95% of all particles with a diameter >0.3 µm and it is comparable to a ffp2 mask according to the european classification system (table 2) [15] .how to properly wear ffp2 and ffp3 masks• carefully place the mask on the face and cover the nose and mouth to minimise the space between the face and mask; • while using the mask avoid touching it with your hands • remove the mask using the appropriate technique (avoid contact with the front of the mask, remove the lace from behind) • after removal or when inadvertently touching a used mask, clean your hands using an alcohol-based cleaner or wash your hands using soap and water if visibly soiled • throw the disposable masks away after each use in a closed bag and dispose of them immediately after removal [16] the who advises healthcare workers to keep the same mask (ffp2 or higher) while routine care is being performed on multiple patients who have the same diagnosis, in order to rationalise the use of ppe and avoid an early depletion of stocks. evidence indicates that ffp2/3 maintain their protection even when they are used for a long time. however, wearing a respirator for >4 h can cause discomfort and should be avoided [3] . masks and respirators are important ppe for protection against sars-cov-2, but alone are not enough.other ppe correct ppe depends on the specific activity and healthcare setting. table 3 shows which devices should be used based on the activity and contact with the patient [3] . healthcare workers must wear a ffp2 mask, goggles or face shield, a long-sleeved water-resistant gown and gloves. if water-resistant gowns are not available, single-use plastic aprons should be worn over the gowns to avoid body contamination. after the patient's examination, ppe must be properly stripped and disposed of. healthcare workers should avoid contact with the eyes and nose via potentially contaminated gloves or bare hands. a recent who document illustrates the correct dressing and undressing procedure, while a recent italian department of health indication also summarises the dressing and undressing procedure (table 5) [6] . during the undressing procedure, it is crucial to avoid contact with potentially contaminated ppe, face, skin and mucosa. it is important to dispose of single-use ppe in the undressing area.medical devices must be disposable or dedicated to a single patient (stethoscope, sphygmomanometer and thermometers). if these devices are used on different patients, they must be washed and disinfected after visiting each patient (using 70% ethyl alcohol). clean and disinfect the surfaces with which patients come into contact.moving or transporting patients outside their room or dedicated area should be avoided if not necessary.use portable x-ray machines or bedside chest ultrasound. if it is necessary to transport the patient, use pre-established preferential routes to minimise the exposure of healthcare professionals and other patients, by making the latter wear a mask. make sure that transport personnel follow standard precautions and wear ppe [17] .optimising the availability of ppe considering the global shortage of ppe, the following strategies can guarantee greater availability of ppe. using ppe appropriately allows us to preserve it for situations of real transmission risk. therefore, it is it is also suggested to use a: ffp3 respirator when performing an aerosol-generating procedure; single-use plastic apron on top of the non-water-resistant gowns if long-sleeved water-resistant gowns are not available; and goggles that fit the contours of the user's face and are compatible with the respirator. reproduced from [5] with permission of the ecdc. necessary to select the appropriate ppe and learn the right way to wear, remove and dispose of them properly. strategies for optimising ppe include the following.• telemedicine to evaluate suspected cases of covid-19 (e.g. toll-free numbers available in italy)• use physical barriers to reduce exposure to the covid-19 virus such as glass or plastic windows; this approach could be implemented in triage procedures • limit the number of healthcare workers in patients' rooms if they are not directly involved in patient care. schedule all the activities in order to reduce the number of times entering the patients' rooms (e.g. check vital signs when administering drugs or leaving food while performing other routine activities) and plan which activities should be carried out at the patient's bed [3] 3. precautions to minimise transmission in case of aerosol-generating procedures in covid-19 patients aerosol-generating procedures expose healthcare workers at high risk of contagion [7] . aerosol-generating procedures include airway suction, bronchoscopy, endotracheal intubation, tracheostomy and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. in a recent publication, the who also includes niv [3] . whenever possible, these procedures should be performed, in negative pressure rooms with a minimum of 12 air changes per hour or at least 160 l·s −1 per patient in facilities with natural ventilation, according to who guidelines [4] .healthcare workers performing aerosol-generating procedures should wear a waterproof long-sleeved gown, double non-sterile gloves, eye protection (with lateral protection) and a respirator that ensures a level of protection equal or greater than n95/ffp2 ( the practical recommendations for critical care and anaesthesiology teams released by a group of canadian anaesthesiologists [18] also suggest the following additional measures for endotracheal intubation.• prioritise a planned early intubation rather than an emergency intubation, at high risk of contagion • if possible, avoid bag-mask ventilation • ensure adequate patient sedation • minimise the number of healthcare workers in the room to essential team members • provide all necessary equipment and medication in the room, do not use the crash trolley this document also suggests wearing a shield visor in addition to protective goggles in order to guarantee double protection. canadian anaesthesiologists' advice to consider the use of powered air purifying respirators (paprs) for high-risk procedures (figure 1). paprs use a battery-powered fan to conduct air through a filter allowing the wearer to breathe through a mask or a helmet. paprs may offer greater protection than ffp2, even if there is no evidence about comparison of these ppes in terms of viral transmission. however, the use of paprs is burdened by the high costs and communication limits determined by the noise of the fan. another risk that must be considered is the high probability of contamination during the undressing procedures, which makes it necessary to support healthcare workers with expert staff.more specific precautions are provided by the chinese thoracic society [19] , which gives further suggestions for the treatment and ventilatory support of covid-19 patients.• do not use humidifiers during conventional oxygen therapy • the patient has to wear the surgical mask to reduce contamination risk of the room • during hfnc treatment, ensure correct placement of the nasal cannulas (which must be completely inserted in the nostrils and secured with the elastic bands on the patient's head in order to minimise lateral losses). place a surgical mask over the nasal cannulas (figure 2) • during niv support, use a double-limb circuit with a non-vented mask. place three filters per ventilator: between the expiratory port and the ventilator; between the inspiratory port and the ventilator; and another filter near the patient's mask. the interface with the lowest risk of aerosol emission is the helmet equipped with an inflatable neck cushion • if bag-mask ventilation is needed, place a filter between the bag valve and the mask/endotracheal tube to reduce airborne contamination • use closed circuits in case suction is needed • use ppe during bronchoscopy • ensure the patient wears a cap that also covers the eyes in order to reduce the risk of face contamination (with eye discharge) during bronchoscopy. place a suction catheter in the patient's oral cavity to ensure a local negative pressure that reduces the droplets released by the patient. cover the patient's mouth with a mask. the suction circuit must be closed. if patient is supported by niv, use the access through the hole on the patient's mask • a shower is recommended after undressing, including disinfection of the ears and mouth figure 2 correct placement of high-flow nasal cannulas. on the left, correct placement of the cannulas. nasal cannulas must be completely inserted into the nostrils, the elastic bands must be well secured to the patient's head, it is recommended to avoid folding of the tube near the interface. on the right, placement of a medical mask over the high-flow nasal cannulas. modified from [19, 20] . according to evidence, approximately 20% of covid-19 patients develop a severe or critical form of disease (adult respiratory distress syndrome), which in 19-32% of cases requires respiratory support treatment [20] . oxygen therapy, hfnc, cpap and niv are noninvasive support methods with a high risk of aerosol dispersion, especially in unprotected environments. being aware of the exhalation distance of the various methods allows us to favour those with the lowest risk (e.g. helmet with an inflatable neck cushion) and to take the necessary precautions (e.g. correct placing of the hfnc). despite the high risk of contagion during these procedures, evidence suggests that the observance of the indications for the use of ppe are effective in preventing infections among healthcare workers. in a case-control study conducted during the sars epidemic in hong kong [21] which investigated the effective adhesion of personnel to ppe (gloves, disposable shirts, goggles and masks) none of the staff reporting use of all measures contracted the virus, while all the infected staff had omitted at least one measure. given the high risk of emission of large quantities of droplets, aerosol-generating procedures require greater precaution by healthcare personnel.the coronavirus belongs to a family of viruses that may cause various symptoms such as pneumonia, fever, breathing difficulty, and lung infection [1] . these viruses are common in animals worldwide, but very few cases have been known to affect humans. the world health organization (who) used the term 2019 novel coronavirus to refer to a coronavirus that affected the lower respiratory tract of patients with pneumonia in wuhan, china on 29 december 2019 [2] [3] [4] . the who announced that the official name of the 2019 novel coronavirus is coronavirus disease (covid-19) [4] . and the current reference name for the virus is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). it was reported that a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause was linked to a local huanan south china seafood market in wuhan, hubei province, china in december 2019 [5] .in response to the outbreak, the chinese center for disease control and prevention (china cdc) dispatched a rapid response team to accompany health authorities of hubei province and wuhan city to conduct epidemiological and etiological investigations. the who confirmed that the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic was associated with the huanan south china seafood marketplace, but no specific animal association was identified [6] . scientists immediately started to research the source of the new coronavirus, and the first genome of covid-19 was published by the research team led by prof. yong-zhen zhang, on 10 january 2020 [7] . within 1 month, this virus spread quickly throughout china during the chinese new yeara period when there is a high level of human mobility among chinese people. although it is still too early to predict susceptible populations, early patterns have shown a trend similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronaviruses. susceptibility seems to be associated with age, biological sex, and other health conditions [8] . covid-19 has now been declared as a public health emergency of international concern by the who [9] .given the spread of the new coronavirus and its impacts on human health, the research community has responded rapidly to the new virus and many preliminary research articles have already been published about this epidemic (additional file 1). we conducted a scoping review to summarize and critically analyze all the published scientific articles regarding the new coronavirus in january 2020. this review aims to provide the evidence of early findings on the epidemiology, causes, clinical diagnosis, as well as prevention and control of covid-19 in relation to time, location, and source of publication. this review can provide meaningful information for future research related to this topic and may support government decisionmaking on strategies to handle this public health emergency at the community, national, and international levels.a scoping review was conducted following the methodological framework suggested by arksey and o'malley [10] . the following five steps were followed to conduct this scoping review: a) identifying a clear research objective and search strategies, b) identifying relevant research articles, c) selection of research articles, d) extraction and charting of data, and e) summarizing, discussing, analyzing, and reporting the results.literature for this review was identified by searching the following online databases: biorxiv, medrxiv, chemrxiv, google scholar, pubmed, as well as cnki and wanfang data (the two primary databases for biomedical research in mainland china). these online databases contain archives of most english and chinese biomedical journals. in addition, some white papers published online by the national health commission of the people's republic of china, chinese center for disease prevention and control, and the who were included in the analysis. we searched scientific publications from 1 january to 31 january 2020. the search terms were 'ncov', '2019 novel coronavirus', '2019-ncov', 'novel coronavirus', 'pneumonia', '新型冠状病毒' (chinese), '新型肺炎' (chinese), and '新冠病毒' (chinese). we included all the relevant scientific publications written in english or chinese in the review. non-scientific commentary, reports, and news articles were excluded from the analysis.two researchers (yw and spa) independently searched through the literature. the two sets of literature were then compared. disagreements on the inclusion or exclusion of literature were resolved through discussion or, if necessary, by including a third researcher (hz) to make the final decision. duplicate articles were eliminated. eventually, 65 unique academic publications were included in this analysis (additional file 1). figure 1 presents a preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) flow diagram showing the process of searching and selecting the research articles [11] .after the articles were selected, data were extracted and recorded in an excel spreadsheet. the extracted data were date of publication, language of publication, title of article, name of journal, author's country and affiliation, study design, targets of study, sample size, study setting, data collection instrument, research domain, and key findings.based on the main research objectives, articles were classified into one of the following four research domains: epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation and diagnosis, or prevention and control. 'epidemiology' includes studies on the epidemic distribution (when, where, who); 'causes' includes studies on virology, pathogenesis, and transmission patterns; 'clinical manifestation and diagnosis' includes studies on the clinical features (signs and symptoms) and diagnosis; and 'prevention and control' includes studies on prevention, control, and treatment measures.authors' affiliations were used to categorize the type of research collaboration. a publication was considered as deriving from 'inside china' when all affiliations of the authors were from china; a publication was considered as deriving from 'outside china' when all affiliations were outside china; a publication was considered as deriving from 'international collaboration' when at least one affiliation was from china and at least one was from outside china. the research domains, publishing dates, journal language, authors' affiliations, as well as methodological characteristics were analyzed respectively. all findings and statements regarding the outbreak in this review are based on published information as listed in the references.among the 65 research articles included in the analysis, more than 31 are on preprint servers, and 34 are (table 1) .as shown in fig. 2 , academic publications are distributed across the following research domains: epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation and diagnosis, and prevention and control. the largest portion of the papers (n = 25, 38.5%) are related to causes, followed by papers on epidemiology (n = 19, 29.2%), while 18.5% examined prevention and control and 13.8% reported clinical manifestations and diagnosis. initially, there were more research articles focused on causes of the outbreak, yet studies on prevention and control gradually increased over time (fig. 3 ). the majority of the articles (n = 44, 67.7%) were published by chinese scholars whereas 29.2% (n = 19) articles were from scholars outside of china. a small number (n = 2, 3.1%) were based on international collaborative research by scholars from different countries ( table 2) .we also analyzed the methodological characteristics of the publications in the final sample. the majority of the articles are based on mathematical modeling (44.6%) and cross-sectional study designs (18.5%). around half of the studies include targeted populations (patients, general populations, and healthcare workers) (49.2%) in their analysis, followed by studies that attempt to identify the species of the virus (virus structure, gene sequence) (36.9%). among the 32 articles with population as the target of study, 34.4% had a sample size of less than 10, 31.3% were conducted in a hospital setting, and 50% used secondary data. quality control activities for data collection were mentioned in 56.3% of the population studies (table 3) .on 29 december 2019, the first four cases of an acute respiratory syndrome of unknown etiology were reported in wuhan city, hubei province, china among people linked to a local seafood market ("wet market") [2] . research is underway to understand more about transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with covid-19 [3] . it appears that most of the early cases had some sort of contact history with the original seafood market [2, [12] [13] [14] . soon, a secondary source of infection was found to be human-to-human transmission via close contact. there was an increase of infected people with no history of exposure to wildlife or visiting wuhan, and multiple cases of infection were detected among medical professionals [2, [14] [15] [16] [17] . it became clear that the covid-19 infection occurs through exposure to the virus, and both the immunosuppressed and normal population appear susceptible. some studies have reported an age distribution of adult patients between 25 and 89 years old. most adult patients were between 35 and 55 years old [14] , and there were fewer identified cases among children and infants [14, 18] . a study on early transmission dynamics of the virus reported the median age of patients to be 59 years, ranging from 15 to 89 years, with the majority (59%) being male [2] . it was suggested that the population most at risk may be people with poor immune function such as older people and those with renal and hepatic dysfunction [2] .the covid-19 has been found to have higher levels of transmissibility and pandemic risk than the sars-cov, as the effective reproductive number (r) of covid-19 (2.9) is estimated to be higher than the reported effective reproduction number (r) of sars (1.77) at this early stage [15] . different studies of covid-19 have estimated the basic reproduction (r 0 ) range to be from 2.6 to 4.71 (table 4 ). the average incubation duration of covid-19 was estimated to be 4.8 ± 2.6, ranging from 2 to 11 days [15] and 5.2 days (95% confidence interval, 4.1 to 7) [2] . the latest guidelines from chinese health authorities stated an average incubation duration of 7 days, ranging from 2 to 14 days [23] . table 4 summarizes the findings on important indicators from these epidemiological studies.in china, 11 791 cases were confirmed and 17 988 cases were suspected in 34 provinces as of 24:00, 31 january 2020 (fig. 4) [32] . studies indicated that the spread of covid-19 was relatively quick and reported that it had spread to several other countries after its outbreak in china. on 31 january 2020, there were 213 deaths reported globally [33] . confirmed cases were reported in the following 19 countries outside of china: australia (9), canada (3), cambodia (1), france (6), finland (1), germany (5), india (1), italy (2), japan (14), nepal (1), malaysia (8), the philippines (1), the republic of korea (11), singapore (13), sri lanka (1), thailand (14) , the united states of america (6), united arab emirates (4) and vietnam (5) (fig. 5 ) [33] .virology and pathogenesis coronaviruses are enveloped single-stranded rna viruses that are zoonotic in nature and cause symptoms ranging from those similar to the common cold to more severe respiratory, enteric, hepatic, and neurological symptoms [5, 34] . other than sars-cov-2, there are six known coronaviruses in humans: hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, sars-cov, hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, and mers-cov [2, 23, 35, 36] . coronavirus has caused two large-scale pandemics in the last two decades: sars [37] and mers [12, 38] .to detect the infection source of covid-19, china cdc researchers collected 585 environmental samples from the huanan seafood market in wuhan, hubei province, china on 1 january and 12 january 2020. they detected 33 samples containing sars-cov-2 and indicated that it originated from wild animals sold in the market [39] . then, researchers used the lung fluid, blood, and throat swab samples of 15 patients to conduct laboratory tests. these laboratory tests found that the virus-specific nucleic acid sequences in the sample are different from those of known human coronavirus species. laboratory results also indicated that sars-cov-2 is similar to some of the beta (β) coronaviruses genera identified in bats [12, 18, 40] , which is situated in a group of sars/sars-like cov [12] .to conduct next-generation sequencing from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and cultured isolates, researchers enrolled nine inpatients in wuhan with viral pneumonia and negative in common respiratory pathogens. the results of this next-generation sequencing indicated that sars-cov-2 was more distant from sars-cov (with about 79% sequence identity) and mers-cov (with about 50% sequence identity) than from two bat-derived sars-like coronavirusesbat-sl-covzc45 (with 87.9% sequence identity) and bat-sl-covzxc21 (with 87.2% sequence identity) [41] . studies also reported that covid-19 s-protein supported strong interaction with human ace2 molecules despite the dissimilarity of its sequence with that of sars-cov [12, 42] .transmission pattern many domestic and wild animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats, may serve as hosts for coronaviruses [23] . it is considered that, generally, animal coronaviruses do not spread among humans [3] . however, there are exceptions, such as sars and mers, which are mainly spread though close contact with infected people via respiratory droplets from cough or sneezing. with regard to covid-19, early patients were reported to have some link to the huanan seafood market in wuhan, china, suggesting that these early infections were due to animal-to-person transmission. however, later cases were reported among medical staff and others with no history of exposure to that market or visiting wuhan, which was taken as an indication of human-tohuman transmission [2, 4, [15] [16] [17] . • median age of patients is 59 years, ranging from 51 to 89 [2] • average age of patients was 55.5 years; age distribution: ≤ 39: 10%; 40-49: 22%, 50-59: 30%; 60-69: 22%, ≥ 70: 15% [19] • cases range from 2 to 72 years [20] sex of patients • more cases were males [20] • 59% males [2] • 68% males [19] age of the deaths • median age of death was 75 (with a range between 48 and 89 years) [21] exposure history • huanan seafood market in wuhan [19, 22] • wuhan residents or people who visited wuhan [20] incubation time • 4.8 ± 2.6 days (2-11 days) [15] • 5.2 days (4.1-7 days) [2] • average of 7 days (2-14 days) [23] • average of 10 days [22] • 5-6 days [24] • average of 6.4 days (5.6-7.7 days) [20] basic reproduction (r 0 )• 2.6 (uncertainty range: • people with poor immune function [2] • people with chronic co-morbidities [2, 15, 19, 21] • people with long-term use of immunosuppressive agents [19] • surgery history before admission [21] mortality rate • 3% (between 29 december 2019 to 23 january, 2020) [15] • 2.3% (as of 28 january 2020) [29] • 2.8% (as of 25 january, 2020) [21] • 2.9% (as of 25 january, 2020) [30] • 11% (as of 25 january, 2020) [19] • 3.1% (as of 24 january 2020) [31] the latest guidelines from chinese health authorities [23, 43] described three main transmission routes for the covid-19: 1) droplets transmission, 2) contact transmission, and 3) aerosol transmission. droplets transmission was reported to occur when respiratory droplets (as produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes) are ingested or inhaled by individuals nearby in close proximity; contact transmission may occur when a subject touches a surface or object contaminated with the virus and subsequently touch their mouth, nose, or eyes; and aerosol transmission may occur when respiratory droplets mix into the air, forming aerosols and may cause infection when inhaled high dose of aerosols into the lungs in a relatively closed environment [23, 43] . in addition to these three routes, one study also indicated the digestive system as a potential transmission route for covid-19 infection. since patients had abdominal discomfort and diarrhea symptoms, researchers analyzed four datasets with single-cell transcriptomes of digestive systems and found that ace2 was highly expressed in absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon [44] .the complete clinical manifestation is not clear yet, as the reported symptoms range from mild to severe, with some cases even resulting in death [3] . the most commonly reported symptoms are fever, cough, myalgia or fatigue, pneumonia, and complicated dyspnea, whereas less common reported symptoms include headache, diarrhea, hemoptysis, runny nose, and phlegmproducing cough [3, 16] . patients with mild symptoms were reported to recover after 1 week while severe cases were reported to experience progressive respiratory failure due to alveolar damage from the virus, which may lead to death [13] . cases resulting in death were primarily middle-aged and elderly patients with pre-existing diseases (tumor surgery, cirrhosis, hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes, and parkinson's disease) [13] . case definition guidelines mention the following symptoms: fever, decrease in lymphocytes and white blood cells, new pulmonary infiltrates on chest radiography, and no improvement in symptoms after 3 days of antibiotics treatment [2] . for patients with suspected infection, the following procedures have been suggested for diagnosis: performing real-time fluorescence (rt-pcr) to detect the positive nucleic acid of sars-cov-2 in sputum, throat swabs, and secretions of the lower respiratory tract samples [13, 14, 43] .prevention and control strategies and methods are reported at three levels: national level, case-related population level, and general population level. at the national level, the national health commission of the people's republic of china issued the "no.1 announcement" on 20 january 2020, which officially included the covid-19 into the management of class b legal infectious diseases, and allowed for class a infectious disease preventive and control measures to be implemented [45] . under this policy, medical institutes can adopt isolation treatment and observation protocols to prevent and control the spread of the covid-19. on 22 january 2020, the national health commission published national guidelines for the prevention and control of covid-19 for medical institutes to prevent nosocomial infection [46] . on 28 january 2020, the national health commission issued protocols for rapid prevention and control measures in order to effectively contain the spread of the epidemic through a "big isolation and big disinfection" policy during the chinese spring festival [47] . national-level strategies have also been issued with targeted measures for rural areas (issued on 28 january 2020) and the elderly population (issued on 31 january 2020) [48, 49] . several public health measures that may prevent or slow down the transmission of the covid-19 were introduced; these include case isolation, identification and follow-up of contacts, environmental disinfection, and use of personal protective equipment [50] .to date, no specific antiviral treatment has been confirmed to be effective against covid-19. regarding patients infected with covid-19, it has been recommended to apply appropriate symptomatic treatment and supportive care [3, 16] . there are six clinical trials registered in both the international clinical trials registry platform and the chinese clinical trial registry to evaluate the efficacy or safety of targeted medicine in the treatment or prognosis of covid-19 (additional file 2) [51, 52] . regarding infected patients with covid-19, it has been recommended to apply appropriate symptomatic treatment and supportive care [3, 16] . studies have also explored the prevention of nosocomial infection and psychological health issues associated with covid-19. a series of measures have been suggested to reduce nosocomial infection, including knowledge training for prevention and control, isolation, disinfection, classified protections at different degrees in infection areas, and protection of confirmed cases [18, 50, 53] . concerning psychological health, some suggested psychological intervention for confirmed cases, suspected cases, and medical staff [18, 54] . for the general population, at this moment there is no vaccine preventing covid-19. the best prevention is to avoid being exposed to the virus [55] . airborne precautions and other protective measures have been discussed and proposed for prevention. infection preventive and control (ipc) measures that may reduce the risk of exposure include the following: use of face masks; covering coughs and sneezes with tissues that are then safely disposed of (or, if no tissues are available, use a flexed elbow to cover the cough or sneeze); regular hand washing with soap or disinfection with hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol (if soap and water are not available); avoidance of contact with infected people and maintaining an appropriate distance as much as possible; and refraining from touching eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands [3] .the who also issued detailed guidelines on the use of face masks in the community, during care at home, and in the health care settings of covid-19 [56] . in this document, health care workers are recommended to use particulate respirators such as those certified n95 or ffp2 when performing aerosol-generating procedures and to use medical masks while providing any care to suspected or confirmed cases. according to this guideline, individuals with respiratory symptoms are advised to use medical masks both in health care and home care settings properly following the infection prevention guidelines. according to this guideline, an individual without respiratory symptoms is not required to wear a medical mask when in public. proper use and disposal of masks is important to avoid any increase in risk of transmission [56] .in addition to articles published in research journals, the china cdc published a guideline to raise awareness of the prevention and control of covid-19 among the general population. the key messages of the guideline include causes, how to choose and wear face masks, proper hand washing habits, preventive measures at different locations (e.g., at home, on public transportation, and in public space), disinfection methods, and medical observation at home [57] . in addition to scientific knowledge on ways to handle the covid-19 outbreak, the guideline also suggests ways to eliminate panic among the general population [57] .the review applied a systematic and rigorous search strategy to retrieve relevant articles according to the research objectives. this research summarizes scientific foundations, identifies literature gaps, and suggests some evidence for future research directions on covid-19 which will provide information for research community, policymakers, and health professionals to adjust and/or come up with new research, policies, and practices. our study only focuses on the articles published either in english or in chinese during the early outbreak period. although, it cannot reflect the entire body of research on covid-19 worldwide, it will provide some evidences for future study and control.this study shows a holistic picture of the current research in response to the outbreak of covid-19. during this early period, many studies have been published exploring the epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation and diagnosis, and prevention and control of the novel coronavirus. thus far, most studies have focused on the epidemiology and potential causes. however, studies exploring prevention and control measures have begun to gradually increase. studies in this domain are urgently needed to minimize the impact of the outbreak. government agencies have quickly incorporated recent scientific findings into public policies at the community, regional, and national levels to slow down and/or prevent the further spread of the covid-19. we recommend that the scholarly community conduct further research to provide valid and reliable ways to manage this kind of public health emergency in both the shortterm and long-term.the current coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic has important implications for the cardiovascular care of patients. implementation of a robust plan in nuclear cardiology units is required to prevent further nosocomial spread of the outbreak. this editorial covers the practical advice on how to protect patients and nuclear cardiology staff against covid-19.la pandémie actuelle de maladie à coronavirus (covid-19) a des implications importantes pour les soins cardiovasculaires des patients. la mise en oeuvre d'un plan robuste dans les unités de cardiologie nucléaire est nécessaire pour prévenir la propagation nosocomiale de l'épidémie. cet éditorial couvre les conseils pratiques pour la protection des patients et du personnel de cardiologie nucléaire face à l'épidémie. since the first cases were reported in china in december 2019 [1] , coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), caused by a novel coronavirus, now referred to as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has become a pandemic, raising a great deal of concern about control [2] . at the time of preparing this manuscript (17 april 2020), the world health organization reported that the number of confirmed cases had reached almost two million globally, accounting for 123,000 deaths so far [3] . therefore, cardiovascular care departments worldwide, including nuclear cardiology units, are confronted with facing the covid-19 biological risk [4] . this editorial aims to gather the key points regarding protection of patients and nuclear cardiology staff against covid-19.the fast spread of the covid-19 outbreak led multiple governments to establish a lockdown.therefore, many nuclear medicine departments, including nuclear cardiology units, were advised to postpone all non-urgent examinations [5, 6] . the use of nuclear cardiology should be approved only for selected cases according to a priority scale (e.g. perfusion single photon emission tomography in symptomatic and high-risk patients or viability scan in the acute or subacute phase of myocardial infarction), and the decision to perform the imaging procedure must be discussed with the referring cardiologist. this decision relies on a trade-off between the infection exposure risk for the patient (who is often susceptible to a severe form of covid-19) and for staff, and the risk associated with delaying or cancelling the diagnostic test.the different steps to consider, from scheduling to interpretation of nuclear cardiology tests, are summarized in fig. 1 . in practical terms, once an eligible patient arrives at the department, mandatory information about hydroalcoholic friction or hand-washing facilities equipped with soap must be provided, together with access to medical masks (also known as surgical masks); a specific notice outlining good hygiene practice, especially with regard to appropriate gestural behaviour, must also be displayed. an illustrated protocol for effective hand washing and adjustment of masks may be pertinent to prevent surface contamination and aerosols in the waiting area. signage (e.g. duct tape on the floor) indicating the security distances that must be respected should be placed in the waiting room. if necessary, physicians may refer some patients to an appropriate infectious disease consultation. in the case of patients with confirmed covid-19, the indication to carry out the procedure must be weighed up following a discussion between the nuclear cardiologist and the recent data suggest that not only aerosol transmission, but also fomite transmission of sars-cov-2 is plausible, as the virus can remain viable and infectious in aerosols for hours and on surfaces for days [7] ; these findings call for rigorous monitoring of hygiene procedures in the unit. therefore, close collaboration between the nuclear medicine and hygiene departments is critical in each structure. procedures may vary from one institution to another, but hygiene rules are mainly based on spatial distancing, hydroalcoholic friction, generalized mask wearing and classical biocleaning (sars-cov-2 is a fragile enveloped virus) using wet disinfectant wipes on handled areas after each passage.management of human resources in the nuclear cardiology unit is key. it is critical to reduce the number of people working at the same time, enabling backup to ensure efficient turnover in case of infection within the team. importantly, workers with confirmed or suspected covid-19 infection must not be present in the department. current guidance recommends a return to work for healthcare personnel with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection if at least 72 hours have passed since recovery (defined as resolution of fever without the use of fever-reducing medications and improvement in respiratory symptoms [e.g. cough and shortness of breath]) and at least 10 days have passed since the symptoms first appeared [8] . close management of the team is critical to allow continuity of healthcare, such as turnover of both cardiologists and nuclear medicine physicians.personal protective equipment will play a critical role in limiting nosocomial spreading of the virus and protecting healthcare professionals. usually, healthcare practitioners are advised to use surgical masks or ffp2 respirators (or n95 respirators) depending on the mode of pathogen transmission and/or the type of medical activity. however, in the specific context of the covid-19 pandemic, given that we need better knowledge about its mode of transmission and the important role of asymptomatic transmission, supplies of personal protective equipment are lacking [9] and access to ffp2 respirators may be restricted to medical staff who practice invasive respiratory procedures in intensive care units (and are therefore the most exposed), the consensus today seems to be clearly in favour of universal j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 5 masking of both patients and workers. interestingly, studies have confirmed that the incidence of laboratory-confirmed influenza in healthcare personnel taking care of outpatients wearing either medical masks or n95 respirators resulted in no significant difference between the two groups [10] .therefore, the wearing of medical masks should be considered for all nuclear cardiology personnel, including cleaning staff, and patients. also, working clothes, protective coveralls, hoods, face shields and other protective equipment may be used to optimize protection. however, these materials will have to be cleaned or changed regularly. practically, personal protective equipment mainly relies on generalized mask wearing (caregiver/caretaker). ffp2 respirators are limited to invasive procedures with risk of aerosols or when the patient cannot wear a mask (the operator then wears an ffp2 respirator and glasses or a face shield). camera surfaces and non-disposable materials used for patient examinations should be disinfected with the appropriate product after each scan [11] .effort stress test procedures are not fully compatible with the wearing of masks by patients, and potentially result in exposure to droplet projections; they should be limited in intensity and combined with a vasodilator or, preferably, switched to just a pharmacological stress test, as recommended by the american society of nuclear cardiology and the society of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging [5] . finally, optimization of nuclear cardiology procedures will often be superimposed with the three principles of external radiological protection (time of exposure, distance from the source and shielding) that are well mastered by nuclear cardiology staff [12] . hygiene advice from the field included in this paper should be balanced with new insights into managing the pandemic that will be gathered in the near future, particularly sars-cov-2 detection in the nose for each patient before any nuclear cardiology examination.the covid-19 pandemic situation is changing rapidly, and further studies are needed to efficiently manage the protection of patients and healthcare workers. implementation of a simple and robust hygiene plan based on spatial distancing, frequent hand washing and universal masking of all personnel in nuclear cardiology units is required to prevent further nosocomial spread of the outbreak.none.the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. pandemic transmission of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) due to severe respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), a novel β-coronavirus, has caused an unprecedented public health threat in the 21st century. as of may 25, 2020 , the global number of covid-19 cases was >5.3 million, with 342,029 deaths. 1 the rapid dissemination of disease may be attributed to the presence of asymptomatic patients with active shedding of virus, [2] [3] [4] [5] which may lead to direct transmission by the droplet route and indirect transmission via contact with a contaminated environment. superspreading events associated with explosive increase in number of cases may further complicate the transmission dynamics of covid-19. 6, 7 the basic reproductive number of sars-cov-2 of (~2.7) is similar to that of sars-cov, 8 both of which are markedly lower than that of airborne measles (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) , 9 suggesting that airborne transmission is not a major route of infection. however, clinical and experimental investigations have suggested possible airborne transmission of sars-cov-2. 10, 11 in the experimental setting with artificial generation of aerosol, sars-cov-2 remained detectable in aerosols up to 3 hours. 11 in the clinical setting, the collection of air samples in patients' rooms is the most direct approach to determining the presence of airborne virus, but the findings have been inconsistent. 10, 12 in a study from singapore, sars-cov-2 rna was not detected in the air samples collected adjacent to patients' heads. 12 a subsequent study demonstrated the presence of sars-cov-2 rna in 44% of air samples in an intensive care unit (icu) in wuhan, china, although the average viral load in the air samples was low. 10 here, we performed air sampling from symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with high to low viral loads in their respiratory samples to resolve this controversy. in addition, we also conducted environmental sampling to correlate the viral load of patients' clinical samples with the positivity rate of environmental samples. our findings have implications for the understanding of hospital covid-19 transmission and the formulation of infection control policy.patients with newly diagnosed covid-19 who were hospitalized singly in aiirs with separate toilet and shower facilities and who consented to participate in air sample collection were recruited. to increase the proportion of exhaled air sampled and to reduce the proportion of environmental air from the air conditioning system with 12 air changes per hour, an umbrella fitted with transparent plastic curtain was used as an air shelter to cover patients during sample collection ( supplementary fig. 1a-d online) . air samples of patients inside this air shelter were collected using the sartorius md8 airscan sampling device (sartorius ag, germany) with sterile gelatin filters (80 mm in diameter and 3 μm pore size (type 17528-80-acd) (sartorius ag). briefly, the air sampler was perpendicularly positioned 10 cm away from the patient's chin. at a rate of 50 l per minute, 1,000 l of air was collected by each gelatin filter for 20 minutes while patients were with or without a surgical mask that complies with the astm f2100 level 1 standard. patients 1-6 were chosen as cases to detect whether sars-cov-2 rna was present in the air. as positive controls, covid-19 patients were instructed to sneeze directly onto the gelatin filter used for the air sampler and to spit saliva droplets onto the gelatin filter. patients 7-10 were chosen as positive controls, and patient 6 served as both a case and his own control. after air sampling or collecting the positive controls, each gelatin filter was soaked into 5 ml viral transport medium (vtm) and incubated at 37°c for 10 minutes. after dissolution of the gelatin filter, 1 ml vtm was collected for nucleic acid extraction, as we described previously. 13 swab samples from the patient's environment, including bed rail, locker, bed table, toilet door handle, and the patient's mobile phone, were collected for sars-cov-2 viral load assay before daily environmental disinfection with sodium hypochlorite solution (1,000 ppm). briefly, swab samples covering a mean surface area of 9 cm 2 (3 cm × 3 cm) for bed rail, locker, and bed table, and the entire surfaces of toilet door handles and patients' mobile phones were collected. swabs were then submerged in 2 ml vtm. each swab sample in vtm was vortexed and centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 1 minute, and 1 ml of the supernatant was used for nucleic acid extraction.the nasopharyngeal flocked swab and deep throat saliva of patients were collected on the day of environmental sampling and were subjected to viral load assay. if other clinical samples, such as throat swab, sputum, and/or rectal swab, were collected, the results were used to correlate with the results of environmental sampling. the clinical sample with the highest viral load from each patient was selected for correlation with the positivity rate of their own environmental samples.the viral load assay of air and environmental samples is illustrated in supplementary file 1 statistical analyses were performed using the spearman rank test using xlstat software (addinsoft, new york, ny). p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.from january 24, 2020, to april 9, 2020, clinical samples were collected from 6 hospitalized patients on the same day of their air sampling. except for 1 asymptomatic patient with low viral load (2.07 × 10 −1 copies/ml) in deep throat saliva collected in the early morning, the other 5 patients (patient 1 and patients 3-6) had viral loads between 3.30 × 10 6 and 9.17 × 10 7 copies/ml ( table 1 ). the results of patient 1 were reported previously. 14 however, all of the air samples from these 6 patients collected inside the air shelter were negative for sars-cov-2 rna by rt-pcr, including 1 patient (patient 6) who was put on high-flow oxygen of 100% in the icu at the time of air sampling collection. patients 6-10 (positive controls) were instructed to sneeze and spit saliva droplets directly onto the gelatin filters used in the air sampler. with the exception of patient 6, who had a viral load of 2.54 × 10 4 copies/ ml in the gelatin filter during sneezing, the sneezing samples onto the gelatin filters were negative for sars-cov-2 rna. the saliva droplets directly spitted on gelatin filters of patients 6-10 were all positive for sars-cov-2 rna (table 1) .from february 28, 2020, to march 22, 2020, a total of 377 environmental samples from aiirs housing 21 rt-pcr-confirmed covid-19 patients were collected during 76 room visits before daily environmental disinfection. the median frequency of environmental sample collection per single room was 3 (range, 1-8). of these 76 room visits for environmental sample collection, at least 1 environmental site positive for sars-cov-2 in 13 room visits (17.2%). in total, 19 of 377 samples (5.0%) were rt-pcr positive. patients' mobile phones had highest rate of contamination, followed by bed rails and toilet door handles ( table 2 ). of these 19 environmental samples positive for sars-cov-2, the median viral load was 9.2 × 10 2 copies/ml (range, 1.1 × 10 2 to 9.4 × 10 4 copies/ml). the correlation between viral loads in clinical samples of patients and environmental samples is illustrated in figure 1 , but it did not reach statistical significance (p = .908; spearman ρ = −0.029). we then divided patients into groups based on viral load in clinical samples and assessed environmental contamination rates in each group (fig. 2 ). environmental sample positivity was only observed in patients with clinical samples having a viral load ≥10 3 copies/ml. we detected a positive correlation between patient viral load (up to 9 log copies/ml) and positivity rate of environmental samples (p = .001; spearman ρ = 0.090).the correlation experiment between viral load and plaque-forming units was performed in triplicate and is illustrated in supplementary note. aiir, airborne infection isolation room with at least 12 air changes per hour; d, day; dts, deep throat saliva collected in early morning before mouth wash; na, not applicable; np, not performed; nps, nasopharyngeal swab; rt-pcr, reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction; sr, single room; ts, throat swab; ud, undetectable; vl, viral load. a patient 1-6 were chosen as cases to detect whether sars-cov-2 rna was present in the air. as positive controls, covid-19 patients were instructed to sneeze directly and spit saliva droplets onto the gelatin filter used for the air sampler. patients 7-10 were chosen as positive controls, while patient 6 served as both a case and his own control. b patient 1 was reported previously. 14 c air samples for sars-cov-2 rna were collected by an air sampler, sas super iso 180 model 86834 (vwr international pbi s.r.l., milan, italy).the air sampler was perpendicularly positioned at a distance of 10 cm at the patient's chin, and 1,000 l of air at a rate of 180 l per minute was collected for each culture plate containing 3 ml of viral transport medium. different air sampler was used for patients 3-6 and the protocol was described in the method session. in this study, we could not demonstrate the presence of sars-cov-2 in air samples collected 10 cm from a patient's chin with or without a surgical mask in a single aiir setting, even among symptomatic patients with high viral loads and in a patient receiving high-flow oxygen in the icu. our finding is consistent with the initial observation reported in singapore where all air samples had no detectable sars-cov-2 inside the isolation room, including air samples collected when the sampler was placed next to patients' heads. 12 although sars-cov-2 was identified in 2 of 3 air outlet fan next to patients' heads, the level of these fans, whether at the roof or ground level, was not specified. an air outlet fan located at ground level may be easily contaminated by respiratory droplets instead of airborne aerosols. sars-cov-2 was detected in the air samples collected in the patients' area in the icu in wuhan, china. 10 to interpret these apparently discordant findings, we must note that there is no standardized method for collecting air samples for virological investigation. 15 different models of air samplers and protocols were used in our study and the other 2 previous studies. more importantly, the rates of collection and the total volumes of air collected were also different. in our study, we collected a total of 1,000 l of air at a rate of 50 l per minute for 20 minutes per sample ( table 3 ). the study from singapore was conducted in a single room with negative pressure setting similar ours, and 1,200 l of air at a rate of 5 l per minute was collected, which required 4 hours per air sample collection. in the study from wuhan, china, a total of 9,000 l of air at a rate of 300 l per minute was collected for 30 minutes per air sample within the icu housing 15 patients, and also in a general ward housing 24 patients. the presence of sars-cov-2 in their air samples may be attributed to a larger volume of 9,000 l of air being collected in both the icu and the general ward. the higher rates of positive air samples in icus than that in general wards may be related to the performance of aerosol-generating procedures in icus, especially in an icu with an open-cubicle design. this situation is similar to the occurrence of opportunistic airborne transmission leading to the sars outbreak in icu in 2003. 16 we have no doubt that the air around covid-19 patients may contain sars-cov-2, as extrapolated from a study on respiratory viruses including common cold-related human coronaviruses from the exhaled breath directly from the infected patients. 17 in this study using a g-ii bioaerosol collecting device, exhaled breath particles were directly captured and differentiated into 2 size fractions including respiratory droplets of particles with aerodynamic diameter >5 μm and aerosols of particles ≤5 μm. among the exhaled air samples collected without a face mask, 6 of 10 participants (60%) with common cold coronavirus infection did not shed detectable virus in respiratory droplets or aerosols. only 4 patients had detectable virus at low median viral load (0.3 log 10 virus copies per sample). assuming that the tidal volume of a young adult is 500 ml and that the average respiration rate is 16 breaths per minute, the total volume of exhaled air is 8 l per minute, which totals 240 l per 30 minutes. given the median viral load of coronavirus of 0.3 log 10 virus copies per each exhaled breath sample collected for 30 minutes, the concentration of viral rna per liter of exhaled air becomes negligible (0.00125 copies per liter of air). 17 in 2 studies (including our study) of air sampling from covid-19 patients, the air samples were not completely composed of exhaled breath but of a mixture of both room air and exhaled air from patients. 10, 12 therefore, negative sars-cov-2 rna findings might be expected in volumes of 1,000-1,200 l of air samples in aiirs. even though we used an umbrella with curtain to reduce the dilution effect of air inside the aiirs, it was not sufficient to improve the yield of sars-cov-2 detection.successful infection by sars-cov-2 depends on the dose of viral exposure and the host immunity. in a murine model, the infectious dose of 2003 sars-cov was estimated to be 43-280 plaque-forming units. 18 based on our experiment, 1 plaque-forming unit is equivalent to a mean of 1.67 × 10 4 virus genome copies/ml. assuming that the infectious dose of sars-cov-2 is similar to that of sars-cov or common cold coronaviruses, the susceptible individual may need to stay with a covid-19 case for 19.5 years to obtain enough virus inoculum as extrapolated from the exhaled breath virus concentration detected by g-ii bioaerosol collecting device. similarly, a susceptible patient needs to stay in a wuhan icu for 44.5 days to become infected, theoretically (supplementary table 2 online), provided that the other routes of transmission are absent. in fact, prolonged exposure in the same confined environment was also required for animal-to-animal transmission, as illustrated in our caged hamster experiment. 19 we only collected air samples from 6 patients with a total collection time of~2 hours when they were not wearing a surgical mask; thus, we cannot completely exclude the possibility of a single erratic event of high virus inoculum being shed by the covid-19 patients when a longer period of sampling is performed. our previous study showed that wearing of a surgical mask by either patients or healthcare workers prevented nosocomial transmission of influenza during the pandemic of influenza a h1n1 virus in 2009. 20 recently, we also demonstrated that community-wide wearing of face masks could minimize the transmission of covid-19 in hong kong. 21 our present findings may also support the usefulness of wearing surgical masks by patients in minimizing environmental contamination by their own respiratory droplets and saliva.although we are puzzled by the study showing that wearing surgical masks by patients infected with common cold coronaviruses could prevent their exhalation of virus-laden aerosols of particles ≤5 μm, it is possible that the filtration mechanism of a surgical mask may be sufficient prevent the transmission of such small-sized particles with coronavirus when their number is low. however, the use of a face mask to prevent dispersal of sars-cov-2 was challenged by a recent study on 4 patients who were instructed to cough directly onto a petri dish containing vtm, which was placed at~20 cm from the patient's mouth, with or without surgical or cotton mask. 22 in this study, the shedding of virus was sporadic. in 1 patient who coughed without wearing face mask, only 1 of 2 coughing episodes yielded detectable sars-cov-2 rna. notably, the viral load in the vtm exposed to coughing from patients was highest when patient was coughing without mask (2.56 log copies/ml), followed by coughing with surgical mask (2.42 log copies/ml) and coughing with cotton mask (1.85 log copies/ml). these findings suggest that cotton masks may offer better or similar protection as surgical masks. surprisingly, no sars-cov-2 rna was detected in 3 of 4 surface swabs collected from inner sides of a surgical mask and a cotton mask, even though 3 of 4 patients produced detectable viral rna in the petri dish placed 20 cm from patient's mouth. whether such apparently discrepant findings can be explained by complicated aerodynamics deserves further investigation.because covid-19 is predominantly transmitted through droplet and contact routes, droplet and contact precautions should have overriding importance. the hong kong special administrative region is one of the very few areas where community-wide wearing of face mask was practiced from the beginning of this covid-19 epidemic. 21 we promoted proactive infection control measures in the hospitals with enforcement of hand hygiene practice and environmental cleaning, 14, 23 and all hospitalized patients were provided with surgical masks as source control to reduce the amount of environmental contamination. 14 however, the mandatory use of surgical masks by hospitalized patients in studies from singapore and china was not mentioned. 10, 12 in addition, we have been promoting hand hygiene among our hospitalized patients. [24] [25] [26] therefore, our single-room environment with confirmed cases of covid-19 was significantly less contaminated than that in singapore and wuhan, china. of our 377 environmental samples collected before daily cleaning and disinfection, only 5% were positive for sars-cov-2 rna, compared with 10%-85% in hospitals in singapore and wuhan, china. 10, 12 moreover, we showed that the higher viral load of patients' clinical samples correlated with the likelihood of environmental contamination. when the viral load of clinical samples was ≥3 log copies/ ml, environmental contamination with sars-cov-2 could be detected. among all sampled items and locations, patients' mobile phones were the most frequently contaminated item. this personal electronic device is not routinely disinfected by the hospital cleaning team. this finding has implications for the disinfection policy of commonly shared electronic devices for patient care in the hospital. ultraviolet c light-emitting disinfecting device specifically designed for electronic mobile device was advocated during this pandemic. 27, 28 the bed rail was another item highly contaminated with sars-cov-2 that is frequently touched by both patients and healthcare workers, as illustrated previously. 29 therefore, enforcement of hand hygiene in healthcare workers and patients remains the cornerstone of infection control, [24] [25] [26] especially during the covid-19 pandemic. 30 correct wearing of a surgical mask, diligent practice of hand hygiene, and thorough environmental disinfection should be sufficient for the prevention of covid-19 in the hospital setting, except during aerosol-generating procedures or when high numbers of covid-19 patients are concentrated in a cohort ward. this study has several limitations. first, the patient number was low. the total process of air sampling including the preparation and instructions to patient took at least 2 hours per patient. thus, some patients refused to join the study. second, the temporal fluctuations of a patient's viral load, the performance of aerosolgenerating procedures, and the immunity of susceptible person were not included in the calculation of the infectious virus dose. further investigations of the complicated aerodynamics of the sars-cov-2-laden aerosols, especially in the cohort ward setting or during aerosol-generating procedures, should be performed.m a n u s c r i p t this paper discusses the basis of the previous worldwide debate prior to april 6, 2020 on whether surgical face masks (also called medical masks) should be used in the general community for protection against the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) that causes the coronavirus disease 2019 . 1 this debate stemmed from the previous guidelines issued by the world health organization (who) on the use of masks for prevention of covid-19. 2, 3 according to the earlier versions of who's guidelines, asymptomatic individuals in the general public need not wear medical masks unless they care for or had close contact with ill individuals. public health authorities released similar statements subsequently in some western countries on the use of masks (see table 1 ). however, april 6, 2020 who softened their stance on the use of masks in healthy individuals, although their guidelines did not specifically recommend widespread use in community settings. 1 this paper also discusses what impact this debate had on the general public and whether a change in stance is adequate to promote behavioral changes.we acknowledge that there are limited supplies of medical masks worldwide. before going into the details of mask use in the community, it is important to first note that we should ensure there is a sufficient supply of face masks for use by healthcare workers. in addition, high performance respirators such as n95 masks should be reserved for healthcare settings where they will be used most effectively. however, it is inevitable that healthy individuals from affected areas start to opt for the use of medical masks when there is an increased evidence of community outbreaks, particularly now that the who softened their stance on their use. as of may 10, 2020, the outbreak of covid-19 has resulted in more than 4 million confirmed cases worldwide in over 209 countries/territories, causing more than 280,000 deaths. 4 infections spread from person to person in the community, and it is essential to identify and implement measures to reduce transmission to slow down or even stop spread. protective behaviors and actions at the individual level can contribute to reducing transmission at the community level. 5 however, confusion from previous public health guidelines has already resulted in stigmatization in western countries towards the choice of using masks by many asian communities as one of the means to prevent the spread of sars-cov-2. research has shown that it is indeed a challenge for a conceptual change to occur when a strong medical misconception had rooted in the general community, as in the case of misinformation against vaccination. 6 there has been reports on both the continuous mistrust on the effectiveness of masks and the improper use of masks in the community. in order to comprehend the basis of the public's misinterpretations on the effectiveness of face masks, it is necessary to first understand the content of the original guideline published by who on prevention of covid-19 in community settings on january 29, 2020. 3 table 1 , the original guidelines from who did not contradict the recommendations of public health authorities from china and some asian territories that supported the general use of medical masks, particularly in crowded public space. in particular, who's guidelines did not state that mask use would be ineffective. in the earlier guideline, who also suggested the use of medical masks when an individual have respiratory symptoms and by medical staff. 3 however, the general community readily discredited the effectiveness m a n u s c r i p t and the use of masks completely, due to an over-interpretation of who's earlier statements in the press. 3 the earlier guidelines also stated there was no evidence to support the effectiveness of medical masks for preventing infection in uninfected persons. note that "lack of evidence that masks are effective" is not equivalent to "there is evidence to show that masks are ineffective" -while the statement is true on the lack of evidence to support the effectiveness of masks specifically towards sars-cov-2 due its recent discovery, this statement has been overinterpreted by the general public that masks are ineffective. as coronaviruses are respiratory infections, there has been extensive literature to suggest the effectiveness of masks in preventing the transmission of these viruses, 7 along with proper use by both infected and uninfected individuals. 8 moreover, young healthy individuals often showed only mild respiratory symptoms, and there is evidence that infection can spread from people who do not show any symptoms. [8] [9] [10] yet, without the use of masks and lack of proper hygiene, those who are carriers of the virus can easily spread it to others of close-contact who may be prone to developing severe symptoms.the confusion on the effectiveness of face masks has been exacerbated following the seemingly inconsistent recommendations of medical mask usage by various health authorities at the earlier stage of the outbreak (also refer to table 1 ). while some health authorities in the west previously conveyed to the public the message "do not wear masks, they are not effective if you do not know how to wear them, so save them for medical staff," many east asian health authorities recommended the public to "wear masks, because they are effective but only if you know how to wear them properly…and here is how." however, the general public from areas where masks had not been worn in the local culture have already been primed strongly with the concept that masks are unnecessary and ineffective across all situations. therefore, misconceptions must be clarified, allowing the general public to acquire adequate knowledge themselves on deciding when the appropriate situation is for using masks during mass outbreaks. public health organizations should take the lead in providing effective education to the general community on the decision and proper ways to medical mask usage, together with other necessary hygiene practices (e.g. hand-washing). previous statements that had been misinterpreted as a criticism on the use of masks should also be clarified to stop unnecessary stigmatizations.research in public health education established that effective behavioral changes in hygiene comes after conceptual change. 11 establishing accurate hygiene concepts can be achieved effectively through teaching microbiological knowledge. 11 therefore, the government and credible public health authorities may consider initiating simple but effective public education campaigns by incorporating au and colleagues' suggestions that focus first on these basic facts in microbiology: 11 i. viruses are like living things and can be killed/destroyed despite not visible; ii.only 'live' viruses can make us sick if they enter our body; iii.there are many ways to destroy the viruses (e.g. through heat and disinfectants) before they enter our body iv.viruses can enter our body through our eyes, nose, and mouth; if they don't enter our body, we will not get sick.in addition to only listing out the "dos and don'ts", establishing the above fundamental microbiology concepts in viral infections will promote critical thinking in the general public when they evaluate the appropriate hygiene measures under different situations. it is advised that the local governments and credible public health authorities in different nations start taking immediate actions to facilitate effective public health and hygiene education.we can witness the comparatively low local infection rate in hong kong, taiwan, and macau, despite the proximity with highly affected areas. 4 one reason has been suggested to be the strong rapid community responses, including advocating for rapid school closures, stricter border controls, and isolation and quarantine measures. 5 moreover, affected by sars in 2003, the majority of residents in china and neighboring affected areas had already acquired health concepts to ensure the accurate use of masks and other proper personal hygiene measures. as of may 10, 2020, it is relieved that many countries have already adopted strict measures to ensure social isolation to stop the spread of sar-cov-2, given the low rate of medical mask usage. however, when the daily social lives of people in these areas resume, the use of masks properly (given its availability) can extend the prevention of community outbreak beyond these quarantine periods. the collective and appropriate actions from the whole community is what the world requires now to help contain covid-19.neither author has any potential conflicts to disclose.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t m a n u s c r i p t *though the representatives from nhs (uk) have previously spoken again the use of masks through the press. **despite ambiguous guidelines on the use of masks, japan and singapore ensured all citizens weekly rations of medical masks and banned of exports of medical masksthe consequences of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov 2) which was originated in wuhan region of china and spread all over the world, have influenced all stages of health services. eventually, world health organization (who) 1 has declared pandemic for this virus. this pandemic is accepted as a viral pneumonia pandemic not a simple flu, therefore, intensive care unit (icu) admission, follow-up, and management of the critically ill patients with covid-19 is extremely important. due to the paucity of studies on covid-19, suggestions are generally within the framework of the experiences gained from china, italy, usa, and uk that have the biggest war against this disease. in this review, we summarized the essential points of icu management for covid-19 patients. 1 the need for intensive care might differ according to institutions or even countries, depending on the demand and supply ranging from 5% to 32% [1] [2] [3] . severe disease may present with severe acute respiratory infection (sari) i.e. severe pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) which is reported in 60%-70% of patients; sepsis and septic shock reported in 30%; myocarditis, arrhythmia, and cardiogenic shock in 20%-30%; and acute kidney injury in 10%-30% of patients [4] . although respiratory failure is often hypoxemic, hypercapnic respiratory failure might also be seen mainly due to mucus plugs. there is a male dominance with male to female ratio being 2/1 in severe cases, whereas according to a recent data from italy, 82% of patients were male. although hypertension and diabetes mellitus are the most common reported comorbidities, advanced age is also a risk factor for the development of severe disease [5] . the main icu admission indications according to turkish guidelines 2 (turkish public health general directorate guidelines), which are prepared according to covid-19 advisory committee proposals are shown in table. patients who are hemodynamically stable and do not need advanced respiratory and organ support anymore might be transferred to wards [6] .the median time between the initiation of clinical signs to the development of pneumonia is about 5 days and the median icu admission time after development of hypoxemia is about 7-12 days (1). icu mortality due to covid-19 varies from 16% to 78% according to different studies [2, 5, [7] [8] [9] . the current reported mortality rate was 26% in a recent multicentre study from italy. however, 58% of patients were still in icu and only 16% of patients were able to be discharged which means mortality rate could be higher [3] . older age, presence of comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic lung disease, cancer, higher d-dimer and c-reactive protein, and lower lymphocyte levels are associated with higher mortality [4] .in part of a pandemic plan of the country and hospitals, icu beds should be organized as well as all devices, equipment, and personnel. it is appropriate to reserve some icus for covid-19 patients. if this is not possible, patient cohorts should be done within the icu. patients should be followed in isolated rooms, necessary personnel protective equipment (ppe) should be provided and a dedicated team for covid icu should be organised. for this purpose, patient to nurse ratio could be 1:1, if possible. a stand-by clean medical team may also be considered. this team can work in other icus. it is recommended to change the team that takes care of covid-19 patients in every 14 days. hereby, a wash-out period is provided. it is also suggested that health care workers should not work for longer than 12 h a day in order to minimise risk of infection. they must be warned that the whole team should report their body temperature and symptoms twice a day and they will not leave the city during rest periods [10] .it should be considered that the existing intensive care beds and organization may not be sufficient due to the pandemic. potential solutions are expanding intensive care outside icus, like high-dependency units, general wards, postanaesthesia care units, and even operating rooms. on the other hand, surging in the icu capacity brings an incremental demand for equipment such as ventilators, consumable materials, therapeutics and as well as human force as healthcare workers (hcw). for this purpose, elective in-patient admissions and surgeries should be delayed and available wards could be adapted for stepping down other icu patients in order to evacuate icus. another point is to increase hcw trained in intensive care. therefore, hcw who are currently working out of icu should be systematically trained in terms of covid-19 protocol for supporting icu staff [11] .to ensure proper infection control measures in the icu are crucial. contact and droplet isolation precautions should be undertaken 3 . faecal-oral transmission has also been reported 4 . viral shedding is expected to be extremely high in critically ill patients. interventions such as bag-valvemask ventilation, noninvasive mechanical ventilation (nimv), high flow nasal cannula oxygen (hfno), nebulisation and oro-tracheal intubation automatically bring high risk in terms of aerosol production. expanded aerosol production might increase airborne transmission risk as well. that is why airborne isolation (with negative pressure) should ideally be implemented as soon as possible in a single room with negative pressure supply that should be provided at least >12 h/day 5 .. fluid-resistant gown, two oxygen requirement ≥ 5l/min with nasal cannula lactate > 2 mmol/l hypotension (systolic blood pressure (sbp) < 90 mmhg, > 40 mmhg drops from usual sbp, mean arterial pressure (map) < 65 mmhg)organ dysfunction such as confusion, kidney and liver tests abnormalities, thrombocytopenia, elevated troponin level and arrhythmia 12 https://hsgm.saglik.gov.tr/depo/covid19/rehberler/covid-19_rehberi.pdf longer sleeved gloves to prevent exposure of the wrists with glove subsiding, eye glasses, full face shield, hair covers or hood, n95 mask and shoe worn are recommended for exposure to confirmed or suspected covid-19 patients. disposable shoe covers might increase the risk of selfcontamination during removal of protection clothing and should be avoided. all icu team should wear hospital's scrubs which should not be worn outside the hospital 6 . zones should be provided for wearing and taking off properly. powered air purifying respirators (paprs) are other protective equipment which has not been proven so far, but it seems reasonable to use in order to decline the viral transmission. it is more convenient for prolonged resuscitations [12] .hypoxemic respiratory failure should be recognized early. despite conventional oxygen therapy, increased work of breathing and hypoxemia could become progressively worse. supplemental oxygen should be given via low-flow o2 delivery systems such as nasal cannula (1-6 l/min to provide fio2 of 0.24-0.45), simple face mask (5-8 l/min to provide fio2 up to 0.50-0.60), nonrebreather masks with reservoir providing fio2 up to > 0.85 with 10-15 l/min oxygen, titrated according to spo2. venturi and diffuser masks are suggested to be avoided. it should be remembered that fio2 > 0.60 for > 6 h might create o2 toxicity. hfno therapy and nimv support may be applied in selected hypoxemic respiratory failure cases with proper ppe because of high risk of aerosol generation. however, these patients should be followed closely in terms of clinical deterioration, if no positive response is obtained in the first few hours (refractory hypoxemia, tachypnoea, tidal volume (vt) > 9 ml/kg meaning increased minute ventilation and work of breathing). when applying nimv, a helmet mask may be used, applied with intensive care ventilators or dualcircuit ventilators; a viral/bacterial filter should be added to the circuit. nimv should not be applied to patients whose secretions cannot be controlled; who have high aspiration risk, impaired mental status, cardiac complications and multiple organ failure; and who are hemodynamically unstable [13] . prolonged spontaneous breathing may cause uncontrolled intrathoracic negative pressures and induce patient-self-inflicted lung injury similar to ventilator induced lung injury and therefore, must be prevented by utilization of intubation as soon as possible [14] .almost 10% of patients may require invasive mechanical ventilation. endotracheal intubation should be applied by a trained and most experienced physician with a rapid sequential intubation protocol. intubation should be performed with video-laryngoscope, if possible. intubation with flexible bronchoscopy can be used in difficult intubation. however, bronchoscopy is a high-risk procedure for aerolisation. use of bag-mask ventilation should be avoided during preoxygenation. preoxygenation could be performed with nonrebreather mask with reservoir. if bag-mask would be used, a filter should be attached to the bag mask. neuromuscular blockers can be administered to suppress cough before intubation. positive pressure ventilation should not be initiated before the endotracheal cuff is inflated and patients must be connected to mechanical ventilator directly without bag ventilation [15] . closed system aspiration should be provided and bacterial/viral filters should be placed in both inspiratory and expiratory ports of the ventilator. for airway humidification, heat and moisture exchanger (hme) filter could be used. unless absolutely necessary, bronchoscopic procedures should be avoided and metered dose inhaler (mdi) should be preferred instead of nebulization for bronchodilator therapy. however, due to mucus plugs, and increased resistance and deadspace ventilation, active heated humidifier (hh) can be preferred 7 .in patients developing ards, low tidal volumes (4-6 ml/kg) and low inspiratory pressures (plateau pressure < 30 cm h2o, driving pressure which is plateau pressure minus positive end expiratory pressure < 14 cm h2o) should be applied. deep sedation may be required to achieve target tidal volumes. in terms of low ph like < 7.15, tidal volume can be increased up to 8 ml/kg. otherwise permissive hypercapnia may be allowed [16] . if there is no evidence of tissue hypoperfusion, conservative fluid support should be provided. peep titration should be applied at pressures that will prevent atelectotraumas and over distention. in moderate (pao2/fio2 < 200) and severe (pao2/ fio2 < 100) ards patients, high peep may be applied instead of low peep. there is not enough data regarding recruitment manoeuvres. even if the use of neuromuscular blocking agents is not routinely recommended, it can be applied in the presence of resistant hypoxemia or hypercapnia, despite sedation in moderate to severe ards with ventilator dyssnchrony and in the first 24-48 h of mechanical ventilation. in patients with pao2/fio2 < 150, more than 12 h of prone position could be applied daily in patients who are managed by conventional mv interventions. prone position has been demonstrated to be helpful even in spontaneously breathing nonintubated patients, even with nimv and hfno. inhaled nitric oxide (no) administration could be used as a rescue therapy and could also theoretically be helpful to improve ventilation/ perfusion match, since it has been speculated that perfusion is also impaired in ards due to covid-19 and these patients have preserved compliance. routine use of corticosteroids is not recommended [17] . extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) may be considered in patients with refractory hypoxemia despite lung-protective ventilation, and appropriate patients should be referred to experienced centres. due to paucity of evidence for this virus and disease pathophysiology, probable advantages of ecmo is ambiguous. ecmo is not a therapy that should be considered in case of a major pandemic regarding the appropriate allocation of resources [18] .dr. gattinoni and his colleagues suggested that covid-19 patients with respiratory failure have 2 phenotypes [19] . phenotype characterized by low elastance (high compliance), so called type l, has low ventilator perfusion ratio, low lung weight, and low recruitability, whereas type h, characterized by high elastance (low compliance) has high right-to-left shunt, high lung weight, and high recruitability. severe hypoxemia for high compliant lungs may be elucidated by the loss of lung perfusion regulation and hypoxic vasoconstriction. they recommend to increase fio2 as a solution for hypoxemia for those who are not experiencing dyspnoea, in which type l patient responds well. early intubation may even cause transition to type h phenotype. however, for intubated hypercapnic type l patients, ventilation with more than 6 ml/kg up to 8-9 ml/kg does not bring risk of ventilatorassociated lung injury. since type l phenotypes could have a tolerance in terms of mechanical power by the help of high compliance. furthermore, administration of high peep for nonrecruitable lungs may cause hemodynamic impairment and fluid retention as well. type h phenotype looks like usual severe ards. therefore, higher peep, prone positioning, and even extracorporeal support are classical therapeutic choices. this suggestion has not been proved in large scale studies and postponing intubation in severe hypoxemia and increased work of breathing might be detrimental and early intubation in patients unresponsive to conventional o2 treatment and perhaps short course of nimv and hfno is recommended.during weaning from mechanical ventilation, patients under very low or no sedation should be evaluated for readiness as such, decreased o2 requirement (fio2 < 0.40, peep < 8 cm h2o), hemodynamic stability, acceptable consciousness with preserved gag, and cough reflex. rapid shallow breathing index could be checked so that patients with respiratory rate to tidal volume ratio < 100, have high likelihood of being successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation. instead of weaning trial through t-piece, weaning from pressure support ventilation could be chosen due to less aerosol generation. in covid-19 patients, high mucus plugs are being reported, therefore, to reduce the risk of reintubation timing of weaning and extubation should be individualized. whether the cuff leak test should be performed routinely prior to extubation is unclear. if postextubation stridor is highly expected (female sex, fluid overload, prolonged intubation > 5-7 days, age > 80 years, large endotracheal tubes > 8-8.5 f, difficult and traumatic intubation), cuff-leak test could be performed weighing against risks and/or corticosteroids could be given during extubation. if possible, extubation should be performed in airborne isolation rooms with maximum ppe use. for postextubation respiratory failure, nimv and/or hfno should be applied very carefully in selected patients and if there is stridor, immediate intubation should be performed. for patients who fail weaning, a tracheostomy may be indicated which is considered to be a high-risk procedure for aerosolization [20] .patients should receive pulmonary and extremity rehabilitation especially when they have low risk of infection transmission and meticulous nutritional support should be provided to prevent icu-acquired weakness.sepsis is defined as organ failure due to dysregulated host response accompanying by suspected or documented infection. organ failure symptoms and signs are; changes in consciousness, difficulty breathing, low oxygen saturation, decreased urine output, increased creatinine and heart rate, weak pulse, cold extremities or low blood pressure, signs of coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, acidosis, increased lactate level or hyperbilirubinemia. septic shock is thought in terms of fluid therapy resistant hypotension, vasopressor requirement and lactate level > 2 mmol/l to maintain mean arterial pressure (map) ≥ 65 mmhg. it should be remembered that myocarditis and associated arrhythmias, and cardiogenic shock may be seen in these patients [21] .due to lack of evidence, most of the recommendations are weak or as best practice statements regarding management of covid-19 patients with shock. it is recommended not to use static parameters in order to assess fluid responsiveness. dynamic parameters like skin temperature, capillary refilling time, and/or serum lactate measurement are suggested. conservative fluid management is superior to liberal approach for acute resuscitation. buffered/balanced crystalloids are preferred over unbalanced in the initial treatment. hydroxyethyl starch is not suggested which is a strong recommendation. in addition, gelatines and dextrans should not be used as well. routine usage of albumin is not recommended.norepinephrine is the first-line vasoactive agent. vasopressin and then adrenalin should be added as a second-line agent, over titrating norepinephrine dose, if target map cannot be achieved by norepinephrine alone. dopamine has no place but could be utilized if norepinephrine is not available as a last choice. target map is 60-65 mmhg, rather than higher values. in spite of fluid resuscitation and norepinephrine, if patients have persistent cardiac dysfunction and hypoperfusion signs, dobutamine could be started 8 .first hour sepsis bundle should be implemented as baseline lactate measurement and repeated if first measurement is >2 mmol/l; blood cultures before antibiotics and antimicrobial therapy should be started within 1 h. if bacterial infection is suspected, appropriate empirical antimicrobial therapy should be initiated. the choice of antibiotic treatment is made according to the local epidemiological data and treatment guidelines of the patient's clinical condition (community-acquired pneumonia, healthcare-related pneumonia, comorbidities, immunosuppression, health care admission in the last 3 months, prior antibiotic use). in intubated patients, diagnostic tests such as polymerase chain reaction (pcr) has higher sensitivity if it is done on tracheal aspirates rather than oro-nasal specimens 9 . for both corona pcr and bacterial cultures, tracheal aspirates should be preferred over bronchoscopic techniques.although 30 ml/kg crystalloid (normal saline or ringer lactate) is suggested in the original bundle, due to the presence of ards fluid treatment should be individualized. patients who are hemodynamically unstable, safety of airway should be provided by taking protective measures. patients should not be transferred until stabilization especially of the airway. if the central catheter cannot be inserted, vasopressor treatment can be given through the possible widest vascular access. however, extravasation should be kept in mind 10 .in the critically ill patients, venous thromboembolism prophylaxis should be undertaken due to immobility. however, in covid-19 patients, presence of hypercoagulopathy is hypothesized and therefore, therapeutic anticoagulation and perhaps antiaggregant therapy should be considered in patients with no contraindications especially in patients with high d-dimer levels [22] .in case of cardiac arrest, cpr should be managed with as few people as possible with ppe which must be worn by all members of the team before entering the room. no chest compressions or airway procedures should be done without full ppe use. cpr should be initiated by only chest compressions which could also be performed by automatic resuscitators and preoxygenation could be provided with nonrebreather face masks with reservoir to prevent aerosol contamination. recognising the shockable rhythms as soon as possible and appropriate interventions might maintain circulation and prevent the need of further respiratory support like intubation. if bag mask ventilation and tracheal intubation are needed, at least two physicians can apply this procedure by the help of oropharyngeal airway and video-laryngoscope. all procedures should be debriefed after cpr for personal safety check and patient clinical evaluation 11 .in the differential diagnosis of covid-19 pneumonia, imaging tests should also be used in addition to the patient's history, clinical and laboratory findings and coronavirus specific diagnostic tests. thorax computerised tomography (ct) examination can be useful in diagnosis and can provide important clues in the initial evaluation of novel coronavirus pneumonia. multiple patched groundglass opacities in bilateral lobular style, with peripheral location, are reported as characteristic thorax ct findings of covid-19 pneumonia [23] . if ct is not applicable during icu stay due to cardiorespiratory instability, lung ultrasound could be a surrogate imaging method to chest radiography or ct scanning being a highly sensitive and specific technique for the diagnosis and follow-up of these cases [24] . ultrasound may also be used to make sure the proper placement of the endotracheal tube and diagnosis of complications such as pneumothorax [25] .in the light of the data obtained from covid-19 pandemic and hospital follow-up of these critically ill patients, the needfulness of intensive care units with well-organized structure and trained hcw, has emerged once again. intensive care science plays a locomotive role in this kind of outbreak management. the contribution of intensivists who are dealing with complex organ failures is very important in the training of healthcare professionals for outbreak planning. providing the emotional support of hcw while organising these plans, increasing the motivation by using the available communication tools is crucial to prevent burnout by minimizing fear and anxiety [5] .nurses should properly arrange critically ill elderly patients with covid-19 and complete the evaluation in the shortest time possible. in the meanwhile, urgent care, such as wheelchair/flatbed transfer, oxygen inhalation, electrocardiogram monitoring, sputum suction, and establishment of venous access, should be completed.the evaluation should include three components: general condition assessment, self-care ability assessment, and specialized assessment. the evaluation's specific content should be reasonably selected according to the nursing human resources available and the critical degree of the patient's condition.the general condition assessment should include age, present history illness, past medical history, allergic history, vital signs, oxygen saturation, breath, consciousness state, and systemic symptoms, such as fever, cough, expectoration, chest congestion, hypodynamia, muscle soreness, and diarrhea.the self-care ability assessment should include the barthel index for activities of daily living 2 according to which patients can be categorized into four grades: total independence (score 100), mild dependence (score between 61 and 90), moderate dependence (score between 41 and 60), and severe dependence (score <40). nurses should determine the nursing grades according to the patient's degree of dependence to provide appropriate nursing care.the specialized assessment should include cognitive functional assessment, nutritional status assessment, and venous thromboembolism (vte) risk assessment. the mini-cog test 3 is recommended for the evaluation of cognitive function as it is brief, minimally influenced by language and education level, and easily accepted by patients. the nutrition risk in critically ill (nutric) scale may be used to evaluate the nutritional status of critically ill elderly patients. 4 however, considering elderly patients are prone to suffering from malnutrition, nutritional support should be provided immediately after admission in the case of insufficient medical staff. vte risk assessment varies depending on different clinical situations: for medical patients, the padua scale is recommended, while for surgical patients, the caprini risk assessment model is recommended. 5• dynamically monitor patients' vital signs, focusing on temperature, respiratory rhythm, rate, depth, and spo 2 . for patients with fever, antipyretic treatment should be performed according to the doctor's advice. after the use of antipyretic drugs, changes in temperature and sweating should be closely monitored. moreover, for patients who sweat a lot, nurses should dry the sweat as soon as possible, change their clothes and bed units, and encourage them to drink more water. if necessary, report to the doctor for timely fluid rehydration. in addition, according to the respiratory patterns, oxygen saturation, and arterial blood gas analysis results, determine patients' blood oxygenation statuses, and promptly correct hypoxemia.• dynamically monitor water electrolytes, acid-base balance, and infection indicators of patients to determine the occurrence of complications, such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), septic shock, stress ulcers, and deep vein thrombosis.once any complications occur, nursing routines and measures of corresponding complications should be implemented.• observe patients' consciousness states and systemic symptoms, such as cough, expectoration, chest tightness, dyspnea, and cyanosis. once the patient has the above symptoms, implement oxygen therapy following the doctor's advice and observe the effect. the patient's condition should be reported to the doctor in time to adjust the oxygen flow rate or oxygen therapy method. also, the 24-hour intake and output volume should be recorded in the nursing document.• for elderly patients, special attention should be paid to strengthen the observation and nursing of their underlying diseases and monitor relevant indicators, such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cerebrovascular disease.for critically ill elderly patients with covid-19, respiratory support techniques should be selected individually according to the degree of hypoxia, tolerance, and the doctor's advice. nasal catheter, mask, high-flow nasal cannula (hfnc), and noninvasive ventilation may be the preferred respiratory support techniques for patients with mild to moderate hypoxia, while noninvasive ventilation, invasive ventilation, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) are recommended for patients with moderate to severe hypoxia. 6 as older patients often have underlying lung diseases, they are prone to suffering from carbon dioxide retention. therefore, when necessary, the patient's blood gas should be reviewed and the oxygen therapy should be changed.recommendations for oxygen therapy and nursing care for critically ill elderly patients with covid-19 are as follows.when nasal catheter oxygen inhalation is used, the oxygen flow rate is generally <5 l/min. disposable nasal oxygen catheters and humidification devices are recommended. the front end of the nasal oxygen catheter should be placed in the patient's nostril with a depth of 1.5 cm, and the patient should wear a surgical mask to prevent aerosol diffusion. 4 a water-based lubricant can be used if the nasal mucosa is dry, but not petroleum jelly or other oil-based agents. when mask oxygen inhalation is used, the oxygen flow rate is usually set at 5-10 l/ min and disposable nasal oxygen catheters and humidification devices are recommended. the mask should completely cover the patient's nose and mouth to reduce aerosol diffusion, but a surgical mask is not necessary. 6 during oxygen inhalation by nasal catheter or mask, the patient's breath and oxygen saturation should be closely observed and arterial blood gas analysis should be implemented if necessary. if oxygen therapy persistently fails to reach the target or carbon dioxide retention occurs, nurses should inform the doctor immediately and change oxygen therapy methods if necessary.in order to reduce the diffusion of aerosol and droplets, when starting hfnc, the operation should be conducted in the following sequence: (1) start up, (2) set initial parameters, (3) fit the nasal plug to the patient, and (4) deliver oxygen. when stopping, the sequence of operation is to shut down or reduce the oxygen flow to zero and then remove the nasal plug. considering that critically ill elderly patients with covid-19 may get worse at any time, when hfnc is used or stopped, the oxygen supply should not be interrupted and some necessary devices needed for nasal catheter oxygen inhalation, noninvasive ventilator, or trachea intubation should be prepared in advance according to the condition. keep the device and pipeline at or below the level of the patient's head to avoid choking or asphyxiation caused by backflow of the condensation in the pipeline. in the process of hfnc, pay close attention to the application effect. if there is no improvement in oxygenation indicators or if they deteriorate after 2 hours of use, the doctor should be informed immediately and a change to noninvasive mechanical ventilation should be considered. 4before initiating noninvasive mechanical ventilation, patients should be fully informed to eliminate resistance and so they can be taught to inhale through the nose. in order to reduce aerosol diffusion, an oral-nasal mask is recommended but not a nose mask. if conditions permit, a disposable breathing valve is recommended instead of a mask-integrated valve and platform valve. filters can be added between the mask and the breathing valve and having the vantage facing the operator should be avoided. 7 in the process of using, adjust the parameters of inspired positive airway pressure, expired positive airway pressure and oxygen concentration according to the doctor's advice, and closely observe the patient's consciousness, oxygenation, patient-ventilator synchrony, and improvement of respiratory function. if the condition does not improve in a short time, or signs of deterioration (such as consciousness disorders or coma) occur, the doctor should be informed immediately and a change to invasive mechanical ventilation should be considered.it is recommended that patients with nasal trachea cannula or tracheotomy should wear surgical masks to avoid aerosol diffusion.disposable respiratory loops are recommended, and regular replacement is not recommended unless contamination is apparent. 7 pay close attention to ventilator operation, oxygenation index, pipe fixation of trachea cannula or tracheotomy, and sputum drainage during use. if endotracheal suction is required, closed endotracheal suction systems should be selected (see "airway management" section below for details). as elderly patients are prone to comorbid ventilator-associated pneumonia, when using noninvasive mechanical ventilation, the head of the bed must be raised by 30°-45°. the condensate must be removed regularly and disposed of in accordance with infectious body fluids. during the process of disposal, the | 77accidental spilling or backflow of the condensate into the airway of the patient should be avoided. 6,7during the operation of ecmo, the patient's condition, hemodynamic changes, vital signs, oxygen saturation, arterial blood gas, postural drainage, regular turning over, and patting of the back can be used to help patients with secretion retention or difficulty in sputum excretion. a vibrating sputum extractor should be avoided as much as possible, so as not to cause the risk of blood oxygen saturation decline and arrhythmia. during sputum excretion, nurses should pay attention to the patient's complaint of discomfort, and immediately monitor the changes of vital signs and blood oxygen saturation.atomization treatment is a high-risk procedure for suspected or confirmed patients with covid-19. therefore, this procedure should be performed in a well-ventilated room with a minimum number of people that can meet the patient's care needs. 8 avoid using a smallvolume nebulizer, which easily causes aerosol diffusion, as much as possible. atomization devices, such as atomized drug storage devices, breathing pipes, and atomized masks, should be disposable.during invasive, noninvasive, or artificial airway ventilation, airway humidification can reduce the inflammatory response caused by mechanical ventilation. for reasonable airway humidification, one should avoid excessive or insufficient humidification. it is necessary to implement sputum suction immediately according to the characteristic changes of airway secretions to prevent the occurrence of emergencies, such as sputum obstruction and suffocation.for patients with artificial airways, closed endotracheal suction systems should be used strictly following the principle of sputum suction on demand to avoid constant suction leading to severe cough, airway wall mucosal edema, or even bleeding. 6 shallow sputum suction is recommended and patients should be given 2 minutes of pure oxygen before that. in addition, each sputum suction duration should be <15 seconds and continuous negative pressure suction should be applied with pressure maintained between 80 mmhg and 150 mmhg (1 mmhg = 0.133 kpa).the closed tracheal suction catheter should be changed every 72 hours to reduce further infection caused by colonization of the tip bacteria.for critically ill elderly patients with covid-19, the total infusion volume should be controlled according to the patient's condition; the infusion sequence should be reasonably arranged and the infusion apparatus should be replaced as needed. after the use of medication, observe the efficacy closely and pay special attention to the occurrence of drug-related adverse reactions.antiviral drugs should be given to patients according to the doctor's advice. considering that lopinavir/ritonavir may cause diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, liver injury, myocardial injury, and other adverse reactions, special attention should be paid to monitoring the liver function, cardiac function of patients during the clinical application, and gastrointestinal reactions that may occur, requiring symptomatic treatment and care.glucocorticoids treatment should be performed in strict accordance with the prescribed dose, frequency, and duration of medication, and the dosage should be reduced gradually according to symptoms and body temperature. attention should be paid to observe the occurrence of any drug-related adverse reactions, such as secondary infection, ulcers, hypertension, blood glucose increase, and blood potassium decrease.during the application of antibiotics, it is necessary to observe the occurrence of intestinal flora disorders, drug allergic reactions, fungal infections, and so forth, and to deal with possible adverse drug-related reactions according to the doctor's advice.patients can be treated with human immunoglobulin according to the doctor's advice. for patients with rapid progression, severe or critical disease, convalescent plasma therapy may be used. 9 during the use, it is necessary to pay attention to the occurrence of transfusion reaction and observe the curative effect.as critically ill elderly patients with covid-19 often have coexistence of multisystem diseases, it is necessary to pay close attention to the occurrence of complications and carry out active prevention, treatment, and nursing on the basis of symptomatic treatment. the occurrence of acute left heart failure and myocardial injury should be monitored vigilantly in elderly patients under a variety of pathogenic factors. especially for elderly patients with underlying heart disease, it is necessary to be cautious about fluid supplementation to avoid large amounts of rapid fluid supplementation leading to acute left heart failure. nurses should pay close attention to changes in breathing, blood pressure, heart rate, and heart rhythm of elderly patients, and promptly identify symptoms such as dyspnea, severe wheezing, arrhythmia, and decreased blood pressure. in addition, relevant laboratory tests of b-type brain natriuretic peptide, electrolytes, and markers of myocardial injury should be conducted, and active treatment should be coordinated with doctors. furthermore, adjust the patient's position, maintain unobstructed venous access, and use drugs in accordance with the doctor's advice. rescue supplies and medicines should be prepared and kept by high-risk patients' beds.treatment with anti-infective drugs and mechanical ventilation increase the risk of acute kidney injury in elderly patients with covid-19. when early kidney injury manifestations (such as decreased urine volume, facial edema, and limb edema) appear, it is necessary to communicate with the doctor immediately to adjust the treatment plan. during the oliguria phase, the infusion volume and drip rate should be controlled (30 drops/min), and attention should be paid to the occurrence of hyperkalemia. during the polyuria phase, the patient's vital signs, consciousness, appetite, and skin elasticity should be closely observed and oral rehydration salts can be used to maintain electrolyte balance. in the course of treatment, daily living nursing should be strengthened to keep the perineum clean and reduce the possibility of urinary system infection.the risk of vte in elderly patients with severe disease is signifi- because the skin of the elderly is atrophic and thin, and the senses are insensitive, it is necessary to strengthen the skin care of elderly patients to prevent pressure injury. for patients with oxygen therapy or noninvasive ventilation, the skin blood circulation of the face in contact with the mask or catheter should be regularly observed and preventive dressings, such as foam dressings, should be used to provide protection when necessary to avoid pressure injuries on the nose, face, lips, and behind the ears. patients with diarrhea, frequent stools, or incontinence need to be alert to the occurrence of incontinent dermatitis. when antipyretic drugs are required, suppositories should be used less frequently to reduce the risk of skin damage.xia et al.some patients with covid-19 have symptoms similar to intracranial infections, such as headache, epilepsy, and disturbance of consciousness, and some even take intracranial infection as the first symptom. therefore, the nurse should closely observe the patient's neurological symptoms and, if necessary and according to the doctor's advice, give sedative and analgesic drugs, and give reasonable physical restraints, so as to ensure the patient's life and safety of treatment and nursing.it is important to provide patients with oral care, nursing of various pipelines, and defecation and urination nursing. strictly implement the aseptic operation and disinfection and isolation standards to prevent ventilator-related pneumonia, catheter-related bloodstream infection, catheter-related urinary tract infection, and other secondary infections.it is necessary to dynamically evaluate the nutritional risk of patients, pay close attention to their nutritional status, and provide timely and reasonable nutritional support. for patients who need nutritional treatment, follow the principle of diet priority, oral route priority, and enteral nutrition (en) priority. 10 (1) for patients with en by nasogastric tube, the temperature of the nutrient solution should be maintained at 38°c-42°c and continuous and uniform pumping is recommended, starting at 20-30 ml/h, and increasing by 10 ml/h after 2 hours if no retention, until 60-100 ml/h. 10 it is recommended that gastric residual volume be monitored every 4 hours for gastric retention. 11 (2) during the en process, patients should be observed for the presence of symptoms of gastrointestinal intolerance, such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. if the above intolerance symptoms appear, promptly inform the doctor and consider the use of gastrointestinal motility drugs or the post-pyloric feeding route, such as nasointestinal tube. (3) the patient's head should be raised 30°-45° during feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration and aspiration pneumonia. 10 (4) the type, speed, and quantity of en nutrient solution should be recorded, and nutritional indicators, such as albumin, prealbumin, and ferritin, should be monitored.supplemental parenteral nutrition (pn) is recommended as early as possible if en fails to meet the 60% target energy and protein requirements within 48-72 hours. 12 critically ill elderly patients with covid-19 are more likely to have psychological panic and anxiety due to insufficient knowledge of the disease and lack of access to information. the following measures should be considered in these cases.• evaluate the patient's cognitive changes, emotional responses, and behavior changes, and provide appropriate emotional support. for patients with anxious and depressed tendencies, self-rating scales, such as an anxiety self-rating scale and a depression self-rating scale, can be used for assessment, and professional psychological personnel can be asked to help patients according to the situation.• various means, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, positive psychology, explaining covid-19 in simple and understandable language, and providing continuous information support, may help elderly patients to a timely transition to the psychological stage of treatment, and to build up the confidence to overcome the disease.• relaxation training, such as meditation, hypnosis, music therapy, and other ways to relieve patients' anxiety and depression, should be provided if possible.for discharged patients, conditional hospitals should set up special discharge channels with bathrooms inside. the first thing for patients after leaving the ward is to enter the bathroom of the discharge channel for personal hygiene disposal. nurses should provide assistance for elderly patients with poor self-care ability in bathing and changing into clean clothes. for patients' personal belongings, discard all that can be discarded. for belongings that must be kept, 1000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant spray or 75% ethanol wiping disinfection is recommended. for clothing that must be kept, garments should be irradiated 1 day in advance with ultraviolet light for 1 hour on both sides.discharge should consist of the following: (1) select appropriate breathing rehabilitation exercises and teach them to patients, such as airway clearance training, breathing exercises, pursed-lip breathing, and abdominal breathing. (2) advise patients to strengthen nutritional support, eat more high-protein, high-vitamin, high-calorie food, and more fresh vegetables, fruits, milk, and so on. likewise, instruct patients to work and rest regularly and to get adequate sleep. (3) it is recommended that patients continue to be monitored for 14 days after discharge and continue to wear masks. if possible, it is recommended to live in a single room with good ventilation, reduce close contact with others, eat separately, carry out hand hygiene thoroughly, and avoid outdoor activities. (4) it is recommended that patients return to the hospital for reexamination 2 and 4 weeks after discharge. 9 during the period after discharge, if the patient has fever, dyspnea, or the reappearance of other uncomfortable symptoms, or if a family member with close contact has a new novel coronavirus infection or suspected infection symptoms, they should go to the hospital immediately.this article was supported by a beijing hospital nova project/award (bj-2018-129).nothing to disclose.pneumonia caused by the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov; sars-cov-2) first broke out in wuhan city, hubei province, china in december 2019 and january 2020. it is a severe respiratory disease associated with high mortality [1] . many recent studies have demonstrated that this new virus is highly contagious. as of march 27, 2020, there have been more than 390,000 confirmed cases of infection in more than 100 countries worldwide [2] . since the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 in wuhan, medical staff in wuhan and some other cities in hubei have been severely infected, accounting for 90% of all infected medical personnel in the country. strengthening the protection awareness of medical staff and taking possible preventive measures have a positive effect on suppressing the virus and preventing infection [3] .sars-cov-2 is primarily transmitted through the respiratory tract and through contact. covid-19 patients and those infected with sars-cov-2 need air isolation and contact isolation, single-room isolation, constant air circulation, and disinfection of the air and environmental items to reduce the spread of the virus. a mask (n95) can block 95% of the virus from entering the respiratory tract. strict implementation of hand hygiene can prevent contact transmission. due to the intense outbreak of covid-19 over a short period in hubei, especially in wuhan, the isolation wards of medical institutions are unable to accommodate the admission of a large number of patients. many ordinary wards have been temporarily converted into isolation wards, which fail to meet the "two-zone, three-passage" standard. furthermore, in the early stage of the epidemic, protective supplies such as n95 masks were scarce, and some medical staff lacked awareness of prevention and control. the failure to standardize mask-wearing and hand hygiene led to a large number of infections among medical staff. recently, a large number of medical personnel in italy and other countries have also contracted sars-cov-2. therefore, it is urgent to strengthen covid-19 prevention and control measures.medical personnel, especially front-line medical staff involved in fever clinics and isolation wards, have long been engaged in the diagnosis and treatment of covid-19. consequently, they have been at high risk for sars-cov-2 infection for a long time. even if the standard second-level protections, such as a disposable round cap, gown, protective clothing, n95 mask and surgical mask, and double gloves, are implemented and enhanced second-level protections (e.g., the use of a protective screen or positive pressure breathing mask during airway operations) are put into use when necessary, these measures do not completely protect people from infection with sars-cov-2. in cases of sars-cov-2 invasion of the mouth and nose, immune intervention strategies to increase the local or systemic immunity of the mouth and nose may increase the body's resistance to the virus and make up for the lack of physical protection.interferon (ifn) was discovered by virologists in 1957. it is an important cytokine that regulates cell functions and has antiviral effects. it is by far the most widely used antiviral biological drug [4] . because ifn can block the replication of virus particles and has some effect on all dna and rna viruses, it may reduce the amount of virus, making the dominant virus infection into recessive virus infection. for general viral infection, ifn can shorten the course of the disease. according to the latest results from the p4 laboratory of the first affiliated hospital of zhejiang university, china, sars-cov-2 can inhibit the secretion of ifn by host cells and reduce the ability of host cells to suppress viruses by reducing endogenous ifn levels. therefore, the use of exogenous ifn in early antivirals may be important. furthermore, the nasal epithelial cells are the first stop in cases droplet infection of the host by sars-cov-2 (dropletnasal-respiratory infection). ifn nasal drops can maintain a high ifn-α concentration in the nasal mucosa and inhibit the virus that has accumulated in the nasal mucosal epithelium but has not yet broken through the mucosal immune barrier [5] .we plan to carry out a trial on the preventive effect of recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops against sars-cov-2 infections in medical personnel. additionally, we plan to explore the efficacy of this drug for the prevention of sars-cov-2 infection in healthy and susceptible people.since january 21, 2020, 2944 official medical personnel, including doctors and nurses from taihe hospital, shiyan city, hubei province, have been included in the study. among them, 2415 medical personnel who were working in nonisolated wards and nonfever clinics were categorized into the low-risk exposure group. they were not in direct contact with sars-cov-2 infected patients. in contrast, 529 medical personnel who were working in isolation wards and fever clinics for diagnosis and treatment were categorized into the high-risk exposure group. the personnel in this group were in direct contact with infected patients. baseline information is shown in [6] , as follows: sars-cov-2 infection: positive pathogenic test (nucleic acid or specific antibody), including: a. asymptomatic infection: the total number of white blood cells was normal or decreased in the early stage of onset and the lymphocyte count was normal or decreased. there was no fever and/or respiratory symptoms and no imaging characteristics of pneumonia. b. asymptomatic nonpneumonia covid-19: normal or decreased white blood cells in the early stages of onset, lymphocyte counts were normal or decreased, and fever and/or respiratory symptoms were observed. there were no imaging characteristics of pneumonia. c. covid-19 pneumonia confirmed cases: in the early stage of onset, the total number of white blood cells was normal or decreased, and the lymphocyte count was normal or decreased. fever and/or respiratory symptoms were present. in addition, imaging characteristics of novel coronavirus pneumonia were found, for example, in the early stage, multiple small patchy shadows and interstitial changes were evident in the extrapulmonary zone. furthermore, multiple ground glass infiltrations and infiltrates could be detected in both lungs. in severe cases, pulmonary consolidation occurred. pleural effusion was rarely seen.inclusion criteria: official members of taihe hospital medical staff. exclusion criteria: people who met the following conditions were excluded: pregnant women, people with severe chronic illnesses who were unable to participate in normal health care work, and those with acute fever and/or respiratory symptoms who were unwilling to receive ifn-α nasal drops or thymosin.infection prevention and control standards first-level protections: wearing work clothes, disposable round caps and disposable medical surgical masks (replaced every 4 hours) and strictly implementing hand hygiene. secondary-level protection: wearing work clothes, protective clothing, medical protective masks, goggles/protective screens, disposable round caps and gloves, double gloves if necessary, shoe covers/boot covers and work shoes/rubber boots. third-level protections: wearing a comprehensive protective mask and gloves (that is, double-layer gloves) on top of the secondary-level protection. interventions low-risk group intervention (2415 cases): in addition to the first-level protections, recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops (beijing tri-prime gene pharmaceutical co., ltd., china, ifn-α 1b, 3000 µ/ml, in-hospital preparation) were administered at a dosage of 2-3 drops/nostril/time, four times/day. the intervention duration was 28 days. high-risk group interventions (529 cases): in addition to the secondary-level protections (and third-level protections, if necessary), recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops were administered as indicated above; additionally, thymosin-α 1 (chengdu shengnuo biotech co., ltd., china, 1.6 mg/tube) was injected subcutaneously at a dosage of 1.6 m/time, 1 time/week. the intervention duration was 28 days.the primary evaluation indicator for this clinical study was whether covid-19 pneumonia had developed by the 28th day after the preventive drug intervention. new-onset clinical symptoms of covid-19 without imaging findings of pneumonia was the secondary evaluation indicator. reported cases of covid-19 pneumonia in wuhan, in hubei province (other than wuhan), and among national medical staff reported in the literature during the same period were used as a control group. additionally, the incidence of adverse reactions after the use of recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops was observed. follow-up observation the participants were closely followed for the 28 days of the intervention. for both groups, if new fevers and/or respiratory symptoms were observed, routine etiological tests (including pharyngeal swab nucleic acid and serum antibody tests) were performed.in the low-risk exposure group, 2415 medical staff members were treated with recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops alone for 28 days. no new cases of covid-19 pneumonia were confirmed during follow-up. new pulmonary imaging was negative, and zero staff members developed fever/respiratory symptoms. as of march 6, no newly confirmed cases of covid-19 pneumonia were found during the follow-up of the participants.in the high-risk exposure group, 529 medical staff members received recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops combined with thymosin α1 for 28 days. during follow-up, no new cases of covid-19 pneumonia were diagnosed. pulmonary imaging of the medical staff was negative at the onset, with 0 confirmed cases of fever/respiratory symptoms. as of march 6, no new confirmed cases of covid-19 pneumonia were found during the follow-up of the participants the control group was drawn from a literature report in the chinese journal of epidemiology [3] on medical staff diagnosed with covid-19 pneumonia nationwide and in wuhan from january 1 through february 11, 2020. chinese medical staff diagnosed with covid-19 pneumonia as reported by the china-world health organization joint inspection expert group as of february 23 were also included in the control group. the 422 medical institutions providing diagnosis and treatment services for patients with covid-19 pneumonia reported that among 3387 medical personnel, there were 1716 confirmed cases, 1070 clinically diagnosed cases, and 157 suspected cases, and 3062 cases came from hubei ( table 2) .according to previous literature, common adverse reactions to ifn spray/nasal drops include flu-like symptoms; slight local irritation, such as burning pain and itching; and rare allergic reactions, such as rash, nausea, chest tightness and flushing. among the nearly 2,000 study participants mentioned above, we did not observe flu-like symptoms. a few of participants experienced transient irritation, such as transient itching, which disappeared without interrupting the intervention.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint .this study preliminarily explores the preventive effect of the use of recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops by medical staff to prevent coronavirus infections over a period of 28 days. the study shows that if standard first-and second-level protections are strictly implemented, the use of ifn-α nasal drops, 2-3 drops per nostril, four times a day can effectively prevent medical staff with low exposure levels (i.e., those not directly exposed to covid-19) from developing the disease. in addition, the study also shows that ifn nasal drops combined with weekly thymosin alpha subcutaneous injections may help prevent medical staff with high exposure levels (i.e., those who are in direct contact with covid-19 patients) from developing the disease.covid-19 is highly contagious and presents a long-term repeated epidemic trend. with an r0 of 2.2-3.7, covid-19 has now expanded to more than 100 countries around the world. in some countries, the epidemic situation has progressed rapidly, and the global pandemic trend is apparent [7] . in addition, the study suggests that compared to people who were infected with sars-cov-2 before january 23, recently infected patients had more subtle symptoms, but the infectivity has not changed significantly, indicating that sars-cov-2 tends to gradually evolve into a low-virulence, highly infectious influenza-like virus [6] . therefore, experts predict that epidemics of the virus sars-cov-2 may recur every autumn and winter, and the virus will coexist with human beings for a long time. for this reason, clinicians and public health scholars currently believe that a broad-spectrum antiviral drug that inhibits coronavirus is essential to prevent recurrent epidemics and mutations both before and after a vaccine becomes available in the marketplace.the keys to preventing and controlling covid-19 are controlling the source of infection, cutting off the route of transmission, and protecting susceptible populations [8, 9] . in accordance with china's "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (fifth edition)", medical personnel working in outpatient departments with suspected or confirmed patients on the ward are equipped with second-level protection for the general diagnosis and treatment of patients. medical staff involved in the treatment of suspected patients using aerosol-generating procedures (such as tracheal intubation and related operations, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, bronchoscopy, sputum suction, throat swab sampling and the use of highspeed equipment (such as drilling, sawing, centrifuging, etc.), should use third-level protection. medical staff in general wards should implement first-level protection and strictly follow standard hand hygiene procedures. hand hygiene should be performed before putting on gloves and after removing gloves. taihe hospital in shiyan city and other hospitals in hubei province have all followed the above-described prevention and control plan throughout the diagnosis and treatment of covid-19. in addition to following these standard protections, the medical staff of taihe hospital in shiyan city were given ifn-α nasal drops with or without subcutaneous thymosin-α1 according to their degree of exposure to covid-19. among the medical staff treated with this protocol, there were no covid-19 cases reported over a 28-day observation period. in contrast, over the same period, more than 100 cases of covid-19 were confirmed among medical staff at other hospitals in hubei province. the results suggest that ifnα nasal drops, especially in combination with thymosin-α1, may improve the protection of medical staff against covid-19 and are an effective supplement to physical protections.vaccines and prophylactic drugs are the two main approaches for protecting susceptible populations. in terms of vaccine development, although more than 20 vaccines are currently being developed worldwide (the chinese academy of military medical sciences has pioneered a small trial to develop a vaccine), conservative estimations indicate that it will be 1-1.5 years before a vaccine is commercially available. additionally, the research team confirmed the existence of two subtypes of sars-cov-2 (the l and s subtypes), and the possibility of new mutations cannot be ruled out [10] . therefore, experts have raised concerns about whether vaccines developed for early viral rna sequences will be able to effectively protect against mutant viruses after they become available on the market. therefore, there is an urgent need for a drug that can effectively prevent coronavirus infection in healthy people to cope with the uncertainty of the 1-to 1.5-year window before a vaccine becomes available on the market and the subsequent decline in the protection rate of early vaccines due to virus mutation.ifn is a type of cytokine produced when a cell is stimulated by a viral infection or other ifn-inducing agent. it is a secreted protein (mainly a glycoprotein) that has many biological functions, including the regulation of innate and acquired immune responses after infection, in addition to a broad spectrum of antiviral, immuneregulating biological functions. ifn is divided into three types: i, ii and iii. type i includes ifn-α and ifn-β; type ii has only one subtype, ifn-γ; and type iii includes ifn-λ 1 (il-29), ifn-λ 2 (il-28a), and ifn-λ (il-28b). at present, the α subtype of type i ifn is generally used for the development of antiviral drugs because of its strong inhibition of viral replication. according to its amino acid sequence, ifn-α has more than 20 subtypes. common ifn-αs that have been developed and marketed for antiviral therapy are ifn-α 1b, ifn-α 2b, ifn-α 2a, and ifn-. the antiviral mechanism of ifn is implemented by activating cell membrane adenylate cyclase on cell surface receptors while promoting the increase of adenylate cyclase, which activates the intracellular antiviral mechanism so that a group of antiviral substances, including viral proteins and enzymes, can be generated. the generation of these substances has the effect of inhibiting virus replication and blocking virus spread.clinically, ifn-α has been used for a long time to prevent and treat the common cold and flu, especially in the early stage of a cold or flu epidemic. ifn-α is effective not only for preventing infection with influenza viruses, rhinoviruses and coronaviruses in susceptible people [11] . since the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak in 2003, the efficacy of ifn-α has attracted researchers' attention. an in vitro test confirmed the efficacy of ifn-α against sars-like coronavirus infections [12] . animal tests have confirmed that ifn-α nasal spray can effectively block or reduce sars-cov infection-related damage in monkeys [13, 14] . in addition, a clinical study confirmed that recombinant human ifn-α 2b spray can reduce infections with common respiratory viruses to varying degrees; in a study of 14,391 healthy people, it was found to have a good safety profile [15] . that trial clearly proved the safety of ifn-α 2b spray. on april 24, 2003, a new recombinant human ifn-α 2b spray was approved by the state food . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 11.20061473 doi: medrxiv preprint and drug administration to enter the clinical trial stage for the prevention of sars pneumonia and will be used for high-risk groups, such as front-line medical staff. this is the first drug approved by the state food and drug administration for the initiation of a clinical trial in high-risk groups since the "green channel" program to prevent and control sars was launched by the chinese food and drug administration. however, since the sars virus was eliminated in 2003, the phase ii-iii clinical study of the prevention of sars virus infection in healthy people was terminated because of insufficient access to subjects.the chinese journal of epidemiology reported data on medical staff diagnosed with covid-19 pneumonia throughout the country and in wuhan for the period of january 1 through february 11, 2020. in addition, the china-world health organization joint inspection expert group reported the numbers of chinese medical staff diagnosed as covid-19 pneumonia as of february 23. among the 422 medical institutions providing diagnosis and treatment services for patients with covid-19 pneumonia, a total of 3019 medical staff became infected with covid-19, and 1716 cases were confirmed [3] . cases of covid-19 in wuhan and hubei starting january 21 are presented in the attached table. our study began on january 25, and there were no new confirmed cases of covid-19 among 2944 medical staff members after 28 days of nasal drop intervention. the 2,415 medical staff members without direct exposure to covid-19 were considered a healthy susceptible population, and the results confirm the effectiveness of ifn-α nasal drops for the prevention of covid-19 in the general healthy population. the 529 medical staff members working in the isolation ward were also free of infections and confirmed cases, proving that the drug can strengthen the protection of medical staff in the isolation ward. these results indicate that for sars-cov-2, which is homologous to the sars coronavirus, recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops can effectively compensate for the deficiency of the physical barrier and improve the nonspecific antiviral effect against sars-cov-2 in susceptible populations, and the mechanisms of this effect are clear. in addition, it can reduce the vulnerability of sars-cov-2 resistance. furthermore, the safety of intranasal ifn-α nasal drops has been effectively evaluated, and no serious adverse reactions or adverse events occurred in the present study. this clinical study has the following characteristics: first, it is the first real-world study of an intervention using ifn-α nose drops to prevent covid-19 pneumonia in healthy susceptible people in the covid-19 epidemic area. second, this study began during the covid-19 outbreak in hubei, in late january 2020. four weeks after the start of the study, the number of covid-19 pneumonia cases in hubei province increased rapidly, while there were no new cases of covid-19 pneumonia among the more than 2,000 subjects in class a tertiary hospitals in the epidemic area who were treated with ifn-α nose drops or ifn-α nose drops combined with thymosin-α1; this finding indicates that ifn-α has a good preventive effect in people who are susceptible to the virus. third, this study divided the test population into a low-risk susceptibility group, comprising those who were not directly exposed to covid-19 pneumonia patients, and a high-risk susceptibility group, comprising those who were directly exposed to covid-19 pneumonia patients, and a single drug (ifn-α nasal drip) or a combination drug (ifn-α nasal drip combined with thymosin subcutaneous injection) was administered to the two groups of subjects with different risks of covid-19 infection. good preventive effects were achieved in both groups. this study provides insights and corresponding data related to the adoption of differentiated drug prevention methods for susceptible populations with different exposure levels.the study has the following limitations: the study was not a clustered, randomized study. the control group used was medical staff with covid-19 pneumonia in the epidemic area during the same period reported in the literature, rather than a strictly parallel, placebo-controlled group. instead, the study represents a real-world effort initiated by researchers in an emergency to verify the efficacy of ifn-α nasal drops for preventing covid-19 pneumonia in healthy but susceptible individuals. the results of the one-month intervention were very satisfactory and achieved the purpose of proof of concept. the results lay a good foundation for subsequent high-quality randomized, parallel, placebo-controlled studies. furthermore, sars-cov-2 nucleic acid tests and serum antibodies tests were not performed for the subjects in this study, so it was impossible to determine whether ifn-α has prevents infection with sars-cov-2 in healthy susceptible persons; instead, the development of covid-19 pneumonia was the main evaluation indicator. the main reason for using this outcome was that no covid-19 diagnostic kits had been approved at the beginning of the study. subsequent high-quality studies should use combined nucleic acid and serum antibody testing to closely screen double-negative healthy susceptible people as enrolled subjects. covid-19 pneumonia was used as the secondary evaluation indicator, while a positive nucleic acid or antibody test within 28 days was used as the primary endpoint for assessing the prevention of viral infection.in summary, in more than 2,000 susceptible health care workers at large class a tertiary hospitals who were at high and low risk of exposure to sars-cov-2 in shiyan city, hubei province, a covid-19 epidemic area, a real-world study of the use of ifnα nose drops with or without thymosin-α 1 as a 28-day intervention shows that low-risk subjects treated with ifn-α nasal drops alone and high-risk subjects treated with ifnα nasal drops combined with thymosin developed zero cases of covid-19 pneumonia. we believe that recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops can be used as an alternative drug to effectively prevent sars-cov-2 virus infection and to protect healthy and susceptible people from viral infection. during the covid-19 epidemic, recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops could play a complementary role along with vaccines, and they are likely to have a suppressive effect on mutant coronaviruses. in the future, recombinant human ifn-α nasal drops could be developed, and larger-scale clinical studies can be conducted to verify the preventive effect of this broad-spectrum antiviral drug. the data for wuhan, hubei, and the entire country come from the analysis of epidemiological characteristics of covid-19 pneumonia in the chinese journal of epidemiology.as of february 23, 3387 medical personnel from 476 medical institutions across the country have been infected with covid-19 pneumonia; there have been 2055 confirmed cases, 1070 clinically diagnosed cases and 157 suspected cases. more than 90% (3062 cases) of infected medical personnel were from hubei.22, 2020 wn wn wn wn wn wnhealthcare practitioners, classified as covid-19 contact subjects, should contact their managers and their hospital's operational hygiene team (hoe team): they generally can continue their activity if they are asymptomatic. furthermore, healthcare practitioners should wear a surgical mask at all times, change it every four hours and monitor themselves by taking their temperature twice a day and identifying any symptoms.in case of symptoms, even of low intensity, professional eviction is immediate, and a sample should be realized quickly and of high priority (results in 4-6 hours) to establish a diagnostic.many medical (maxillofacial surgeons, stomatologists, oral surgeons, ear-nose-throat surgeons, ophthalmologists, anesthetists, radiologists) and non-medical (dentists, dental assistants, orthodontists, oral surgeons, nurse anesthesists, dental technicians, orofacial kinesitherapists and osteopaths) health care practitioners examine and work in the mouths of their patients. more than other specialties, they are at daily risk of exposure to covid-19 whether in hospitals, clinics or private practice [27] [28] [29] [30] .for all these health care professionals, risk is real when realizing: endobuccal examination with the aid of a tongue depressor, examination mirror, forceps or probe; anterior rhinoscopies; nasal fibroscopies and endoscopies of the upper aerodigestive tract; oral and nasal intubations; dental and prosthetic care; dental extractions; surgical procedures of the oral cavity (teeth, jaws, face).these advices are based on the recommendations of the french society of hospital hygiene (sfhh, march 4, 2020) and the guidelines of the department of infectious risk prevention of the hospitals of paris-public assistance (aphp, march 6, 2020) [27, 29] .to be effective, the usual protective masks, known as ''surgical anti-projection masks'', must in france comply with the european safety norm ''nf en 14683''. they limit the aerial diffusion of potentially infectious particles, but should imperatively be renewed every 4 hours, to guarantee their effectiveness. it should be noted that the presence of a beard reduces the effectiveness of any mask [31] .the surgical mask should be reserved to: 3.1.2. wearing an ffp2 filter mask ffp2 filter masks allow for a better protection of caregivers from contamination by airborne spread of very small infectious agents. the correct positioning of the ffp2 filter mask and its correct use require some precautions (https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=zi2-chcyram) and it is more difficult to tolerate for several hours compared to surgical mask.ffp2 masks are mandatory for:medical and non-medical oral healthcare professionals, giving oral cavity cares (minor surgery in their care room, clinics, hospitals or operating room); medical and non-medical oral healthcare professionals, working in contact with a contagious patient (tuberculosis, measles, chicken pox. . .) as part of the ''air precaution''; medical and non-medical oral healthcare professionals giving cares to confirmed covid-19 patients or highly symptomatic suspected cases (unexplained acute respiratory distress).in all other cases, wearing a mask is not recommended [32] .in stage 3 epidemic phase, any practitioner specialized in oral health (naturally exposed to the risk contamination) must be equipped with a ffp2 filter mask.protective glasses or large face shields protect against projections of the virus on the ocular conjunctiva [30] . their use is systematically recommended for any procedure at risk of ocular projection of biological liquid, regardless of the patient's status [33] .this concerns all practitioners working in the oral cavity, and all procedures ranging from a simple examination of a tooth, to that of the oral cavity, the oropharynx, the larynx, the eye, considering the risks of coughing and nauseous reflex at the time of examination.hand cleaning should include all fingers, digital spaces, palms, backs of hands and clipped nails. it is essential to remember the evident effectiveness of ''basic'' and ''regular'' hand washing with soap and water (for one minute): well-conducted hand washing with liquid soap from a clean dispenser for one minute. drying will be done with a clean paper towel (cloth towels are generally prohibited) [34, 35] .hydroalcoholic solutions (has) are aseptic skin solutions. they have bactericidal, virucidal and fungicidal properties, but no cleaning effect. therefore, it is good to remember that they should be applied to the entire skin covering of dry and clean hands. friction with sha should not be exclusive but should be regularly combined with the ''basic'' and ''regular'' hand washing during the day. their composition must comply with current regulations, i.e. no endocrine disruptors such as bisphenol, triclosan or triclocarban [36] .hand washing (soap and/or sha) is indicated systematically between the examination of two patients, after removing gloves, after going to the bathroom, after blowing one's nose or sneezing, after opening or closing a door, before the meals and after leaving public transport (bicycles, bus, subways, metro, taxis, planes, boats).the gloves protect the practitioner in case of contact with potentially contaminated organic secretions, even more so if his hands have skin lesions that could become over-infected [30] . finger pads are considered insufficient. wearing gloves is recommended if there is a risk of contact with contaminated body fluids and in case of skin lesions on the hands.other recommendations, mainly based on common sense, could help prevent transmission of the virus and improve patient management [37, 38] : secure mask and sha stocks to prevent them from being stolen; regularly aerate enclosed spaces frequented by the public (reception, waiting room, consulting room, bedroom); keep a safety distance of 1 to 2 meters between 2 people; avoid delays in his consultations so as to not increase the number of patients in the waiting room; leave bottles of sha available in the waiting rooms of offices or hospitals, and in all places where there are patients; avoid any contact with patients or colleagues (handshakes, hugs. . .); prefer single-use disposable cups and cutlery sets at coffee breaks and lunches; prohibit patients visits by minors; avoid the presence of any person who is not part of the care team and whose presence is not essential to the patient's care (visitor, accompanying an autonomous adult patient, etc.); do not put your hands to your face during the examination; remember to clean multimedia screens and keyboards; between two patients and at the end of the consultation, systematically bio-clean the equipment and objects entering into contact with the patient (chin, hands, etc.), using a usual disinfectant detergent containing at least one quaternary ammonium (support and handles of x-ray equipment, chair arms, door handles, etc.); if the examination or the surgery of a patient, infected with or suspected of being infected with covid-19 (cough, dyspnea, fever. . .), is not urgently required, this should be postponed. if it is only a suspicion, the practitioner should take advices from an infectious disease specialist near to its place of exercise. indeed, the surgical masks available in the operating rooms do not sufficiently protect surgeons from these virulent microorganisms. the risk of contamination would be increased by the projections of motor sprays, turbines drills and bone burs, piezoelectric scalpel, fluid leaking from intubation probes. . .if possible, the procedure should be postponed for 14 days and ambulatory care should be privileged [39] .the corridors and elevators should be kept free of people during the transfer. the patient must wear a surgical mask during transfer to the operating room. transfer and operating room staff members should be equipped with a surgical mask.limitation of the number of people involved in the patient care, ideally without leaving the room or exchanging personnel during the entire procedure.respect of hygiene rules: mask, hand hygiene (with the use of hydro-alcoholic solutions), protective glasses for the surgical teams (including the anesthetic team) and surface hygiene between operations. ventilation of the room should be ideally under negative pressure or interrupted. a room should be isolated and reserved if possible. otherwise, the operation should be cancelled. disposal of contaminated waste at the end of the procedure according to the covid-19 rules established by the hygiene teams and the establishment's infectiology team.sha dispensers available in all hospital reception areas (entrance hall, rooms. . .).limitation of visits to one person, with surgical mask to be worn as soon as entering the hospital.several guidelines have been reported by the french national agency public health [19, 40] :postpone the procedure until the patient is completely healed, if possible; prefer ambulatory procedures (return to the initial service if possible); during patient transfer: in addition to the precautions cited in section ''4'', the staff members in charge of patient transfer and reception in the operating room should be equipped with an ffp2 filter mask; in the operating room: in addition to the precautions cited in section ''4'', respect of the rules of hygiene: hand hygiene (with recourse to hydro-alcoholic solutions), protective glasses and ffp2 filter mask for the surgical teams (including the anesthetic team) and bio-cleaning of equipment and objects; in the hospital units, in addition to the precautions cited in section ''4'', limitation of visits to one person who will have to wear an ffp2 type mask. preparing the return home with 14 days of isolation; some recent observations are interesting and promising. for example, hollander and carr have reported the benefits of telemedicine in the management of the covid-19 crisis [41] . combining antiviral and anti-inflammatory treatments has been recently proposed [42] but serious adverse events related to the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported in both young patients with possible and confirmed covid-19, which has conducted the french ministry of health and research to contra-indicate the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in this pathology [43] .for practitioners working in a private structure, with less space to control and fewer patients, the implementation of these recommendations seems easier.for practitioners working in a hospital structure, specific protocols may have been put in place by the local operational hygiene teams. these will need to be approximated where appropriate.finally, the precautionary principles mentioned above will remain valid for future microbial agents to which practitioners specialized in oral health will, probably more than others, always be exposed [44] .this article did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.the authors have not supplied their declaration of competing interest.d uring the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), pandemic elective surgical cases have been canceled in many institutions to conserve personal protective equipment (ppe) and prevent spread of the virus. it is essential for the medical community to have a full understanding and deep appreciation for the distinctive role of electroconvulsive therapy (ect) and its colossal value of restoring function and maintaining quality of life. electroconvulsive therapy is lifesaving for many patients with psychosis and/or major depression. 1, 2 during this pandemic, it will be necessary for the ect practitioner, with guidance from professional associations and in collaboration with their available healthcare resources, to develop guidelines focusing on determining the necessity to perform ect in the safest manner. 2 early guidance from the anesthesia patient safety foundation and other sources regarding airway management in covid-19positive patients has recommended rapid sequence intubation and avoidance of mask ventilation to reduce the risk of droplet spread and aerosolization of virus. 3 given the penetrance of covid-19 in the new york metropolitan area, the weill cornell medicine newyork-presbyterian hospital anesthesiology and psychiatry departments collaborated to develop guidelines to ensure that the patients who were in urgent need of ectwere provided that care while minimizing exposure to the staff and potential spread of disease to other ect patients.the psychiatry department established a review process to confirm that each patient had an urgent need for ect. the department of anesthesiology decided against repeated intubation and extubation or insertion and removal of supraglottic devices for ect treatment because these procedures could potentially result in a greater risk of aerosolization than low tidal volume mask ventilation. the dental and oral surgery infection control literature recommends reducing nasopharyngeal viral burden with povidone-iodine nasal swabs and either 1.0% to 1.5% peroxide or 0.2% povidone mouth rinse, because of the susceptibility of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars cov-2) to oxidizing agents. 4, 5 chlorhexidine is not as effective. 6 based on this literature, a multifaceted program was developed, the highlights of which are illustrated in figure 1 .before ect treatment, each patient is screened for symptoms of covid-19. povidone-iodine nasal swabs and hydrogen peroxide oral rinsing are performed and have been added to the preprocedure orders on the inpatient unit. a surgical mask is placed on each patient, and the patient performs hand hygiene before leaving the inpatient unit. in the preprocedural area, a maximum of 2 patients are allowed, each separated by 6 ft, and each accompanied by a mental health worker. the preprocedure checklist ( fig. 2) is reconfirmed before each treatment. in the procedure room, all personnel are required to wear ppe including an n-95 respirator mask, surgical mask with face shield, welders-type face shield, isolation gown, and double gloves. personal protective equipment has been donned under observation by another provider, and an n-95 self-fit test is confirmed. each patient is asked to insert the bite block into their mouth, and an anesthesia mask with a high-efficiency particulate air (hepa) filter at the immediate mask outlet is applied and held in place with a head strap. the patient is then preoxygenated while an anesthesia provider inserts a peripheral intravenous (iv). jackson-rees circuit is used for oxygen delivery because of the ease of spontaneous ventilation compared with an ambu bag. the lowest possible inflow of oxygen is selected, typically 2 to 4 l/min. after induction of anesthesia and application of electrical stimulus, positive pressure ventilation is administered at the anesthesiologist's discretion with one practitioner ensuring good seal of the facemask and the other provider delivering low tidal volume ventilation as needed to maintain adequate saturation. upon return of spontaneous ventilation, the circuit, anesthesia mask, and bite block are removed and placed in a biohazard bag to be discarded. a surgical mask is then placed back on the patient. doffing of protective gown and gloves and hand hygiene is performed with direct observation. the provider's n-95 mask and surgical mask with face shield remain in place for the day, whereas the welder type face shield is cleaned with sanitizing wipe after each patient. as the patient is transported to the postanesthesia care unit (pacu) by the anesthesiologist and the psychiatrist, the procedure room is decontaminated by a dedicated team. all staff wear full ppe. supplemental oxygen is administered via nasal cannula under the surgical facemask only if necessary to maintain o 2 saturation above 90%. upon patient discharge to the floor, the room is decontaminated.several challenges have been encountered in implementing this ect process. these challenges include the availability of ppe and the need to wear an n95 mask covered by a surgical mask for the duration of the treatment day. in addition, because securing hepa filters for mask ventilation has been problematic, highquality heat and moisture exchanger (hme)s have been used in place of hepa filters when necessary. facility changes necessary to adapt existing practice have included creating appropriate donning and doffing areas, and visual educational guides have been placed throughout the ect suite for health care providers to reference. whereas anesthesia for ect had been performed by a single anesthesiologist in the past, the donning and doffing of ppe in addition to the necessity of ensuring complete mask fit if positive pressure ventilation is used require 2 anesthesia providers to be available at all times. to maximize adherence to our practice changes and establish familiarity with the unique aspects of each patient, the decision was to use same team of anesthesia providers for ect during the pandemic. this practice, while ensuring continuity, has been stressful for the clinical team, which provides anesthetic care multiple times a week to a population of patients with a very high potential penetrance of covid-19. in fact, a few of our patients have developed covid-19 symptoms and tested positive during their treatment. to this date, our treatment team remains asymptomatic. although all psychiatric inpatients are required to wear masks at all times and practice social distancing, the structure of communal living on the inpatient unit remains a concern for spread. the current policy now provides for all patients to be tested on admission, and all ect patients are tested weekly for surveillance.these recommendations can easily be applied to the outpatient community setting for ect. with the increasing availability of rapid covid-19 testing, patients can be screened within 24 to 48 hours before their procedures. this extra layer of safety can help prevent the spread of virus within a facility. in addition, n-95 masks can be covered with a surgical mask, enabling the use of the n-95 mask for an entire day or even up to a week if it is also protected with the welder type face shield. developing a team-oriented approach for practicing and observing donning and doffing ppe, maintaining social distance as much as possible between both staff and patients, and being deliberate about decontaminating areas with appropriate quaternary ammonium/isopropyl alcohol/hydrogen peroxide wipes are feasible in the outpatient setting and incorporate low-cost steps to ensure the safe performance of ect during the covid-19 pandemic. with respect to airway management of the patient during general anesthesia for ect, we prefer the jackson-rees circuit over the bag-mask ventilation. the jackson-rees circuit in general is less expensive than the bag-mask ventilation, and in addition, it allows better control of the pressure that is transmitted to the patient's respiratory tract. the most challenging aspect of the airway management in the outpatient setting, with respect to our recommendations, is the provision of a second anesthesia clinician to ensure a tight mask fit to minimize and avoid droplet or aerosol transmission of the virus. to this end, it would be reasonable and acceptable for the anesthesiologist to train a second clinical provider in the ect suite, such as an registered nurse (rn), physician assistant (pa), nurse practitioner (np), and the psychiatrist, to assist with securing a tight mask fit.the global impact of the novel coronavirus 2019 (covid- 19) has had severe implications for frontline health care providers (hcps). the safety of hcps requires consistent and adequate use of personal protective equipment (ppe). in particular, the use of facial protective equipment against aerosolized transfer of covid-19 droplets is a key recommendation worldwide. 1 it requires the use of a protective filtering respirator such as a n95 mask, eye protection such as glasses, fitted facial shields, and/or specially designed protective suits. facilities have noted an attendant increase in medical device-related pressure injuries (mdrpi) among frontline hcp wearing facial ppe protection that requires risk mitigation. guidelines are being rapidly developed all over the world to ensure that the best solution for each setting can be implemented.the staff of the king hamad university hospital (khuh) includes many ethnicities and various skin types. as in many other facilities, these hcps have been wearing ppe with n95 masks in high risk areas since february 2020 as protection against covid-19 (first confirmed case, february 21, 2020). 2 early on, the pressure injury prevention and nursing quality committees of the khuh agreed that ppe-related pressure and skin injury protection of all staff fell under their purview. bundled pressure injury prevention interventions 3 such as the intact skin bundle are supported by the best evidence for patient pressure injury prevention; the use of these bundles is well documented in high-risk settings. accordingly, the nursing quality committee advised the pressure injury prevention committee to follow this approach in developing and testing a skin care bundle specifically applicable to the work environment of khuh for those hcps providing acute covid-19 care.a mnemonic-based approach 4 was used to enhance knowledge retention, with a one-word reminder of the importance of self-care: help. this mnemonic was designed to help hcps remember the new rules and procedures that had been implemented in a very short time. this led to the creation of the help enabler, which emphasizes 10 evidence-based points to improve hcp prevention of facial mask injuries ( figure 1 ). the key message is to help yourself first, before helping others. elements such as sufficient hydration 5 and nutrition 6 to support a 4-hour shift, emptying bladders before donning ppe, 7 keeping an eye on the amount of time spent in ppe, 1, 3, 8 good skin hygiene, 9 and the importance of mask leak tests 1 form the basis of this care bundle. additional recommendations include using an acrylate lotion 10 or a protective dressing 11 for facial protection under ppe.because adhesives increase the risk of skin stripping and subsequent skin tear injuries, 12 the use of an atraumatic silicone dressing on the face also was proposed. the pressure injury prevention committee repurposed a readily available dressing for facial pressure injury prevention in the absence of existing evidence. however, the team had to establish that this use would not compromise the n95 seal efficacy and facial skin would remain intact under the dressing. further, because this study had to address skin safety for all staff, skin type variation had to be taken into account; for this, researchers used the fitzpatrick skin type classification.the fitzpatrick skin type classification 13 was developed in the 1980s to measure the impact of sunburn injury on different skin types, and is deemed the criterion standard for skin type classification. the classification comprises six skin types ranging from light skin (type 1, which burns easily and never tans, and type 2, that usually burns and figure 1 . help enabler tans slightly) to olive/medium brown skin (type 3, that initially burns and tans well, and type 4, that usually tans) and finally to dark brown and black skin (types 5 and 6). 13 in this study no hcp with type 1 (extremely light caucasian skin) could be included because there are no nursing staff with that skin type at khuh.this prospective observational cohort study was divided into five steps to establish the appropriateness, efficacy, and safety of each phase. it involved wear-time tests culminating in a final 4-hour crossover experiment. developing the protocol and assembling key departments (nursing, infection control, quality assurance representatives, covid-19 hospital committee) to discuss and approve the proposed skin protection protocol took time; this practice innovation began in march 2020 and was tested in the first 2 weeks of april 2020.institutional review board approval was received because the study involved human participants (reference #20-334). because n95 mask wear is mandatory for covid-19 frontline care provider safety, any facial injuries sustained as a result were not deemed an ethical objection for this experiment. essentially, facial injury was the real-life risk this study tried to mitigate. participants signed an informed consent form to take part in the study and for all photos to be used in subsequent publication with no parts of faces obscured. phase 1. ascertain how to repurpose an atraumatic silicone border dressing (mepilex border sacrum, mölnlycke, norcross, georgia) to cover bony facial prominences without compromising the n95 particulate respirator and surgical mask fit (3m type 1860, minneapolis, minnesota) using only one small dressing per day for the duration of a shift (this allows for the most stringent interpretation of infection control practice).phase 2. fit eight participating staff members with various skin types who volunteered for this project with a protective dressing layer. have infection control staff conduct a n95 fit test according to international best practice. phase 3. continue the use of facial protection for 1 hour after the fit test and examine the condition of the facial skin thereafter.phase 4. determine the efficacy and stability of the dressing underneath a fitted n95 mask after 3 hours and examine facial quality thereafter. (only one participant was included in this phase.) phase 5. compare the difference in facial skin quality and metabolic oxygen saturation values (spo 2 ) as determined by a fingertip applied pulse oximeter with and without facial protection applied in a 4-hour shift period on a normal working day among five participants. this test took place over 2 days in a work environment not actively caring for patients who were covid-19 positive.facial skin evaluation and spo 2 values before and after removal of the mask were repeated.during the study development period (march 2020), relevant guidelines on this topic were scarce. a process of creative problem solving was therefore followed to determine how facial skin injuries in health care providers in the authors' setting could be addressed in the most efficient and cost-effective manner. because staff would have to remove the protective dressing at the end of each shift, it was clear that any product with aggressive adhesion would soon strip the outer layer of the skin 12 and that the additional pressure exerted by the n95 mask on the barrier would enhance adhesion. pain on removal and skin injury over time would be likely. 12 therefore, an atraumatic dressing was required.at the khuh, an atraumatic silicone sacrum dressing is routinely used for pressure injury prevention of high-risk hospitalized patients 11 as part of the standard pressure injury prevention skin care bundle. 3 it is the only type of atraumatic silicone dressing available in the authors' setting; each dressing is similar in cost to a take-away coffee. the aim was to repurpose a single 10 x 10 dressing for frontline hcps during each shift to provide facial protection and limit cost for the institution. earlier testing revealed that the dressing edge could catch on to the n95 mask sponge and create an interlocking mechanism to position two offloading areas next to each other rather than on top of each other. this enhances the distribution of pressure over a larger area and prevents additional pressure on any given area by stacking multiple layers. the rationale was that if pressure was equally distributed over the nose with the interlocking fit of the n95 mask sponge on the dressing edge, the cheekbones were only in need of friction control (maintaining mask integrity without adding bulk). further, this placement was successful even with some small facial hair stubble present on the cheeks and chins of male staff members; the dressing sat snugly despite being applied over chin hair, and removal was painless.there was a square piece left for the forehead that could be used as pressure relief underneath protective eye shields or goggles resting on the forehead. two additional small pieces remained to offset the pressure from the elastic band of the n95 mask touching the sides of the face close to the ears ( figure 3 ).to ensure each person uses the correct n95 mask size, a standardized initial fit test in accordance with international guidelines is required. the khuh infection control team conducted the leak tests in late january and early february using the hood method. 14, 15 the method involves placing a see-through polymer hood with an applicator window in front of the face and a tight-fitting seal around the hcp's neck. to determine a participant's individual sensitivity, a distinct smell (denatonium benzoate) is serially sprayed into the hood to determine at what point (after how many sprays) a smell is observed. next, the hood is removed, and the participant is instructed to rinse his/her mouth and wait 15 minutes. then a n95 mask is donned and the procedure repeated. the mask fit is deemed effective when no smell is observed if half of the sprays required during the sensitivity test are applied. the infection control team documents each time a person passes the fit test (smell only observed after more than the threshold number of sprays). a person who fails the fit test is fitted with a different sized mask and the spray test is repeated until passing; however, it only needs to be completed once per person. 14 leak testing is the responsibility of each staff member and involves positioning the n95 mask on the head and fitting it around the nose by applying two fingers on either side of the nose and pressing the mask tight while breathing in. next, hands are placed over the middle of the mask (without adjusting its position) and the staff member exhales sharply. if air escapes from the sides of the mask, the mask should be adjusted and all of the steps repeated until exhaled air exits only through the middle of the mask and no leaks occur on inhalation or exhalation. this process is repeated twice every single time an n95 mask is applied. 16 where limited reuse of n95 masks is practiced, it is done in accordance with the khuh infection control protocols governing mask functionality/ cross-contamination prevention and not to exceed five uses per person. 17 eight volunteer staff members (four males and four females) with various fitzpatrick skin types were included in this phase. two work in the ed, two in icu, one in a male surgical ward, and three in the wound care unit. all participants had previously passed the official n95 fit test. all staff previously wore n95 masks without skin protection. participants applied the repurposed, separated atraumatic dressing segments on their own faces after an initial demonstration. the application took less than 5 minutes, inclusive of the time required to cut up the dressing. they then donned n95 masks and conducted manual leak tests. 16 all eight participants achieved the same mask positioning with the applied dressing beneath their mask as without.infection control then conducted another fit test. staff all reported only a slight smell after 4 sprays, and this was consistent up to 6 sprays. therefore, 95% blockage was achieved with this mask configuration. this outcome was certified by infection control as conforming to international standards-that is, all eight participants passed the fit test while using the atraumatic dressing.staff were instructed to maintain that exact ppe configuration for the next hour without repositioning or removal. once the hour was over, they had to remove the mask and the facial dressing themselves, take a photograph of their face, and present it to the research team. all photos were time stamped to ensure masks were not removed before the period was completed.staff also had to report on this experience compared with their previous experience/original fit tests. there were no negative comments from the staff, despite application over hair in some men. in fact, some staff noticed that the nose dressing prevented mask movement they had previously experienced when looking up or down. this interlock also helped to minimize the perpendicular pressure of the n95 mask exerted on the nasal crest; all participants commented on improved nose comfort, as well as the absence of facial irritation caused by the direct contact of mask fibers to the cheeks. comfort underneath the chin was also noted; itching and moisture vapor build-up appeared to be absent in this configuration. when asked if the dressing was worth the application time, the answer was a unanimous yes.the immediate facial condition of all staff with protective dressings can be seen in figure 4 . those with fitzpatrick skin types 2 and 3 (lighter skin tone, n = 2) showed a bit of visible erythema over the bony cheek area. no marked erythema or pressure was visible on any of the other participants (n = 6). no erythema or pressure marks were visible on any staff member on the sides of their faces where the top applied elastic band of the n95 mask is placed.one staff member with fitzpatrick type 2 skin was willing to test the mask without facial protection for 2 hours on a different day, before the leak tests were conducted. researchers believed that this skin type would show visible injury most quickly. the next day, this participant wore the mask for 3 hours with facial protection applied. the results of this trial are depicted in figure 5 .mask wear without skin protection resulted in friction and chafing with erythema visible over and along the bony prominences of the cheekbones. a blanchable area was visible on the bridge of the nose after the 2-hour test. this finding is consistent with extant literature reporting that pressure injury can occur in as little as 2 hours. 8, 11 after testing with facial protection, slight erythema was again present over the bony prominences of the check bones with only a little redness on the left lateral side of the nose. however, these changes were much less noticeable than before, without additional friction or chafing areas present, signifying good mask fit with minimal movement during the 3-hour period. all erythema visibly diminished after 1 hour.this experimental test took place over 2 consecutive days with five volunteer staff members (one male, four female) with skin types from fair to dark brown on the fitzpatrick scale. researchers theorized that skin damage or injury would be easier to observe in females, who have thinner skin than males. 18 if female skin was protected by the selected method, it could reasonably be assumed that males would be protected as well. female nurses also outnumber male nurses in this setting and are therefore more likely to participate in direct care and require protection.on the first day of this phase, the n95 mask was worn for 4 hours (no eating, drinking, or bathroom breaks allowed) with protection prepared and applied by each participant. comfort was self-assessed by participants. at the end of the 4 hours, three participants felt that they could have continued for an hour or two more. slight sweating was present, with indentations visible on all of the participants' faces. only one (fitzpatrick type 2) presented with slight erythema; the least damage was visible on the darkest skin.pulse oximetry saturation levels of each participant were also taken before and after the test. all participants lost between 1% and 3% spo 2 in this test, with a mean loss of 2% metabolic spo 2 (table 1 ). this is in line with extant studies on n95 mask use that confirms overall oxygen intake is diminished during wear, even with a perfectly fitting mask. 19, 20 on the next day, the n95 mask was worn without any protection ( table 2) . each participant positioned their own mask and it was again worn for 4 hours without any eating, drinking, or bathroom breaks. all four female participants battled with discomfort; pruritus on the mask edges was noted after the first hour. all participants reported that they were relieved when the mask could be removed; none wished to continue wearing the mask for a longer time.less moisture build-up was visible compared with the day before, but skin indentations were present on all five faces. the lighter skin tones appeared to have more pressure-related impact than those with darker skin tones. all four females had various levels of skin erythema, with the fair skin most damaged of all. the participant with the darkest skin had the least visible damage; one small darkened area was visible that fully recovered in 1 hour. of the female participants, three continued to have signs of indentation and erythema an hour after the test, with the fair-skinned participant least recovered compared with results from the day before.with regards to metabolic spo 2 on the second day, three participants retained the exact same starting value, and one gained 1%. the remaining participant had a 2% spo 2 loss. the mean loss was 0.2% metabolic spo 2 . figure 6 depicts spo 2 readings taken from the same participant before and after both 4-hour tests.this article describes a holistic approach to facial skin injury prevention for hcps to "help" staff to embrace a longer periods of ppe use (with each participant serving as their own control) produced a distinct difference between mask wear with and without protection, including improved facial condition and comfort without compromising mask seal. three possible mechanisms of injury were identified in this experiment. the first was associated with direct high pressure causing skin indentations (ie, from mask edges, nose fitting device, and straps); the second a diffuse erythema in a linear pattern associated with lower pressure with or without friction (ie, mask edges moving). both were more pronounced when no facial protection was present. the third was related to sweating: slight localized sweating underneath the mask was more pronounced when skin protection was used, attributable to the better integrity of the acquired seal. associated moisture build-up from sweat is therefore a risk with this ppe configuration; accordingly, the use of a skin-protective acrylate 10 followed by meticulous facial care 9 is recommended for off-duty hcps. all participants cut up the dressing into segments with ease and could easily apply the dressing to their faces with the use of a mirror. after donning this protective layer, the integrity of the n95 mask was also easily established, with all staff passing both the leak and the fit tests.the most crucial safety consideration for frontline providers during the pandemic lies in the order of ppe removal; it must be doffed in the exact reverse order it was donned. 1 bathroom and eating breaks cannot be factored into shifts because the proper reverse removal of layers of ppe takes more time than application to prevent contamination and risk to others in the facility. 1, 7 all body ppe must be removed first, followed by a thorough handwashing, 21 after which the n95 masks are removed by touching only the elastic bands, 1 and the handwashing procedure is repeated before the facial protective dressings can be removed. essentially, staff can greatly increase the risk for covid-19 self-contamination if they touch their faces before all contaminated ppe is safely removed. 1 this stringent ppe process requires heightened staff awareness of this vital safety precaution, reinforcing the help enabler's focus on adequate nutrition and hydration in off duty times and recommendations to limit excessive amounts of fluids immediately before a shift. given these self-care strategies, a 4-hour fasting period is feasible.the key is to plan and shift nutrition and hydration activities to directly after and/or no less than an hour before a shift. staff with medical conditions who cannot adhere to a 4-hour fasting or bathroom break-free shift should be deemed at high risk for contagion not only to themselves, but also others using the same facilities.at least one facility has already trialed this approach with success. for each 4-hour shift of frontline staff in full ppe in wuhan, china, 7 touching masks, eating, drinking, and bathroom breaks were prohibited. this simple process ensured zero staff contracted covid-19. 7 their experience provided the rationale for the 4-hour wear test conducted in this study.a different cross-sectional study 22 (n = 4,306) from china on facial injuries sustained by hcps when using ppe also identified this 4-hour cut-off time. researchers found a statistically significant difference in the number of injuries sustained if hcps exceeded this time frame in ppe. 22 skin protection under masks is therefore a necessity because shift lengths can be unpredictable based on ppe supplies 23 but also because facial injuries have been noted in shorter shift periods 22 and within 2 hours in this study.it is of vital importance that hours of ppe wear (regardless of facial protection applied) be documented 3 to prevent prolonged exposure, excessive moisture build-up, and skin breakdown. based on the experience of aggressive frontline covid-19 care in wuhan, 7, 22 it is recommended that each 8-hour shift be divided between two teams where one team does the work requiring n95 mask wear (in the dirty/infected area) while the rest works in the clean area. after 4 hours inside without eating, drinking, or a bathroom break in full ppe, the two teams switch. this prevents exhaustion, mask hypoxia, 19 and protects the skin of hcps 7,22 with minimal impact on staffing.the most interesting finding of this study was the drop in participant spo 2 values by 2% on average when using the protective dressing underneath the n95 mask. this corresponds with tight-fitting mask wear studies conducted during flu outbreaks. 19, 20 it is possible that the protective dressing increases the mask's seal stability while mitigating pressure-related skin damage. critically, extended periods of n95 mask wear may be related to mask-induced hypoxia in hcps; 19, 20 hypoxia is an established major risk factor for pressure-related skin breakdown. 3 mitigation of this concern can be achieved by the split-shift approach previously described. 7,22the reduced spo 2 finding was not the case with n95 mask use alone. this may indicate that despite passing the fit and leak tests, the discomfort from mask wear results in participants occasionally moving their faces to relieve pressure and facial irritation, which could result in small leaks. the participant with type 2 skin most likely had a leak present during the test where the protective layer was not applied that was sustained during the test by mouth, chin, and facial movements. this participant had a 1% increase in spo 2 and the most pronounced skin damage present after the test.mask discomfort may therefore add to the iatrogenic risk of contracting covid-19 infection. the same risk applies to staff with any facial injury resulting in a skin breach, because pain may compromise proper n95 mask seal. adding repeated pressure to an existing facial injury has the potential to exacerbate minor injuries and lead to deeper dermal injuries; this is why patients are carefully positioned to displace pressure to other body parts once a stage 1 pressure injury is present. 3 this small sample was recruited to serve in a pilot project to determine if the application of a facial protective layer could mitigate facial injury risk among n95 mask wearers. more research using different border dressings would be beneficial to expand the evidence base on this topic and give providers more options. the staff at khuh is also mainly of west and east asian descent, hence the lack of a nurse with a fitzpatrick skin type 1. this is a major limitation because this skin type is usually the most sensitive to injury and skin insults. further, although the fitzpatrick scale is the criterion standard for sun-related skin damage, it may not fully predict pressure and shear damage on skin because deeper injuries may not be immediately visible. further testing in institutions that have hcps with fitzpatrick type 1 skin is warranted.further work is also needed on n95 mask wear and the impact of reduced spo 2 on fatigue, headache, and concentration to determine the optimal safety balance between skin risk, metabolic stress, and personal protection.early on in the covid-19 health crisis, the need to protect the skin of hcps was prioritized at the khuh. at that time, there were no educational resources available to guide practice. (some enablers have since been released, beginning in april 2020. 24, 25 ) the creative stepwise process of skin protection described in this article was developed with readily available products and participants who volunteered to help develop a safe solution for skin injury prevention.at roughly the same cost as a daily take-away coffee, a repurposed atraumatic silicone border dressing can support skin health underneath a tight-fitting mask. by cutting it into segments and carefully applying it without creases over the nose, cheekbones, and sides of the face, hcps can achieve pressure redistribution and facial skin protection. this method does not appear to interfere with n95 mask integrity and in fact may provide additional leak protection by securing the mask more firmly in position, ultimately protecting against accidental viral transfer to the face. 1 accordingly, these authors recommend that hcps add an atraumatic silicone border dressing as a safe and beneficial option to protect facial skin under ppe. however, no dressing by itself (regardless of testing) can provide complete care of facial skin underneath n95 masks. it is critical that hcps implement a comprehensive skin care approach. frontline staff who "help" themselves by taking responsibility for their own skin care, who are well prepared, well rested, fed, and hydrated can more safely take care of others.it is the authors' hope that this creative evidence-based clinical facial protection solution and help enabler will be of assistance to their global colleagues in the fight against covid-19. • supplemental table. application of the protective dressingstep 1: hand preparation handwashing according to correct technique, 40 to 60 secondsstep 2: prepare dressing by cutting it in required segments 1-7step 3: apply dressing segments in this order: 1) on the nose 2, 3) sides of face 4) under chinstep 4: apply the rest of the dressing on areas in need of added relief: 5) forehead (thicker or thinner as needed) 6, 7) sides of earsstep 5: apply n95 mask and other protective equipment over dressingstep 6: removal handwashing for 40 to 60 seconds remove the mask using elastics only and discard properly wash hands again, 40 to 60 seconds remove all protective dressings in reverse order (7 through 1) wash hands and face and apply moisturizer on both follow the help enabler for total self-and skincare during the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic in 2020, masks have become one of the most indispensable pieces of personal protective equipment. on 20 january 2020, prof. nanshan zhong, the head of the high-level expert group appointed by the national health commission of the people's republic of china to fight the novel coronavirus, emphasized the importance of wearing masks in an interview with china central television [1] . on 22 january 2020, the spokesperson of the national health commission in the state council information office of the people's republic of china advocated the "mask civilization" and pointed out that "wearing masks is not only for the protection of ourselves, but also for the protection of others" [2] . however, according to the data publicly reported by the ministry of industry and information technology of the people's republic of china, the production of masks in china was only 8 million per day on 23 january 2020 and reached 10 million per day by 2 february 2020. given china's population of over 1.4 billion people, the huge mask demand-supply gap is obvious. according to technical guidance on the selection and use of masks for different population to prevent novel coronavirus, which was released by the national health commission of the people's republic of china on 4 february 2020, people in supermarkets, shopping malls, airports, subways, indoor offices, and other low-risk places are recommended to wear disposable medical masks or surgical masks to prevent the spread of the covid-19 virus [3] . as a result, medical masks, which were originally designed for use in clinics and hospitals, are now widely used and appear in stations, airports, markets, parks, and other public places. the technical guideline also indicated that during the covid-19 pandemic, the use of masks may be appropriately extended (including the duration of single use and times of repeated use) if it is safe to do so. in particular, people in low-risk places are recommended to reuse masks. however, the existing national standards and local standards for masks mainly focus on the performance of disposable masks, and there are no specific requirements or instructions on mask performance for multiple uses, including the duration of a single use, disinfection methods, and the number of times a mask can safely be reused. how can masks be efficiently sanitized for multiple uses during the covid-19 pandemic? are masks damaged during decontamination treatment? how many times can masks be decontaminated by appropriate methods? in fact, there is no scientific theory or experimental data support to answer these questions. during the mask shortage, most people-including front-line medical staff-have been spontaneously reusing masks several times, which eases the tension between supply and demand to a certain extent; however, this practice might also increase these people's risk of exposure. therefore, user-friendly technologies and methods are urgently needed to effectively extend the service time of masks.masks, including disposable medical masks, surgical masks, medical protective masks, and dust masks, are usually made of non-woven polypropylene fabric with electrostatic properties that enhance particle capture. the electrostatic charge keeps airborne particles out by drawing them onto the fiber surfaces, much like iron filings are drawn onto a magnet. the spaces between the fibers of the mask at the microscale are much larger than the sizes of bacterial viruses and respiratory aerosols/droplets, so masks are not able to block particles at the nanoscale by means of mechanical filtration. therefore, the electrostatic charge on the fibers plays an important role in intercepting virus particles with diameters of 100 nm and aerosols/droplets containing bacterial viruses. in the process of using the mask, elimination of the electrostatic charge layer occurs along with the deposition of bacteria viruses and haze (water vapor) onto the electrostatic layers, which causes a decline in filtration efficiency and even invalidation of the protective performance of the mask. therefore, during the covid-19 pandemic, if people are driven by necessity to extend the use of masks that were originally designed and marketed as disposable masks, there are two points to consider: first, user-friendly decontamination to kill possible covid-19 viruses on the used masks; and, second, efficiently controlled charge regeneration of masks to maintain mask performance for reuse. on 14 february 2020, the sciencenet website reported a preliminary "regeneration treatment" approach toward the reuse of disposable masks developed by our group at beijing university of chemical technology [4] . advice was given to soak used medical masks in hot water at a temperature greater than 56 °c (typically 60-80 °c) for 30 min for decontamination. ordinary household appliances such as a hair dryer, electric fan, or electronic igniter would then be used to dry the masks and recharge them with electrostatic charge. successful regeneration of a mask could be confirmed by sprinkling the mask with small scraps of paper at home, without the need for special professional instruments [4] . according to official guidance from prevention and control program of covid-19 (4th edition) released by the national health commission of the people's republic of china on 6 february 2020, this temperature (> 56 °c) and time (30 min) are efficient for killing the covid-19 virus. the charge-regeneration procedure aims to infuse the filter with electrostatic charge, which is the key contributor to a mask's high level of filtration.in this article, we summarize our experimental results and evaluations on three kinds of typical masks (disposable medical masks, surgical masks, kn95-grade masks) treated by the so-called "hot water decontamination + charge regeneration" approach. the evolution of static electricity on the masks is revealed. the microstructures of the masks were studied by scanning electron microscope (sem) and the waterproof properties were assessed by the hydrostatic pressure method. the filterability of the masks was tested according to respective national standards and local standards. the performance of the kn95-grade masks in 121 °c steam for 30 min, which is a well-accepted approach for killing almost all pathogens, was also investigated. furthermore, a method based on fluorescent nanoparticle penetrant inspection was proposed for the detection of inner defects in used masks, in order to provide necessary data for the development of reusable masks, structural optimization, and evaluation standards.three types of disposable masks were tested: disposable medical masks (chtc jiahua non-woven co., ltd., china), disposable surgical masks (from three locations: esound medical device co., ltd., anbang medical supplies co., ltd., and yubei medical supplies co., ltd., china), and kn95-grade masks (the 3m 9502 and kf94 masks from republic of korea). these masks are referred to herein as "jh," "yx," "ab," "yb," "3m," and "kf," respectively.three kinds of containers, including a household aluminum basin, a polypropylene plastic lunch box, and a stainless steel thermos cup, were used in the experiments. in a typical procedure, boiling water was directly poured into the container at room temperature. the volume of water exceeded 80% of the total capacity of the container and the temperature was measured by a thermometer. the mask was immersed in the water by placing a heavier object on top of it, such as a spoon. the container was then closed and the mask was left to soak in the hot water for 30 min. after that, the container was opened and the mask was removed from the hot water. the liquid on the mask was slightly shaken off and the mask was placed on the surface of dry insulating material, such as wooden, plastic tables and bed sheets. the mask was then dried with a standard hair dryer for 10 min.a hand-held electrostatic field meter (fmx-004; simco-ion, usa) was used to test the electrostatic charge of mask. the mask to be tested was hung on an insulation component at least 5 m away from other instruments with static electricity in order to avoid interference from other static electricity fields. before measurement, the researcher washed his or her hands with water to remove static electricity from the hands. the probe was gradually moved closer to the measurement position on the mask until the two laser dots from the electrostatic field meter coincided. the value of the instrument readings was recorded.waterproof testing of the masks was performed by a buchner funnel procedure. to summarize, the mask was placed at the bottom of the bowl, with the outer surface of the mask facing upward. a hose pipe was used to attach the filter flask sidearm onto the vacuum aspirator. a vacuum aspirator operating at 30 lmin −1 was used for the suction of liquids, through the filter paper. a total of 100 ml water was then poured onto the surface of mask within 20 s from a height of 20 cm. the pumping filtration was maintained for 3 min and the flask was watched to see if water dropped down. then the water was removed from the buchner funnel, and the vacuum suction system was turned off. the inner surface of the mask was then observed to determine the wettability/waterproofness of the mask.the filtration efficiency of the samples for sodium chloride (nacl) particles was measured by using tsi 8130 equipment (tsi incorporated, usa). the particle size distribution of the nacl aerosol for the specified test conditions was the median diameter of the number of particles at (0.075 ± 0.020) μm. the geometric standard deviation did not exceed 1.86 and the concentration did not exceed 200 mgm −3 . the detection system had a device to neutralize the charged particles. to test the kn95-grade masks, the gas flow rate was stabilized to (85 ± 4) lmin −1 , while to test the disposable medical masks and surgical masks, the gas flow rate was stabilized to (30 ± 2) lmin −1 , and the cross-sectional area of the air flow was 100 cm 2 .it has been well accepted that the covid-19 virus can be killed after being maintained at over 56 °c for 30 min [5] . due to thermal activation, the envelope protein of the virus will denature and the virus will lose its infectious ability. therefore, high-temperature treatment is an effective way to kill the virus. in our work, we proposed the hot water method for mask decontamination; that is, killing the potential covid-19 virus on a used mask by keeping the mask in hot water at greater than 56 °c for 30 min [5] . fig. 1(a) shows the three types of containers used in our experiments: a household aluminum basin, a polypropylene plastic lunch box, and a stainless steel thermos cup. when boiling water was first poured into the container at a room temperature of 20 °c, the temperature of the water was measured at around 90 °c, and decreased as time passed. after 30 min, the temperatures of the water in the covered aluminum basin and in the polypropylene plastic lunch box were both around 60 °c, and the temperature of the water in the stainless steel thermos cup was 85 °c (fig. 1(b) ). thus, the hot water approach for mask decontamination is easy to achieve at home. compared with other proposed decontamination methods for masks, such as organic solvent, ultraviolet (uv) radiation, and hydrogen peroxide steam, hot water decontamination is more suitable for people to perform at home without the use of additional solvents or high-tech equipment. in addition, this approach has the advantage of cleaning the mask to some degree. fig. 1(c) shows a typical used mask that has been worn for 4 h. although the used mask looks as good as new, some fluorescent spots were clearly observed under a 365 nm uv lamp. the fluorescence signal was generated by wastes from the oral cavity and respiratory tract of the user. these wastes were adsorbed on the masks, making the masks smell bad. after decontamination of the used mask in hot water, followed by drying treatment, no fluorescent spots were observed on the masks under the uv lamp ( fig.  1(d) ) and there was no bad smell from the masks. typical masks are composed of three layers of non-woven fabric ( fig. 2(a) ). the outer layer is a waterproof non-woven fabric that is used to isolate the liquid sprayed by others, and the inner layer is a common non-woven fabric that absorbs the moisture released by the wearer. the filter layer in the middle, which is composed of a polypropylene melt-blown non-woven fabric treated with electret, serves as a barrier against germs. in typical masks, the melt-blown filter layer is 100-1000 μm thick and is composed of polypropylene microfibers with diameters in the range of 1-10 μm (figs. 2(b) and (c)). the filtering mechanism of a typical mask involves brownian diffusion, entrapment, inertial collision, gravity sedimentation, and electrostatic adsorption. among these factors, electrostatic adsorption is critical for masks to capture nano-sized particles in order to achieve high filterability while maintaining low gas resistance. during mask decontamination in hot water, the static electricity disappears. to reuse a mask, the microfibers of the melt-blown filter layers must be recharged with static electricity to capture nanoparticles. after naturally air-drying masks for 10 h in our experiment, the static electricity of the surgical masks was recovered to 60% of the level of new masks (fig. 2(d) ), due to micro-friction of the microfibers caused by the air flow of the drying process. however, when a more effective method was used-that is, drying the mask with a standard hair dryer for 10 min-the static electricity of the surgical mask was recovered to 90% of the level of a new mask (fig. 2(e) ). these results indicate that the electrostatic charge attenuation velocity of a regenerated mask is similar as that of a new mask. therefore, it is feasible and effective to recharge a mask with static electricity. compared with natural air-dry processing, the use of a standard hair dryer removes the moisture from a wet mask more quickly and recharges the mask with static electricity more efficiently. this method is particularly suitable for rapid charge regeneration of masks in humid regions or during humid weather. in addition, allowing a mask to air-dry naturally over a long period of time allows the potential growth of a large amount of bacteria and microorganisms. in contrast, rapidly regenerating the charge after a mask has been decontaminated in hot water prevents the growth of bacteria inside the mask. as mentioned above, the outer layer of a mask is usually made of a waterproof non-woven fabric to isolate the liquid sprayed by others. therefore, a mask's waterproof property is a key factor for ensuring the mask's performance in blocking the microorganisms in liquid droplets. using a hydrostatic testing method ( fig. 3(a) ), we demonstrated that the regenerated masks presented good water resistance. even after masks had been repeatedly treated for 10 cycles of decontamination (soaking in hot water for 30 min) and charge regeneration (drying with a hair dryer for 10 min), they still maintained a good waterproof property; that is, no water seepage was observed in the inner layers of the masks (fig. 3(b) ). these results indicate that decontamination and regeneration processing over 10 cycles did not damage the structure of the polypropylene fibers. as seen in the sem images, the microstructures of the regenerated masks were similar to those of new masks, and no significant fiber breakage or fracturing was observed in either the outer layers (fig. 3(c) ) or the filter layers ( fig. 3(d) ). as typical personal protective equipment, masks are used to block microorganisms, droplets, pollen, and other particles. thus, filterability is one of the most important indexes of a mask. in our experiments, the filterability of three typical mask types (disposable medical masks, surgical masks, kn95-grade masks,) was tested after hot water decontamination and charge-regeneration treatments, following the rules of the respective national standards or industrial standards in china. to summarize, the regenerated masks were treated by soaking in hot water at 65 °c for 30 min and were then dried using a standard hair dryer for 10 min. a bacterial filtration efficiency (bfe) test determines the filtration efficiency by comparing the bacterial control counts with the test article effluent counts, and is a key performance indicator for both disposable medical masks and surgical masks. according to the standards for a single-use medical face mask (yy/t 0969-2013) and a surgical mask (yy 0469-2011), the bfe of these masks should be no less than 95%. fig. 4 shows the bfe values of a regenerated disposable medical mask (jh) and a regenerated surgical mask (yb) in our experiments, which are higher than 95% (fig. 4(a) ). a particle filtration efficiency (pfe) test evaluates the nonviable particle retention or filtration efficiency of filter media and other filtration devices at sub-micron levels. the standards for single-use medical face masks (yy/t 0969-2013) have no requirement for pfe, whereas the standards for surgical masks (yy 0469-2011) state that the pfe should be no less than 30% under specific conditions. in our experiments, we found that most of the regenerated surgical masks had a pfe much higher than 30%, with an average value of 92.3%. for kn95-grade masks, the pfe should be no less than 95% under specific conditions, according to the chinese national standard gb 2626-2019. in our experiment, the kn95-grade masks (3m and kf) retained a pfe greater than 95% (fig. 4(b) ). in order to investigate the effects of the regeneration treatment on the properties of the masks, we prepared samples of five different brands of masks (jh, ab, yx, 3m, and kf) that were treated by hot water decontamination and charge-regeneration processing for 10 cycles. as shown in fig. 4(c) , regeneration processing over 10 cycles had little effect on the filtration properties. furthermore, we extended our investigations to decontamination treatment at a higher temperature. the kn95-grade masks (3m and kf) were placed in an autoclave, covered with a clean piece of cloth to avoid damage from heavy turbulence. steam sterilization is the most widely available and dependable method for disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facilities, and most hospitals and many clinics already have the necessary materials on hand to sterilize surgical equipment. in our experiments, the masks were treated by pressurized steam at 121 °c for 30 min. the average pfe of the 3m 1860 masks after steam sterilization was measured to be 99.2% and that of the kf94 masks was 96.6% (fig. 4(d) ). according to the experimental results, the regenerated masks was still at a relatively high level; therefore, the regenerated masks should have a significant effect on blocking microorganisms, droplets, pollen, and other particles. in order to study the influence of actual service processing on masks, we examined mask samples that had been worn for 8 h by participants. for surgical masks, the effects of wearing varied among individuals and for the same individuals at different times. after being worn for 8 h, followed by hot water decontamination and charge regeneration, the pfe values of the surgical masks decreased by 0.5%-12% in our experiments, based on the testing of 15 samples. however, all of the tested kn95-grade masks (10 samples) that had been worn for 8 h, followed by hot water decontamination and charge regeneration, were able to retain filtration efficiencies greater than 95%. it was observed that the waterproof property of masks that were worn might change, as a result of the adsorption of dirt and oil from the participants' skin. fig. 5(a) shows droplets on the surface of the outer layer of a typical disposable medical mask under daylight and under a 365 nm uv lamp, respectively. under uv excitation, the droplets of water lacked brightness but the fluorescent nanodispersion droplets exhibited a bright blue emission due to the fluorescence of the carbon nanodots. after removing the droplets, no significant marks of the fluorescent nanoparticles were observed, indicating the excellent resistance to wetting of the outer layer of the mask. however, if the wettability of the masks was enhanced by potential interfacial reactions between dirt/oil and the fibers, a spontaneous infiltration process could be promoted. in this work, we developed a fluorescent liquid penetrant test based on fluorescent nanodispersion for investigating masks. to summarize, water-dispersible carbon nanodots [6] were sprayed onto the surface of the outer layer of the mask, and the liquid drops were then allowed to remain for 30 min while the penetrant was sinking into the mask. after that, the excess liquid on the surface of the outer layer of the mask was removed, and the inner layer of the mask was inspected under the irradiation of a hand-held uv lamp with emission at 365 nm. as shown in fig. 5 (c), no significant fluorescence signal of the nanodots was observed when testing new masks. however, the fluorescent nanoparticles penetrated into the surface defects of a mask that was damaged by oil, with the fluorescence signal mainly being concentrated in the "damaged area," where the hydrophobicity of the fibers changed. these findings may aid in the development of new materials and design strategies for reusable masks. a company named zhejiang runtu co., ltd., which is a large-scale stock enterprise with over 4000 staff members engaged in producing and selling disperse dyes, reactive dyes, chemical intermediates, and so forth, faced a shortage of masks in mid-february 2020, when the workers resumed work. to carry out scientific and orderly prevention and control work in accordance with the law, the workers needed to wear masks during the covid-19 pandemic. however, it was difficult to obtain enough mask supplies in china from february to march 2020. scientific and technical engineers at runtu learned about our technology, which had been reported by sciencenet [4] , and independently verified the engineering feasibility of the hot water decontamination and charge-regeneration method. the company then required their workers to apply the hot water decontamination and charge-regeneration method in order to safely and effectively reuse their masks. between 20 february and 30 march 2020, mask usage at runtu was reduced from one mask per day per person to one mask every three days per person, and 122 500 masks were saved by this company during the covid-19 pandemic in china [7, 8] .masks have been recommended as a powerful tool to tackle the covid-19 pandemic. in many countries around the world, people are not allowed into public places or on public transportation without wearing masks [9] . growing evidence is demonstrating the benefits of wearing masks in preventing the transmission of human coronaviruses and influenza viruses from symptomatic individuals [10] . however, the limited productivity and scarce resources cannot meet the ever-increasing demand for masks. meanwhile, pollution caused by waste masks is having an adverse effect on the economic development of society and on the ecological environment. therefore, the development of user-friendly methods to effectively extend the service time of masks is urgently needed. our group proposed a specifically designed method for household use to extend the use of disposable masks in mid-february 2020. in this article, we summarize our experimental results and evaluations on three typical kinds of mask (disposable medical masks, surgical masks, and kn95-grade masks) treated by the so-called "hot water decontamination + charge regeneration" approach. we provide solid evidence that the essential performance of the masks was maintained after decontamination for up to 10 cycles. it should be noted that several other technical solutions for n95 respirators have been reported very recently. for example, researchers at the university of nebraska medical center built towers of uv bulbs to kill viruses on masks, while bioquell inc. manufactured hydrogen peroxide vapor generators for the decontamination of n95 masks for multiple use [11] . scientists at 4c air, inc. and at stanford university have reported that heat (≤ 85 °c) under various levels of humidity (≤ 100% relative humidity) is a promising, nondestructive method for the preservation of the filtration properties in n95-grade respirators, since they have found that uv light can potentially impact the material strength and subsequent sealing of masks [12] .compared with approaches that use "high-tech" equipment such as uv radiation towers, hydrogen peroxide vapor generators, or constant-temperature cabinets, our work provides a simpler and more convenient method for the decontamination of masks during the covid-19 pandemic. by soaking the masks in hot water at greater than 56 °c for 30 min, viruses are killed and the dirt on the surface of the masks is removed. after the mask is dried with a standard hair dryer for 10 min, the static electricity of the surgical mask can be recovered to 90% of the level of a new mask. according to tests on three typical kinds of masks (disposable medical masks, surgical masks, and kn95-grade masks), all of the regenerated masks retained a similar waterproof property, microstructure, and filterability in comparison with the respective new masks. for the kn95-grade masks with good quality, we found that the masks retained a pfe greater than 95% after being treated in pressurized steam at 121 °c for 30 min. these results demonstrate that the regenerated masks should have a significant effect in blocking microorganisms, droplets, pollens, and other particles. we also studied the influence of actual service processing on masks. for surgical masks, the effects of wearing vary among individuals and for the same individual at different times. after being worn for 8 h, followed by hot water decontamination and charge regeneration, the pfe values of surgical masks decreased by 0.5%-12% in our experiments on 15 samples. however, all tested samples of kn95-grade masks that had been worn for 8 h, followed by pressurized steam at 121 °c for 30 min and charge regeneration, were able to retain filtration efficiencies greater than 95%. a fluorescent liquid penetrant test based on fluorescent nanodispersion for investigating masks was carried out, and revealed that the adsorption of dirt and oil from participants' skin was partly responsible for changes in the wettability and filterability of polypropylene masks. many researchers have made great efforts regarding the reuse of masks, and have conducted active and beneficial exploration. some industry associations have issued related standards to ensure the quality and life of masks for multiple reuses, including the standards for reusable civil masks (t/bjfx 0001-2020) and for reusable daily protective masks (t/cstm 00387-2020) that have been released by industry associations in china. many productions of reusable masks are coming onto the market [13] . we hope that this short communication article can contribute to alleviating the panic over mask shortage and to promoting new methods for the detection of mask damage zones and the optimal design of reusable masks.this statement is to certify that all authors have seen and approved the manuscript being submitted. we warrant that the article is the authors' original work. we warrant that the article has not received prior publication and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere. on behalf of all co-authors, the corresponding author shall bear full responsibility for the submission. this research has not been submitted for publication nor has it been published in whole or in part elsewhere. we attest to the fact that all authors listed on the title page have contributed significantly to the work, have read the manuscript, attest to the validity and legitimacy of the data and its interpretation, and agree to its submission to the engineering journal. all authors agree that author list is correct in its content and order. we have no conflict of interest to declare.corresponding author:background we compared the efficacy of medical masks, n95 respirators (fit tested and non fit tested), in health care workers (hcws).methods a cluster randomized clinical trial (rct) of 1441 hcws in 15 beijing hospitals was performed during the 2008 ⁄ 2009 winter. participants wore masks or respirators during the entire work shift for 4 weeks. outcomes included clinical respiratory illness (cri), influenza-like illness (ili), laboratoryconfirmed respiratory virus infection and influenza. a convenience no-mask ⁄ respirator group of 481 health workers from nine hospitals was compared.findings the rates of cri (3ae9% versus 6ae7%), ili (0ae3% versus 0ae6%), laboratory-confirmed respiratory virus (1ae4% versus 2ae6%) and influenza (0ae3% versus 1%) infection were consistently lower for the n95 group compared to medical masks. by intentionto-treat analysis, when p values were adjusted for clustering, nonfit-tested n95 respirators were significantly more protective than medical masks against cri, but no other outcomes were significant. the rates of all outcomes were higher in the convenience no-mask group compared to the intervention arms. there was no significant difference in outcomes between the n95 arms with and without fit testing. rates of fit test failure were low. in a post hoc analysis adjusted for potential confounders, n95 masks and hospital level were significant, but medical masks, vaccination, handwashing and high-risk procedures were not.interpretation rates of infection in the medical mask group were double that in the n95 group. a benefit of respirators is suggested but would need to be confirmed by a larger trial, as this study may have been underpowered. the finding on fit testing is specific to the type of respirator used in the study and cannot be generalized to other respirators.the current influenza a h1n1 2009 virus pandemic, 1 the ongoing zoonotic transmission of influenza a h5n1 and the emergence of oseltamivir-resistant seasonal influenza a h1n1 are threats to human health. hospital health care workers (hcws) are key to effective pandemic response and the capacity of health care systems. respiratory protec-tion is one of the key non-pharmaceutical interventions for protection of hcws.nosocomial influenza and other outbreaks result in significant morbidity and costs 2,3 and can occur in the absence of community epidemics. 4 during outbreaks of infectious diseases, hospitals may amplify virus transmission, as demonstrated during severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). 5 furthermore, anticipated antiviral shortages and original article delays in vaccine development make non-pharmaceutical interventions crucial. there are gaps in knowledge about prevention of influenza by medical masks and respirators. there are several prospective, randomized controlled trials on the use of handwashing, [6] [7] [8] but only two trials on the use of medical masks ⁄ respirators in households. 9, 10 in one of these studies, we showed that medical masks ⁄ respirators in compliant users in the household setting were associated with reductions in the risk of influenza-like illness (ili)associated infection. 10 to date, there is one small randomized controlled trial (rct) of medical masks compared to respirators in hcws 11 which found no difference, but lacked a control arm. medical masks are not designed to provide respiratory protection. 12 they have consistently lower filtration efficiency when compared to respirators, which are designed specifically for respiratory protection. [13] [14] [15] medical masks were designed to prevent wound contamination when worn by the surgeon; however, three rcts failed to show efficacy against their intended design. [16] [17] [18] the aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of medical masks compared to fit-tested and non-fit-tested n95 respirators in hcws in the prevention of disease because of influenza and other respiratory viruses.a prospective, cluster randomized trial of medical mask and respirator use in frontline hcws was conducted from december 2008 to january 2009 in beijing, china. we initially aimed to determine the efficacy of two different kinds of respiratory protection (n95 respirators and medical masks) during the influenza season compared to each other and compared to a no-mask group. however, although we intended to have a randomized control group, this was not acceptable to the chinese irb, who felt it would be unethical to assign hcws randomly to not wear a mask, given mask use was widespread in chinese hospitals that were included in the randomization. as such, we studied a convenience-selected no-mask group of hcws who did not wear a mask. these hcws were selected from other hospitals where mask wearing was not routine during the study period. absence of randomization in the no-mask group meant that we eventually had to restrict the primary analysis of the trial to the comparison of the efficacy of n95 respirators and medical masks with each other.participants were hospital hcws aged ‡18 years from the emergency departments and respiratory wards of 15 hospitals. these wards were selected as high-risk settings in which repeated and multiple exposures to respiratory infections are expected. we also monitored all participating wards by active surveillance for clinically compatible illness, including in the no-mask group, for outbreaks of respiratory infection in patients during the study period, and none was detected. all hospitals were large, tertiary hospitals in urban beijing, and there was no variation in the start of the influenza season within this geographic area.recruitment commenced on the 1 december 2008 and final follow-up was completed on 15 january 2009. the study protocol was approved by the institutional review board and human research ethics committee of the beijing ministry for health. verbal informed consent was provided by participants, and they were provided written information about the study.the nine hospitals in the convenience no-arm group were not part of the randomization, but hcws in those hospitals were selected from the same type of wards as the intervention arms (emergency departments and respiratory wards). they were followed up in the same way as the trial participants for development of infections.the unit of randomization was hospitals. hospitals were randomized to one of three intervention arms: (i) medical masks (3mô medical mask, catalogue number 1820, st paul, mn, usa); (ii) n95 fit-tested mask (3mô flat-fold n95 respirator, catalogue number 9132) and (iii) n95 nonfit-tested mask (3mô flat-fold n95 respirator, catalogue number 9132). figure 1 outlines the recruitment and randomization (using a secure computerized randomization program) process. a pre-study assessment of hospital infection control levels determined that the hospitals had sufficient diversity to warrant stratified randomization by size of hospital and level of infection control. this assessment measured ventilation, spatial dimensions, bedding configuration, handwashing facilities and personal protective equipment use. the ministry of health in 1989 categorizes hospitals in china into three levels (level 3 is the highest) depending on their level of sophistication, equipment and staff ⁄ bed numbers. fifteen hospitals were randomized -five level 2 and ten level 3.(i) clinical respiratory illness (cri), 19 defined as two or more respiratory or one respiratory symptom and a systemic symptom; (ii) ili, defined as fever ‡38°c plus one respiratory symptom (i.e. cough, runny nose, etc.); (iii) laboratory-confirmed viral respiratory infection (detection of adenoviruses, human metapneumovirus, coronavirus 229e ⁄ nl63, parainfluenza viruses 1, 2 and 3, influenza viruses a and b, respiratory syncytial virus a and b, rhinovirus a ⁄ b and coronavirus oc43 ⁄ hku1 by multiplex pcr); (iv) laboratory-confirmed influenza a or b and (v) adherence with mask ⁄ respirator use.the choice of a relatively broad cri definition was dictated by our interest in interrupting transmission of a wide range of respiratory viruses, which in adults may or may not be accompanied by fever. also, all respiratory pathogens share a similar transmission mechanism namely aerosol, droplet and fomite spread, although the relative role of these factors may vary between different viruses and in different clinical situations. other endpoints included adverse effects, measured using a semi-structured questionnaire and adherence.any nurse, doctor or ward clerk who worked full time in the emergency or respiratory wards at the hospital were eligible. hcws were excluded if they: (i) were unable or refused to consent; (ii) had beards, long moustaches or long facial hair stubble; (iii) had a current respiratory illness, rhinitis and ⁄ or allergy and (iv) worked part-time or did not work in the aforementioned wards ⁄ departments. in all participating wards, 100% of eligible health workers participated.participants wore the mask or respirator on every shift for 4 consecutive weeks after being shown when to wear it and how to fit it correctly. participants were supplied daily with either three masks for the medical mask group or two n95 respirators. participants were asked to store the mask in a paper bag every time they removed it (for toilet breaks, tea ⁄ lunch breaks and at the end of every shift) and place the bagged mask or respirator in their locker. all participants were instructed on the importance of hand hygiene prior to ⁄ after the removal of medical masks and respirators. participants in arm two underwent a fit-testing proce-dure using a 3mô ft-30 bitrex fit test kit according to the manufacturers' instructions (3mô, st paul, mn, usa).detailed demographic and clinical details of all participants were collected. this included age, sex, smoking history, comorbidities, seasonal influenza vaccination status, medications, conduct of high-risk procedures (defined as suctioning, intubation, nebulized medications, chest physiotherapy and other aerosol generating procedures), handwashing practices, use of other personal protective equipment (gowns, gloves, eye shields and hair ⁄ foot covers) and results of laboratory tests. use of specific interventions for influenza such as antivirals was also measured.participants were followed for 4 weeks of wearing the masks or respirators and an extra week of non-wearing for development of respiratory symptoms.all participants received a mercury thermometer to measure their temperature at the beginning of each day and at the onset of any symptoms. diary cards were provided for the duration to record daily the (i) number of hours worked; (ii) mask ⁄ respirator usage and (iii) recognized cri encounters.participants were contacted daily by phone or face-to-face contact to actively identify incident cases of respiratory infection. at each ward, the head nurse actively followed up all participants and identified incident illness. staff members from the district cdc also undertook daily monitoring of the sites. if participants were symptomatic, swabs of both tonsils and the posterior pharyngeal wall were collected.we also monitored adherence with mask or respirator use over the 4-week time course by: (i) observation: the head ward nurse observed compliance on the ward on a daily basis and recorded the information on a structured form, (ii) self-report: a diary card with tick boxes was given to each subject, to be carried during the day. adherence to wearing the masks or respirators was monitored by these diary cards and returned to researchers on a weekly basis. exit interviews with participants were conducted after the 4 weeks to gain further insights into adherence and other issues around the use of masks ⁄ respirators including adverse effects.participants with symptoms had two pharyngeal swabs collected by a trained nurse or doctor. double rayon-tipped, plastic-shafted swabs were used to scratch both tonsilar areas and the posterior pharyngeal wall. these were transported immediately after collection to the laboratory, or at 4°c within 48 hours if transport was delayed. pharyngeal swabs were tested with at the laboratories of the beijing centers for disease control and prevention. viral dna ⁄ rna was extracted from 300 ll of each respiratory specimen using the viral gene-spin tm kit (intron biotechnology, inc., seoul, korea) according to the manufacturer's instructions. reverse transcription was performed on 8 ll of rna in a final reaction volume of 20 ll for 1ae5 hours at 37°c, using the revertaid tm first strand cdna synthesis kit (fermentas, burlington, on, canada) to synthesize cdna. multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) was carried out using the seeplex ò rv12 detection kit (seegen, inc., seoul, korea) to detect adenoviruses, human metapneumovirus, coronavirus 229e ⁄ nl63, parainfluenza viruses 1, 2 or 3, influenza viruses a or b, respiratory syncytial virus a or b, rhinovirus a ⁄ b and coronavirus oc43 ⁄ hku1. three microlitres of synthesized first-strand cdna, 4 ll of multiplex primers, 10 ll master mix (hot start taq dna polymerase and dntp are included in the reaction buffer) and 3 ll of 8-methoxypsoralen (8-mop) were added (8-mop, accompanied by uv irradiation for 20 minutes, prevents amplification of contaminated dna). a mixture of 12 viral clones was used as a positive control template, and sterile deionized water was used as a negative control. after preheating at 95°c for 15 minutes, 40 amplification cycles were carried out under the following conditions in a thermal cycler (geneamp pcr system 9700, foster city, ca, usa): 94°c for 30 seconds, 60°c for 1ae5 minutes and 72°c for 1ae5 minutes. amplification was completed at the final extension step at 72°c for 10 minutes. the multiplex pcr products were visualized by electrophoresis on an ethidium bromidestained 2% agarose gel. viral isolation by mdck cell culture was undertaken for some of the influenza samples which were positive by nuclei acid detection. specimen processing, dna ⁄ rna extraction, pcr amplification and pcr product analyses were conducted in different rooms to avoid cross-contamination.the primary endpoints of interest as described above were analysed by intention-to-treat analysis. the two n95 arms were also combined and compared to the medical mask arm, given that there was no significant difference between them and rates of fit test failure were extremely low in the fit-tested arm (5 ⁄ 461 fit test failures). differences in proportions between the trial arms were tested by calculation of pearson's chi-square using sas 9.2 software (cary, nc, usa). the distribution of key potentially confounding variables between study arms was compared. to estimate the odds ratio while adjusting for the clustering effects, we used a random effect logistic regression model. in the model, we added a hospital-specific random intercept in the linear predictors, and maximum likelihood was estimated using adaptive quadrature. 20 the model was fitted using 'xtlogit' command in stata (college station, tx, usa). 21 we also conducted multivariable analysis to adjust for the potential confounders. in the initial model, we included all the variables along with the main exposure variable those were significant (p < 0ae05) in the univariate analysis. we then used a backward elimination method to remove the variables that did not have any confounding effect, that is, could not make meaningful (roughly 10%) change in the effect measure with the main exposure variable. 22 in case of high multi-collinearity because of strong correlation among the potential confounders, we chose the more relevant ones having the highest confounding effect on the association of interest.we analysed compliance as wearing the mask for >80% of the shift.to obtain 80% power at 2-sided 5% significant level for detecting a significant difference of attack rate between the intervention arms, and for an assumed 5% attack rate in the n95 arm and 12% in the medical mask arm, a sample size of 488 participants or five clusters (hospitals) per arm was required for cluster size (m) 100 and intra-cluster correlation coefficient (icc) 0ae01. 23 the design effect (deff) for this cluster randomization trial was 2 (deff = 1 + (m)1) · icc = 1 + (100)1) · 0ae01 = 2). as such, we aimed to recruit a sample size of 500 per arm.a total of 1441 nurses and doctors in 15 beijing hospitals were recruited into the randomized arms and 481 nurses and doctors in nine hospitals were recruited into the convenience no-mask group. figure 1 shows the recruitment process. the distribution of demographic variables was generally similar between arms (table 1) , but was significantly different for anyone smoking in the family, four or more people in family, four or more adults in family, influenza vaccination in 2008 and 2007, public transport, handwashing, hospital level and high-risk procedures. in regards to hand hygiene, 83% (382 ⁄ 461), 87ae8% (428 ⁄ 488) and 88ae6% (435 ⁄ 492) of participants from the n95 fit test arm, n95 non-fit test arm and medical mask arm stated that they washed their hands between patients, respectively.for all outcomes, non-fit-tested n95 respirators had lower rates of infections compared to fit-tested n95s (for all n95 versus medical masks, the rates were 3ae9% versus 6ae7% for cri, 0ae3% versus 0ae6% for ili, 1ae4% versus 2ae6% for laboratory-confirmed virus and 0ae3% versus 1% for influenza) but these differences were not significant. all infection outcomes were consistently higher (approximately double) in the medical mask group compared to the n95 group ( figure 2 ). there were no cases of influenza in the non-fit-tested n95 arm, three in the fit-tested n95 arm and five in the medical mask arm. after adjustment for clustering, non-fit-tested n95 masks were significantly protective compared to medical masks against cri, but other outcomes were not significant between n95 and medical masks ( table 2) . when compared to the convenience no-mask group and adjusted for clustering, n95 non-fit-tested was significantly protective against cri, and all n95 was protective against laboratory-confirmed virus and laboratoryconfirmed influenza (table 3 ). in a post hoc analysis carried out to adjust for potential confounders which were unevenly distributed between arms, all n95 and hospital level remained significant for cri and laboratory-confirmed viral infection, but handwashing, vaccination and high-risk procedures were not significant (table 4) .fit-testing failure rate was very low (5 ⁄ 461, 1ae08%). rates of adherence in all arms of the study were high (figure 3 ). table 5 shows adverse events associated with medical mask or n95 use, and that n95 respirators were associated with higher rates of adverse events. adherence with mask or respirator wearing was high and not significantly different in all arms, with 74% adherence (95% ci 70-78%) in the n95 fit-tested arm, 68% in the n95 nonfit-tested arm (95% ci 64-73%) and 76% in the medical mask arm (95% ci 72-79%). the duration of mask wearing in these arms, respectively, was 5ae2 hours (95% ci 5ae1-5ae4 hours), 4ae9 hours (95% ci 4ae8-5ae1 hours) and 5 hours (95% ci 4ae9-5ae2 hours; figure 3 ).we found that rates of respiratory tract infection were approximately double in the medical mask group compared to the n95 group in health workers who wore masks throughout their shift. however, only the n95 non-fittested arm was significantly protective against cri, and there were no other significant differences between n95 respirators and medical masks for the four primary outcomes in the adjusted analysis. however, it should be noted that under the null hypothesis where there is no difference between groups, the probability that we wrongly find at least one significant difference given the 12 tests undertaken is 46%. the trial may also be underpowered because observed attack rates were lower than expected.the rates of all outcomes were higher in the convenience no-mask group than in the masks groups. *ili definition using fever >38 -note, this is less sensitive than laboratory-confirmed infection. **any respiratory virus. ***odds ratio -medical group as reference. a random effect logistic model accounting for clustering was used to compute odd ratios. p m : p value adjusted for clustering of hospitals using random effect logistic regression model. 29 cri, clinical respiratory illness; ili, influenza-like illness. intention-to-treat analysis, n95 respirators but not medical masks had significantly lower rates of infection compared to no masks. however, the convenience no-mask group was not a randomized control arm and hospitals in this group were actually selected on the basis that most of their staff did not wear masks (which is not the norm in hospitals in beijing), suggesting that conditions in those hospitals were different than those in hospitals from the masks groups. as a consequence, it is not possible to make any definitive judgement on the efficacy of masks on this basis. one possible bias would be if those hospitals had differentially higher risk of infection compared to the intervention hospitals, for example because of the occurrence of outbreaks. however, we monitored all hospitals involved in the study for outbreaks which may have increased apparent attack rates, and none were documented. other than that, possible sources of bias that could have plausibly increased the infection rate in the control arm (namely vaccination, handwashing, hospital level and high-risk procedures) were measured. in a post hoc adjusted analysis, only hospital level and the n95 arm were significant against cri and laboratory-confirmed viral infection. respiratory protection is a key strategy for pandemic control and key to sustaining the health care workforce. the fact that rates of all outcomes were consistently lower in the n95 group suggest that n95 respirators might offer better protection for hcws; but a larger trial is needed to make a definitive judgment about the relative efficacy of respirators and medical masks. a recent, smaller trial found no difference between n95 and medical masks, but was *ili definition using fever >38 -note, this is less sensitive than laboratory-confirmed infection. **any respiratory virus. ***odds ratio -no-mask convenience group as reference. a random effect logistic model accounting for clustering was used to compute odd ratios. cri, clinical respiratory illness; ili, influenza-like illness. bold text signifies statistical significance. probably underpowered to detect any differences. 11 further, the intervention in that study was use of respiratory protection only during care of identified febrile patients with ili or high-risk procedures. this is different from the intervention in our study, which comprised wearing the mask for the entire shift. in addition, that study measured serological evidence of influenza as an outcome, which comprised the majority of outcomes, but did not exclude influenza-vaccinated participants, a flaw that would have resulted in falsepositive cases of 'influenza'. the finding that fit testing did not improve the efficacy of n95 respirators is important, although it could be explained by a lack of power. the value of fit testing varies with the quality of the respirator, and our study used a high-quality respirator. these results would not be generalizable to other respirators, where fit testing may be more important. as such, we still recommend that fit testing be part of the process of using respirators.the small number of randomization units along with the small numbers of cases means that estimation of multivariate models would not necessarily converge. in the post hoc multivariable analysis, we could not adjust for all of the factors because of high correlation among some of them.other limitations of the study include the generalizability of our results to other types of respirators and to other hcw populations in other countries. scoping work with australian hcws showed compliance of 10% with continual mask wearing during a severe influenza season. 24 beijing was selected to maximize the power of the study because of the strong culture of mask wearing among hcws. another limitation of the study is that cluster rcts can be impacted by heterogeneity of behaviours, meaning that we cannot exclude such effects caused by behaviours we did not measure. the cluster design is also strength, as interventions against infectious diseases can have herd effects. in infectious diseases which can spread from person to person, the 'herd effect' is a real and documented phenomenon where protecting some individuals with an intervention (most commonly vaccination, but also applicable to other interventions) can also protect individuals who were not protected by the intervention. therefore, if some individuals are randomized to masks on a ward, the individuals who do not wear masks may also be protected because of the effect the masks have on interrupting the transmission of disease from person to person. this is why it is preferable to use cluster design, where everyone in the cluster gets the same intervention. in our study, masks or respirators were worn during the entire shift. some policies recommend mask ⁄ respirator use only when hcws are conducting high-risk procedures or entering an isolation room. whether masks ⁄ respirators will be protective when used only when an identified episode of exposure occurs depends on whether hcws accurately identify all episodes of risk, whether most transmission occurs after clearly identified exposures and whether there is transmission from asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic infections. there is currently no evidence on how much of a hcws' risk is unidentified or unrecognized. in our study, hcws who conducted high-risk procedures had higher rates of cri, but not of laboratory-confirmed pathogens or influenza. further clinical research is required to determine the efficacy of continuous versus targeted mask use.until now, public health policy for dealing with pandemics has relied heavily on data from a modest number of often old and inadequate studies. data from the sars outbreak showed that masks reduced transmission of sars and other viral respiratory infections. 25, 26 during sars, the use of n95 respirators and medical masks was the major protective infection control measure. 27 however, the relative contribution of each type or the difference between n95 respirators and medical masks cannot clearly be determined from observational data.problems with adherence to mask ⁄ respirator use are also a potential problem. we showed that in australia, less than half of parents who were randomized to wear a medical mask or respirator while their child was ill adhered with mask wearing. 10 there may be adverse effects of wearing masks, which can reduce adherence. [28] [29] [30] our study showed significantly higher reported adverse effects of n95 respirators compared to medical masks, consistent with other studies. 28 interestingly, this population of chinese hcws reported overall similar rates of discomfort with masks as parents in our household study, 10 with higher rates in the n95 group, but it did not affect their adherence with mask ⁄ respirator wearing. this suggests that discomfort is not the primary driver of adherence, and rather, cultural acceptability and other behavioural factors may be the main reason for non-adherence. the past experience of beijing health workers with sars may also be a factor in the high adherence. this level of adherence may not translate to western cultural contexts in a normal winter season, especially for n95 respirators; however, adherence can change with perception of risk. during a pandemic, we would expect hcws to have higher adherence to infection control measures. in summary, our study adds evidence on the use of respiratory protection for hcws, but highlights the need for larger trials and comparison of different policy options.sanofi-pasteur msd on the modelling of varicella zoster virus. the remaining author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. the corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. prior to the start of this study, nmf acted as a consultant for roche, novartis and gsk biologicals (ceasing in 2007).the new outbreak of covid-19 has recently become a serious threat to the health of people around the world. covid-19 is caused by the sars-cov-2, which is a single-stranded positive-sense rna virus that causes infection and respiratory failure (swerdlow and finelli 2020; and has led to the thousands of people deaths (thienemann et al. 2020) . following the who announcement, the global emergency committee identified the need for early detection, quarantine, and prompt treatment as a global concern (sohrabi et al. 2020 ), because people with the virus do not have clinical symptoms such as fever, cough, etc., in the early stages. for this reason, there is not enough information on how to disinfect and disinfect surfaces and hands, human-tohuman transmission through air, food, and water, and the presence of the virus in human wastewater and waste. there are several factors involved in transmitting the virus. these conditions can be included in environment and human behavior (fig. 1) . the distribution of human population, migration, social interactions, climate change (deforestation, habitat invasion), agricultural growth, and direct contact with domestic and wild animals fall into this category (barratt et al. 2019; dehghani and kassiri 2020) . on the other hand, the effect of environmental factors such as ambient temperature, humidity, etc., relating to the covid-19 pandemic ( fig. 1) has not been sufficiently investigated. how the virus enters the body (eyes, ears, mouth, and nose) is not well known by the release of aerosols and droplets containing sars-cov-2 in human societies. however, previous findings in the epidemic of a virus similar to sars-cov-2 can be used in this regard (sun et al. 2020) , because the methods of transmission are not currently known. therefore cdc recommends standard precautions, contact and air, and eye protection (glasses or face shields) (cdc 2020b, e). it has been reported that even with personal protective equipment (ppe), it is still possible to get infected (dai 2020) because there is no convincing evidence to support the effect of ppe use in the prevention of infection (yang 2020) . the significant concern about sars-cov-2 is its transmission (dehghani and kassiri 2020) . according to the who, there is no certainty about the persistence of the sars-cov-2 on surfaces. however, the virus appears to act like other coronaviruses and can survive on the surface for at least several hours (parry 2004) . for this reason, the following health points in public places, hospitals, and residential houses has a significant role in controlling the transmission of the disease (who 2020a). dealing with covid-19 and preventing its rapid and dangerous spread is a global challenge. therefore, the fight against this disease requires global management. however, due to the potential variability of this disease, according to the type of climate and other environmental factors, its prevention and control should be investigated quickly and seriously (askari et al. 2018) . when a new pandemic occurs, a lot of health advice is given. anyway, it should be noted that these methods may not be the most accurate and correct, but following them can be effective until sufficient knowledge is obtained. nevertheless, a hierarchy to deal with sars-cov-2 transmission involves three steps: 1) self-care, 2) control of environmental factors, and 3) the use of ppe (lai et al. 2020) . this study aimed to investigate the effect and role of various factors, including environmental factors (climate change, water transfer, air, and food), disinfection of surfaces, and hands in the transmission and prevalence of covid-19 pandemics.currently, due to the prevalence of covid-19 in most parts of the world, one of the primary concerns is the relationship between environmental factors such as rising summer temperatures and the rapid prevalence of coronavirus (abbasi et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020b) . one study observed the relationship between the numbers of positive daily sars-cov-2 cases with three environmental factors: maximum relative humidity, maximum temperature, and maximum wind speed in four cities in china and five cities in italy. in this study, the relationship between the prevalence of the covid-19 with maximum air humidity and wind speed was negligible and statistically not significant. although, in most cases, with increasing humidity and wind speed, the prevalence has decreased. the association between covid-19 prevalence and maximum ambient temperature was negligible to moderate. also, with increasing temperature in most of the studied cities, the prevalence of the disease has decreased (bhattacharjee 2020). the study by chin et al. (2020) reported the resistance of the sars-cov-2 at 4 °c for a long time, but at 70 °c, its resistance was 5 min. in general, heat, high or low ph, and sunlight make it easier to kill the coronavirus (who 2020b). however, the results of a study also showed that the virus is stable at different phs of 3-10, at room temperature (chin et al. 2020) . a new study of 24,139 positive sars-cov-2 cases was conducted in 26 regions in china. its results show that with a 1 °c increase of the minimum ambient air temperature, the cumulative number of cases decreases by 0.86% ( fig. 1 ) (wang et al. 2020b ).according to the cdc, sars-cov-2 transmission through food, food packages, and food handlers has not been identified as a risk factor for the disease. however, based on the available evidence and the persistence of the virus on the surfaces between a few hours and a few days, cdc suggested washing and then disinfection as the best way to control this virus (seymour et al. 2020b ). sanitary recommendations are also recommended when relocation and preparing food, such as washing hands regularly, separating raw meat from other foods, cooking at high temperatures, and storing food in the refrigerator (eslami et al. 2015; seymour et al. 2020c ). the most important health recommendations for staff involved in preparing and distributing food include complete personal hygiene such as covering the nose and mouth by bending the elbow during sneezing or coughing, isolating employees with covid-19 symptoms or having contact with these patients, and following the minimum distance, 6 feet or 1.8 m, between employees. also, providing multiple points for hand washing and disinfection at work and washing and disinfection of surfaces with high contact by diluted sodium hypochlorite (0.1%) (seymour et al. 2020c ).guaranteeing safe water, collecting sewage, and maintaining effective hygiene during infectious diseases, including covid-19 pandemic, play a key role in supporting human health (eslami et al. 2018; who 2020b) .the risk of covid-19 appears to be low through the stool of an infected person. there is evidence that sars-cov-2 may lead to intestinal infection and be present in the stool (bhattacharjee 2020). studies show that approximately 2 to 10 percent of confirmed sars-cov-2 cases have been associated with diarrhea (chen et al. 2020; huang et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020a) . two studies have reported the detection of residual sars-cov-2 viral rna in the stool of patients with sars-cov-2 (holshue et al. 2019; xiao et al. 2020 ). yet, only one study has reported the sars-cov-2 from a cultured stool sample (who 2020b). in the latest study, the report of the presence of the sars-cov-2 virus in sewage has been confirmed. the presence of the virus in the wastewater, even when the prevalence of the virus is low, indicates that the sars-cov-2 can survive in the sewage. this finding could be a sensitive tool for tracking and monitoring the rate of virus rotation in communities (lodder and de roda husman 2020; medema et al. 2020) . some studies have reported that coronavirus can remain in water or wastewater sources for days or weeks (qu et al. 2020 ). due to the evidence of the virus surviving in aquatic and sewage environments, its presence in water resources is dependent on essential factors such as temperature, sunlight, and the presence of organic compounds that the virus can adsorb to and protect themself against sunlight. the presence of other antagonistic microorganisms can also affect its survival in water resources. according to the latest who report, there is no evidence that humantype coronavirus has been transmitted through contaminated drinking water (naddeo and liu 2020) . in general, coated viruses are less environmentally friendly and are more sensitive to oxidants such as chlorine. the sars-cov-2 is likely to be significantly inactivated more rapidly than human intestinal viruses without water-borne diseases in contact with oxidants (who 2020b).research has shown that newly infected patients have no clinical symptoms and can easily be the source of the spread and transmission of sars-cov-2. this transmission can be through sneezing, coughing, talking to other people at close range, and through the foul airflow zhi 2020) . based on the available evidence, it is not thought that air diffusion is one of the main transmission routes (dehghani and kassiri 2020) . non-invasive ventilation, high flow oxygen therapy, intubation/extubation, nebulization, open suctioning of airway secretions, bronchoscopy, induction of sputum, bag and mask ventilation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, etc. are the principal causes of sars-cov-2 aerosol release in airflow (cdc 2020d). for example, the role of environmental pollution in several hospitals has been evaluated following the outbreak of mers-cov in 2015 in korea, as well as experimental studies on the survival and stability of mers-cov on surfaces and air (bin et al. 2016) . there is also the possibility of air stability for sars-cov-2. therefore, the use of viral filters and closed suctioning, airflow changes, and negative pressure air pollution in closed environments, with the probability of infection, is recommended (malhotra et al. 2020 ). thus, people in contaminated environments should use a mask and, if there is no mask, should use face masks (bowdle and munoz-price 2020). facial hair can provide a way for sars-cov-2, to penetrate (malhotra et al. 2020 ). using non-standard masks can also exacerbate the incidence of sars-cov-2 (jones and xia 2018). besides, wearing a mask in some health workers has shown symptoms of claustrophobia, respiratory distress, discomfort, and skin irritation (barratt et al. 2019). the most available type is the n95 mask, which according to studies can be sterilized and reused by hydrogen peroxide, gamma rays from co60, uv rays, dry and wet heat, and ethylene oxide. in the meantime, the use of radiation is preferable to other methods (card et al. 2020; cramer et al. 2020; kenney et al. 2020) . gamma co60 with a dose of 10 kg can sterilize the n95 mask used in sars-cov environments, and kill the virus (feldmann et al. 2019 ). however, high doses of radiation may damage the fibers of the mask and allow air to pass through without purification, but it does not have secondary radiation and its side effects (harrell et al. 2018) . hydrogen peroxide is also a useful antiviral and has no adverse effects on the respiratory tract (viscusi et al. 2009 ). enhanced traffic control bundling (etcb) was very effective at the time of the sars-cov outbreak. due to the similarity of this disease with covid-19, the application of this strategy can prevent the transmission of the disease through the air. . in this way, patients with clinical symptoms quarantined, other people use disinfectant and ppe during patients' visits to the hospital. this process has been approved in the control of other epidemic diseases such as ebola and sars-cov and is currently being implemented in covid-19 pandemics (ong et al. 2020 , schwartz et al. 2020b yen et al. 2015) . the possibility of transmitting bioaerosols with the ability to move up to 6 feet through the air has also been reported in the internal environment of ophthalmologists (cdc 2020c). as a result, hepa filters have been used for ventilation. still, air-born emissions for sars-cov-2 have not yet been reported. according to available evidence, it is not confirmed that air can be one of the principal causes of transmission. therefore, it can be predicted that if any suspended matter is created in the air of medical centers, the transfer will be easy (who 2020a).numerous factors are contributing to the spread of global diseases such as covid-19, which is spreading worldwide. these conditions include ecology and human behavior. these cases have been directly and indirectly involved in the occurrence of some problems and diseases (barratt et al. 2019; dehghani and kassiri 2020). most coronaviruses are pathogenic and can cause acute respiratory syndrome. so far, 7 types of them have been identified (gorbalenya 2020; roush et al. 2019) . the transmission and evolution of the sars-cov-2 from bats to scaly anteaters (pangolins) and then to humans has been reported (dehghani and kassiri 2020) . this process is now present in humans through aerosols, but transmission through secretions such as stool has not been confirmed. in addition to these cases, the transfer through bandages can also be considered. there have been no reports of sars-cov-2 transmission by blood-borne arthropods such as mosquitoes (shankar et al. 2020; wu and mcgoogan 2020) . some studies have associated insects such as beetles and domestic insects, which are the main mechanical carriers of pathogens, by contact with contaminated surfaces and patients' secretions involved in transmission (graczyk et al. 2005; kobayashi et al. 1999; vazirianzadeh et al. 2014 ). sars-cov-2 excretion by stool has been confirmed in some patients. therefore, feeding domestic insects and beetles from the stool and its mechanical transmission can play a significant role in the transmission of the disease (parry 2004) . they can transmit more than 100 pathogens through the legs, body hair, mouth, feces, and vomit. in this regard, the elimination of mechanical carriers is very important not only in residential homes but also in public places. there are several ways to control these organisms, including improving environmental hygiene, such as putting garbage in closed bags and trash cans, controlling sanitary landfills, sanitary toilets, proper sewage disposal systems, and preventing the accumulation of manure nearby, and residential areas (jobara 2016) . clinical and laboratory wastes from sars-cov-2 detection in suspected individuals, secretions such as blood (1%) and feces (26%) can also be a major source of the virus (chang et al. 2020; iwen et al. 2020 ). but no study has shown the presence of the virus in the urine (wang et al. 2020c ). finally, if such waste is not properly managed, sars-cov-2 can be transmitted through mechanical transmission by insects (cdc 2020a).human-to-human transmission of the sars-cov-2 occurs most often when people are in the communal stage of the disease or carrier and have no symptoms, or when they are with mild symptoms. the important ways of transmitting the virus are through droplets, infected hands, and skin-to-skin contact, as well as inanimate surface contact (kampf et al. 2020) . studies show that sars-cov-2 stays for more than 9 days and be resistant, like other coronaviruses such as sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), can live on inanimate surfaces such as metals, glass, and plastic at room temperature. also, at ambient temperatures of 30 °c and above, the duration of sars-cov-2 is reduced (kampf et al. 2020) . some studies have suggested that a temperature of 56 oc for 90 min or a temperature of 67 oc for 60 min can cause sars-cov-2 to be inactive (henwood 2020) . kampf et al. (2020) showed that at room temperature and 50% humidity, the resistance of the virus was more than 30%. in one study, the stability of sars-cov-2 on different surfaces confirmed that the virus was more resistant to smooth surfaces than others. according to the results of this study, the virus remains stable at temperatures of 22 oc and relative humidity of 65% for 4 days on surfaces such as glass and banknotes and 7 days on smooth surfaces such as steel and plastic. it also stays on rough surfaces such as fabric and wood for up to 2 days (chin et al. 2020) . another investigation, which examined environmental levels of sars-cov-2 virus in hospital centers, found that the most important environmental levels of infection were self-service printers (20%) (used in chinese laboratories), desktops, and keyboards (16.8%), door handles (16%), telephones (12.5%), and medical equipment (12.5%) (ye et al. 2020) . studies show that students touch their face with their hands an average of 23 times an hour. 56% of it is the touch of the skin, 36% is the lips, 31% is the nose, and 31% is the eyes (kwok et al. 2015) . although sars-cov-2 is not available on the surface of complete information on viral load, it can be said that by reducing the frequency of touching surfaces by hands and disinfecting surfaces, the amount of virus load on surfaces can be reduced (kampf et al. 2020) . the who has recommended that cleanliness be done with water and detergents to ensure environmental cleanliness, and then the use of common environmental disinfectants, such as sodium hypochlorite (who 2020c). the most well-known methods of surface disinfection to remove sars-cov-2 virus are, in short, the use of ethyl alcohol (62-70%), or hydrogen peroxide (0.5%) or sodium hypochlorite (0.1%, dilution ratio 1 to 50) with a contact time of 1 min (henwood 2020; who 2014) . other biocidal agents such as benzalkonium chloride (0.05-0.2%) or chlorhexidine digluconate (0.2%) are also applicable, but their effectiveness is less than previous (who 2014). the effect of hand soap on disinfecting surfaces from the sars-cov-2 virus was investigated. the results of this study show that the virus is inactivated by contact with soap for 5 min (chin et al. 2020) . the cdc has also recommended a water temperature above 65 degrees to disinfect surfaces (seymour et al. 2020a ). one of the most important concerns at the pandemic period of coronavirus is disinfection and sterilization of surgical masks and n95 for reuse. the significant thing is that these devices are disposable and cannot be reused in normal conditions. however, in cases of shortage and under certain conditions, they can be reused up to 5 times by disinfecting and sterilizing them. the use of thermal methods of at least 50 °c for at 30 min is highly recommended as a disinfection and sterilization method for n95 masks. in one study, the use of uc radiation with a 100 µwcm −2 power with a contact time of 15 to 20 min for sterilization of n95 mask was suggested (card et al. 2020) . in another study, the use of hydrogen peroxide (hp) vapor was used in a short time to sterilize the n95 mask (seymour et al. 2020a) . hydrogen peroxide gas is suitable for disinfecting devices used for patients with viral infections. it also does not hurt patients' respiratory system and can be used to disinfect hospital rooms (schwartz et al. 2020a ).preliminary health advice when spreading epidemics is to observe hand hygiene and use ppe. some of the reasons for not following the recommendations occur at the individual, group, and community levels. at the time of the epidemic, such issues are particularly well addressed among medical staff. nevertheless, some hand disinfectants are not effective in eliminating the pathogen (pittet 2001) . in other words, a disinfectant should be used that will affect the pathogen and the virus in question. at the same time as the covid-19 pandemic, the effectiveness of hand sanitizers can prevent the virus from spreading, because the main way to prevent the transmission of pathogens is body contact. lack of public access to such materials is also a significant issue at this time. the effectiveness of home disinfectants has been investigated by who (seymour et al. 2020d ). its main ingredients are alcohol, glycerin, and hydrogen peroxide. after that, spray on the hands and drying is done automatically by exposing it to the air. lack of hand disinfection and contact with parts of the body (ears, eyes, nose, and mouth) can cause covid-19. in one study, alcohol-based hand rubs, or soap and water hand wash, were shown to be effective in preventing covid-19. sequentially, if the disinfectant dries, the above-mentioned items should be used again before contact with the patient or any use of the hand (malhotra et al. 2020) . although there is evidence that hand hygiene can reduce respiratory illness, it has not yet been proven that it can reduce the transmission of sars-cov-2 (yang 2020). so far, no eye infections have been reported in patients with the sars-cov-2, but very few viruses have been seen in tears and conjunctival discharge. it can be seen that the eye may not be the main entrance of sars-cov-2 into the body and cause respiratory infections (sun et al. 2020) . however, eye infections can be caused by respiratory and nasopharyngeal infections. it can be very efficient, especially during close contact between the patient and the clinical staff. the use of masks and goggles, along with hand disinfection, has shown a significant reduction in person-to-person transmission (yang 2020) . also, since sars-cov-2 is not only transmitted through the air and can survive on the surface for a while, the importance of hand disinfection cannot be ignored (otter et al. 2016) . besides, infected people can contaminate the surface they touch, which may include a large number of household items and appliances (who 2020a). in this way, even infected people should disinfect their hands.reviews of studies have shown that reducing the frequency of touching surfaces by hands and disinfecting surfaces can reduce the amount of coronavirus load on surfaces and the rate of transmission. the most important solution is to disinfect surfaces, clean surfaces with water and detergents, and then disinfect with ethyl alcohol (62-71%), or hydrogen peroxide (0.5%) or sodium hypochlorite (0.1%) with 1 min contact time. despite the lack of evidence of sars-cov-2 transmission by bloodborne arthropods such as mosquitoes, some studies have identified insects such as beetles and domestic insects, which are the main mechanical carriers of pathogens, through contact with contaminated surfaces and patients' secretions. also, its transmission through the air with a minimum distance of 6 feet, water and sewage, and food has not been provided so far.as the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic progresses, one debate relates to the use of face masks by individuals in the community. we previously highlighted some inconsistency in who's initial january, 2020, guidance on this issue. 1,2 who had not yet recommended mass use of masks for healthy individuals in the community (mass masking) as a way to prevent infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in its interim guidance of april 6, 2020. 3 public health england (phe) has made a similar recommendation. 4 by contrast, the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) now advises the wearing of cloth masks in public 5 and many countries, such as canada, south korea, and the czech republic, require or advise their citizens to wear masks in public places. [6] [7] [8] an evidence review 9 and analysis 10 have supported mass masking in this pandemic. there are suggestions that who and phe are revisiting the question. 11, 12 people often wear masks to protect themselves, but we suggest a stronger public health rationale is source control to protect others from respiratory droplets. this approach is important because of possible asymptomatic transmissions of sars-cov-2. 13 authorities such as who and phe have hitherto not recommended mass masking because they suggest there is no evidence that this approach prevents infection with respiratory viruses including sars-cov-2. 3, 4 previous research on the use of masks in non-health-care settings had predominantly focused on the protection of the wearers and was related to influenza or influenza-like illness. 14 these studies were not designed to evaluate mass masking in whole communities. research has also not been done during a pandemic when mass masking compliance is high enough for its effectiveness to be assessed. but absence of evidence of effectiveness from clinical trials on mass masking should not be equated with evidence of ineffectiveness. there are mechanistic reasons for covering the mouth to reduce respiratory droplet transmission and, indeed, cough etiquette is based on these considerations and not on evidence from clinical trials. 14 evidence on non-pharmaceutical public health measures including use of masks to mitigate the risk and impact of pandemic influenza was reviewed by a workshop convened by who in 2019; the workshop concluded that although there was no evidence from trials of effectiveness in reducing transmission, "there is mechanistic plausibility for the potential effectiveness of this measure", and it recommended that in a severe influenza pandemic use of masks in public should be considered. 15 dismissing a low-cost intervention such as mass masking as ineffective because there is no evidence of effectiveness in clinical trials is in our view potentially harmful.another concern is the shortage of mask supply in the community. medical masks must be reserved for health-care workers. yet to control the infection source rather than to self-protect, we believe that cloth masks, as recommended by the cdc, 5 are likely to be adequate, especially if everyone wears a mask. cloth masks can be easily manufactured or made at home and reused after washing. authorities also worry about correct techniques for wearing, removal, and disposal of face masks, but these techniques could be learned through public education.finally, there are concerns that mask wearing could engender a false sense of security in relation to other methods of infection control such as social distancing and handwashing. we are unaware of any empirical evidence that wearing masks would mean other approaches to infection control would be overlooked. it is important, however, to emphasise the importance of this point to the public even if they choose to wear masks.mass masking is underpinned by basic public health principles that might not have been adequately appreciated by authorities or the public. first, controlling harms at source (masking) is at least as important as mitigation (handwashing). the population benefits of mass masking can also be conceptualised as a socalled prevention paradox-ie, interventions that bring moderate benefits to individuals but have large population benefits. 16 seatbelt wearing is one such example. additionally, use of masks in the community will only bring meaningful reduction of the effective reproduction number if masks are worn by most peopleakin to herd immunity after vaccination. finally, masking can be compared to safe driving: other road users and pedestrians benefit from safe driving and if all drive carefully, the risk of road traffic crashes is reduced.social distancing and handwashing are of prime importance in the current lockdown. we suggest mask wearing would complement these measures by controlling the harm at source. mass masking would be of particular importance for the protection of essential workers who cannot stay at home. as people return to work, mass masking might help to reduce a likely increase in transmission. south korea and hong kong have managed to limit their covid-19 outbreaks without lockdown. 17, 18 it is difficult to apportion the contribution of various measures, including extensive testing, rigorous contact tracing, and strict isolation, but use of masks in public is universally practised in these two places. we encourage consideration of mass masking during the coming phases of the covid-19 pandemic, which are expected to occur in the absence of an effective covid-19 vaccine. 19 finally, this practice could also be useful for control of future influenza epidemics.mass masking for source control is in our view a useful and low-cost adjunct to social distancing and hand hygiene during the covid-19 pandemic. this measure shifts the focus from self-protection to altruism, actively involves every citizen, and is a symbol of social solidarity in the global response to the pandemic.we declare no competing interests. an epidemic, triggered by the new coronavirus sars-cov-2, has recently become the focus of the scientific community attention [1] . covid-19 represents the illness generated by this virus. its clinical presentation ranges from being an asymptomatic infection to developing into a severe disease with high mortality rate [2] . at the time of writing (may 16, 2020), over 4,425,485 covid-19 cases and 302,059 death have been registered worldwide [3] . in particular, in egypt, there are 11,228 positive individuals and 592 death cases [4] . now, covid-19 has been classified as a pandemic by the world health organization. it is both a highly contagious and a life-threatening disease [3] . its reproduction ratio (rr) is defined as the expected number of cases generated by a single infected individual within a susceptible population [5] . it varies between 2.4 and 2.7 [6] . these values are high compared to influenza (rr = 1.3-1.8) [7] .currently, a fight is being undertaken against the covid-19 pandemic. adherence to control and prevention steps is paramount for ensuring a complete success over covid-19. lessons were learned from the 2003 sars outbreak. these indicate that fear exists within the population awareness and attitude to infectious diseases. this factor may hinder further efforts to prevent the virus spread. therefore, it is crucial to understand covid-19 public's awareness at this critical stage to facilitate pandemic management [8, 9] .as members of the health care team, pharmacists play an essential role in patient care. this includes contributing to the decision-making process within the multidisciplinary health care team, taking responsibility for medication administration and assessment of patient care [10] . moreover, together with physicians, pharmacists' knowledge, attitude and practices are crucial to prevent and control the disease [11] . health care teams include pharmacists are responsible for providing knowledge, delivering good quality management and protecting individuals from illness during epidemic prevalence period. therefore, pharmacy students' education should include training in precautionary measures, effective treatment and follow-up. this is critical together with their behavior in these fields [12] . normally, training in disaster medicine occupy a very small place in regular medical curricula worldwide [13] . therefore, the present study was carried out to evaluate knowledge about covid-19 as an attempt to identify senior students' degree of awareness and its effects. furthermore, this study objective aims to contribute in developing a fit for purpose education program that creates awareness among future practitioners. to the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first study directly exploring senior pharmacy students' knowledge, attitudes and practice regarding this topic.this is an institutional based cross sectional study conducted in faculty of pharmacy at the british university in egypt during the period from april 28, 2020 to april 30, 2020. the targeted population included students who had completed ≥ 85% of the credit-hours required for graduation.the sample size was calculated by using the online sample size calculator raosoft®. based on an estimated population of 470 students in the final years (year 4 and 5) and on the anticipated response of 50%, the minimum required sample size was 204 participants with a confidence level of 95% and a 5% margin of error.a pre-validated questionnaire [14] was modified after a comprehensive literature search and based on the most recent available information from the world health organization, the center for disease control and prevention (usa) and the egypt ministry of health. the initial draft was sent to a group of experts, chosen according to their experience and expertise in related fields, to appraise the questions in terms of relativity, simplicity and importance. then, the questionnaire was sent by email, through survey monkey software®. a pilot study was conducted on 10 subjects, to test the questionnaire validity. following a group discussion, the questionnaire was completed. the data from the pilot study was removed from the final analysis.the questionnaire included two sections: demographics, and knowledge, attitudes and practices questions (kap). demographic variables included age, gender and place of current residence (cairo, other governorates in egypt). the first part of the kap represented the knowledge investigation, consisting of 12 questions ( fig. 1 ): 4 questions were about covid-19 clinical presentations (k1-k4), 3 asked about transmission routes (k5-k7), and the following 5 questions quizzed on prevention and control (k8-k12). these questions were answered on a true/false basis, including an additional "i don't know" option. one point was assigned to a correct response, while no points were given for an incorrect/unknown answer. the total score ranged from 0 to 12, with a higher score suggesting better covid-19 awareness. in the pilot sample, the knowledge questionnaire cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.73, indicating reasonable internal consistency [15] .attitudes towards covid-19 were appraised with 2 questions (a1-a2, fig. 2 ) that asked about the level of agreement on the covid-19 control implementations and the confidence perception for winning the war against this coronavirus. the assessment of students practices was performed through 4 questions (p1-p4, fig. 2 ), that investigated their actions towards going to a crowded place, wearing masks when going out in recent days, maintaining social distance between others and if they agree that patients should disclose their exposure to covid-19. finally, one last question was added to inquire about the students' source of covid-19 information.before study start-up, permission was taken from the ethics committee of the faculty of pharmacy at the british university in egypt. the participants were briefed about the study rationale and were reassured about the confidentiality safeguards for their personal information and responses. the answered survey submission was considered as consent for study participation. respondents' participation was completely consensual, anonymous and voluntary.the completed questionnaires data were analyzed using the statistical package for social science, version 21.0 (spss 20.0, chicago, il). the significance level was set at a value of p < 0.05 for all analyses. initially, all information gathered through the questionnaire was coded into variables. in the pilot study, the cronbach's alpha coefficient test was used to measure internal consistency. data normality was tested using the kolmogorov-smirnov test. descriptive and inferential statistics, involving chi-square test, mann-whitney u test, correlation and logistic regression, were used to analyze the results. fever, tiredness, and dry cough, k2 some patients infected with the covid-19 virus may suffer from aches and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat or diarrhea, k3. coagulation dysfunction is one of the major causes for death in patients with severe covid-19, k4. older persons and persons with pre-existing medical conditions (such as high blood pressure, heart disease, lung disease, cancer or diabetes) appear to develop serious illness with covid-19 more often than others, k.5 people with covid-19 will not transmit the virus to others when fever is not present, k6. covid-19 can spread from person to person through small droplets from the nose or mouth which are spread when a person with covid-19 coughs or exhales, k7. only wear a mask if you are ill with covid-19 symptoms or looking after someone who may have covid-19, k8. it is not necessary for children and young adults to take measures to prevent the infection by the covid-19 virus, k9. to prevent the infection by covid-19, individuals should avoid going to crowded places such as public transportation, k10. covid-19 is caused by a virus, so antibiotics do not work. antibiotics should not be used as a means of prevention or treatment of covid-19. they should only be used as directed by a physician to treat a bacterial infection, k11. isolating and treating people with covid-19 infections are effective means of minimizing viral spread, k12. people who have contact with someone who has covid-19 infection should be isolated in a proper place immediately. the observation period is usually 14 days in the present study, the scoring system and categorization were utilized to assess knowledge levels towards the covid-19 pandemic. the questions determination was based on one point for every correct answer and zero points for false answers. by adding the results of all the knowledge questions in the survey, the participants mean knowledge scores (kss) were determined. ks ranged from 0 to 12, with the higher scores demonstrating an increased level of pandemic covid-19 knowledge. knowledge level categories were defined by an 80% cut-off point as any score above 80% is good and any score below 80% is poor [16] .during the course of this study, a total of 248 participants completed the devised online survey questions. after excluding 10 respondents who participated in the pilot study, the final sample consisted of 238 participant students. among these, the average age (measured in years) was 22 ± 1, 166 students (70%) were females. when identifying the place of residence, 149 students (63%) were living in greater cairo while 89 (37%) resided in other governorates (table 1) . with regards to the students' source of information, results disclosed that the main source of information was social media (70%) followed by published articles (48%) and television (48%).in the present study, the main objective was to measure covid-19 related knowledge of pharmacy senior students. the mean score of covid-19 related knowledge was 83% (10 ± 1.2, ranging from 4 to 12) (table 1 ). in particular, 72.5% of the students possessed a good knowledge level, while 23.5% displayed poor knowledge based on an 80% cut-off point [16] . the first 4 survey questions (k1-k4) measured students' knowledge towards covid-19 clinical presentations. the highest correct answer rate (98%) related to the covid-19 related knowledge items identified by 2 questions; 'the main clinical symptoms of covid-19 are fever, tiredness, and dry cough (true)' and 'older persons and persons with pre-existing medical conditions (such as high blood pressure, heart disease, lung disease, cancer or diabetes) appear to develop serious illness with covid-19 more often than others (true)' (fig. 1) . however, the item with the lowest correct-answer rates was: 'coagulation dysfunction is one of the major causes for death in patients with severe covid-19 (true)' (37%) (fig. 1 ). the answer 'i don't know' was selected by 12% of students for the question 'covid-19 may cause aches and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat or diarrhea in some patients' (fig. 1) . then the following 3 questions (k5-k7) measured students' knowledge towards the transmission routes. in this case, the percentage of knowledgeable students is high. k.5: no transmission if fever is not present (88%); k6: covid-19 can spread from person to person through small droplets (98%); and k7: wear a mask only if you are ill or looking after someone who may have covid-19 (96%). a similar result was achieved with the next 5 questions (k8-k12), which concerned assessing knowledge about covid-19 prevention and control (fig. 1) . this study showed a significant relation between the knowledge score and published articles as source of information (p < 0.05).the students' attitude was measured with 2 questions. the highest positive result was attained by the following covid-19-related attitude item: 'are you confident that the health care team and scientists can win the fight against the covid-19 virus?' (87% answered yes). however, the lowest positive attitude result corresponded to the following: 'do you agree that covid-19 will be successfully controlled?' (only 72% answered yes) (fig. 2) .the highest performance rate was attained by the following covid-19-related practice item: 'in recent days, have you gone to any crowded place?' (87% answered no). however, the item with the lowest performance rate was: 'in recent days, if you left your house, have you worn a mask when leaving home?' (50.5% gave a negative answer) (fig. 2) . as expected, it was found that the covid-19 practice for going out in crowded place was significantly different between males and females: females displayed a lower tendency to go out than males (p < 0.05). in addition, the practice for keeping social distance between students was significantly different between males and females: females maintained social distance more successfully than males (p < 0.05). it is worth mentioning that significant relations existed between the two practices and the students' source of information. in particular, the practice of wearing a mask when leaving home was directly correlated with using television as source of information (p < 0.05). furthermore, the practice of keeping social distance of at least 2 m from other people was directly associated with utilizing physicians' advice as source of information (p < 0.05). moreover, the correlation coefficient, existing between the major knowledge, attitude and practice variables was analyzed. a weak positive correlation was observed between attitude and practice and this result appeared to be highly significant (r = 0.2; p < 0.01). however, no correlation appeared to exist between knowledge and attitudes or knowledge and practice (table 2) .logistic regression analyses showed that students with a good knowledge score are 2.2 times more optimistic and agreed that covid-19 will be successfully controlled (95% confidence interval [ci] 1.03-4.72). students who live in cairo were 1.7 times more likely to maintain social distance of at least 2 m from other people (95% confidence interval [ci] 0.9-3.2)., and 1.7 times more likely to agree that patients should disclose potential covid-19 exposure, than students who live in other governorates in egypt (95% confidence interval [ci] 0.9-3.3). moreover, female students were 3.6 times more likely to avoid going to any crowded place than male students (95% confidence interval [ci] 1.5-8.6), and 2.3 times more likely to keep their social distance of at least 2 m from other people than male students (95% confidence interval [ci] 1.2-4.4) ( table 3 ).the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is an emerging contagious respiratory disease caused by a novel coronavirus. it was first detected in december 2019 in wuhan, china [17] . emerging infectious diseases like covid-19 can occur anywhere in the world. by being part of the health care team, pharmacists can be exposed to the risk of infection [18] . here, we present the results of a questionnaire study about the knowledge, attitudes and practices of egyptian senior pharmacy students towards the covd-19 disease.in the present study, one of the most significant findings was that the highest main source of covid-19 information among senior students was social media, television and published articles. the results strongly support similar findings in which the main source of middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) information was reported to be the internet and social media [19] . this clearly indicates that senior pharmacy students are relying consistently on the internet, social media and online information as the principal ways to obtain information, compared with friends and other resources. the egyptian ministry of health and population and the world health organization (who) have provided clusters with covid-19 information through their websites and are recommending everyone to be aware of updates relating to knowledge about covid-19 [3, 4] . similarly, a previous study reported that internet was the main source of information about mers-cov [20] . therefore, it is feasible to suggest that researches should urgently find ways to utilize the internet to promote health, especially in emerging infectious diseases and pandemics. at present, the quality of the information available on the internet is insufficient and needs to be revised. furthermore, a very small percentage of participants reported that healthcare professionals, either physicians or pharmacists, were their primary source of information. this scenario illustrates the lack of healthcare team engagement in increasing the public awareness regarding different aspects of covid-19.the present study showed a significant relation existing between the knowledge score and published articles as source of information (p < 0.05). that may be due to the role played by the who and the egyptian ministry of health and population in providing cluster with covid-19 information through their websites. therefore, these organizations recommend everyone to be aware of updates about covid-19.as mentioned earlier, 238 senior pharmacy students participated in the present study. the overall mean knowledge scored among students was 83% (10 ± 1.2). most of the students possessed a good covid-19 knowledge level (72.5% of the students), possibly owing to the fact that the egyptian ministry of health and population (mohp) and the world health organization (who) are providing a significant amount of covid-19 information through their websites [3, 4] . the present study results showed that 98% of participants were knowledgeable about the main clinical symptoms of covid-19. in addition, the same percentage of students knew that older persons and persons with preexisting medical conditions were more liable to develop serious illness with covid-19 than others. these findings confirm observations from previous studies, which reported that the majority of participants believed that the disease is more dangerous for the elderly and for those suffering from chronic diseases [21, 22] .the students were least knowledgeable towards the question of coagulation dysfunction being one of the major death causes in patients with severe covid-19. suitable remedial actions should be taken since vascular, venous thromboembolism and arterial thrombosis risks have been documented in severe and critically ill covid-19 patients [23, 24] . a perceived lack of information regarding some of the covid-19 clinical presentation or preventive measures highlights the requirement for the inclusion of more training, seminars in their courses. this raises concerns regarding the ability of newly-graduated pharmacists to deal with the covid-19 pandemic disease, or any other potential similar epidemic events. also, the students were least knowledgeable about when to wear masks. masks and sanitizing products use has evolved since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic, resulting in their rapid depletion. lack of appropriate security measures represents a major concern for health workers. this is a cause of concern in a highly populated country such as egypt, where the public may experience anxiety and even panic feelings, because basic protection measures are unavailable [25] .knowledge is a prerequisite for establishing positive attitudes and promoting positive behaviors. therefore, it makes sense to invest in individuals' cognition towards the infection. regarding the senior students' attitude towards covid-19, in the present study 72% of them agreed that covid-19 will be successfully controlled and 87% were confident that health care teams and scientists can win the fight against the coronavirus. interestingly, it was found that a greater students' knowledge relates to more confidence in covid-19 becoming successfully controlled (or 2.2, 95% confidence interval [ci] 1.03-4.72).correlation between the students' attitude and practice indicates that their positive attitude is affecting their action towards covid-19. this present study results showed that 87% of participants did not go to any crowded place, 76% of the students agreed that patients should disclose their exposure to covid-19 and 73% of the students kept the social distance of at least 2 m from other people. however, the students showed bad practice when using masks as a protective measure (approximately 50%). that was directly related to their lower level of knowledge towards the importance of wearing masks (p < 0.05). that is supported by findings from a previous study, which reported that only about 35% of the participants were willing to wear face masks [21] .interestingly, it was reported that females preferred not to go to any crowded place more than male students (or 3.6, 95% confidence interval [ci] 1. 5-8.6 ). in addition, females preferred to keep the social distance more than male students (or 2.3, 95% confidence interval [ci] 1.2-4.4). moreover, students who live in other governorates kept social distance and agreed that patients should disclose their exposure to covid-19 rather than the students who live in the capital (or 1.7, 95% confidence interval [ci] 0.9-3.2).it is noteworthy that a significant association existed between the practice of wearing masks when leaving home and using television as source of information (p < 0.05). likewise, an association existed between the practice of keeping the social distance at least 2 m from other people and utilizing physicians as a source of information (p < 0.05). this encourages the public to avoid public meetings, including sports, ceremonies, meetings and school classes, in order to prevent a global transmission of coronavirus infection [26] . however, many people ignore the importance of maintaining social distance because of attitudinal issues.it can be concluded that senior pharmacy students are generally knowledgeable about covid-19. they lack knowledge about some of the clinical presentation of severe covid-19 infection such as hyper-coagulation. they also lack knowledge about the indication of wearing face masks. the present study constitutes the first attempt to examine knowledge and perceptions of future pharmacists in egypt on pandemic diseases. finally, the analysis of senior pharmacy students' knowledge and the factors affecting their attitudes and practices towards covid-19 could provide a reference for preventing further spread of this disease.it is recommended that strategies and education programs should be implemented to reduce the risk of infection among future pharmacists. senior pharmacy students should acquire increased awareness regarding the seriousness and consequences of a covid-19 infection.some of the results of this study were compared with research on other new emerging infectious diseases similar to coronavirus, because no analyses have been conducted concerning pharmacy students or students in general.the year 2020, is definitely one to go down in the history books. as new covid-19 cases continue to emerge with a global count of 6535354 cases and 387155 deaths as of 6 th june 2020 [1] , healthy individuals have been advised to stay at home and follow self-quarantine regulations declared by local governance and world health organization (who) [2] . access to outdoor tracks has been denied, and fitness centres have been closed for the prevention of community spread of the deadly virus. prolonged stay at home, could result in physical inactivity, which could further lead to ill health. sedentary behaviour (any waking behaviour characterized by the energy expenditure of fewer than 1.5 mets in reclining or sitting postures) is identified as a pleiotropic risk factor for cardiometabolic disease risks such as obesity, coronary artery diseases, hypertension and cancer disease [3] .straying away from a sedentary lifestyle is essential, especially in these troubled times of a global pandemic to reverse the ill effects associated with the health risks mentioned earlier.exercising even at a low intensity is found to maintain the muscle mass, cardiovascular fitness and prevent the bone loss that is imposed by the sedentary behaviour during this lockdown period [4] . owing to the current world scenario, specific exercise guidelines have been proposed during the covid-19 lockdown period, specifically for at-risk or chronically ill individuals [5] .exercise training is anticipated to stave off or lessen the chances of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) associated with covid-19 [6] . in his systematic review, zhan yan 2020 found that antioxidant extracellular superoxide dismutase (ecsod) associated with exercise training might be protective against covid-19 ards [7] . though moderate to vigorous exercise training is proposed to improve immune system [8] , few studies refute this proposition suggesting a window period for immunosuppression, primarily reduction in cd4 cells after vigorous exercise or unaccustomed exercise performed for a longer duration (> 2hrs/day). dramatic reduction in cytotoxic t cells should be anticipated in sedentary individuals participating in the accustomed strenuous exercise [9] .despite the conflicting evidence, low-intensity exercise for sedentary individuals and moderate exercise for active individuals are recommended by center for disease control (cdc) andamerican college of sports medicine (acsm) to maintain cardiovascular and musculoskeletal fitness in global population [10] .worldwide, governments are slowly relaxing their national lockdowns even though the number of cases continues to rise. although concerning, it has still brought a sigh of relief to athletes as well as social exercisers, who can resume their training/fitness sessions, and they can now be seen everywhere with facemasks. however, the wearing of facemasks to prevent the community spread of the novel covid-19 is itself debatable, considering the limited evidence on the subject matter [11] . who recommends masks only for covid-19 patients but the usage of masks is morally "exploited" among community individuals [12] . the present physiological hypothesis paper is an attempt to explore the unanswered questions: 1) does the use of facemasks offer any benefit for 'social exercisers' during this pandemic; 2) does exercising with facemasks alter normal physiological responses to exercise; 3) does exercising with facemasks increase the risk of falling prey to coronavirus; 4) how could "social exercisers" combat the physiological alteration?coronavirus is known to spread via droplets and causes upper respiratory tract infections with ards. respirator facemasks (n95) serve as personal protective equipment that could filter fine airborne particles and prevent them from reaching the respiratory system as well as prevent interindividual infections, especially influenza and coronaviruses [13] . the current trend indicates the proclivity of coronavirus towards the nasal or oral cavity, due to its lower temperature as compared to the core. gupta et al. 2020 proposed that facemasks may provide a "therapeutic" environment (95 f hot and 80 humid), and act as a barrier against these viral impactions in the naso-oropharynx region [14] .exercising with customized tight facemasks induces a hypercapnic hypoxia environment [inadequate oxygen (o 2 ) and carbon dioxide (co 2 ) exchange] [15] . this acidic environment both at the alveolar and blood vessels level induces numerous physiological alterations when exercising with facemasks: 1) metabolic shift; 2) cardiorespiratory stress; 3) excretory system altercations; 4) immune mechanism; 5) brain and nervous system. muscle metabolism highly depends on the uninterrupted o 2 supply and co 2 exchange with the atmosphere. the efficiency of muscle metabolism depends on patency of oropharynx, autonomic stability, cardiac fitness and muscle blood supply [16] . fat metabolism occurs at rest and low to moderate-intensity exercise, sparing glucose. but during moderate to vigorous intensity exercise, anaerobic metabolism predominates and requires substantial o 2 supply after cessation of the activity for the conversion of lactic acid. the face mask forms a closed circuit for the inspired and expired air, though not completely airtight. rebreathing of the expired air increases arterial co 2 concentrations and increases the intensity of acidity in the acidic environment [17] . thus individuals exercising with a mask would have physiological effects similar to a chronicobstructive pulmonary disease (copd) person exercising such as discomfort, fatigue, dizziness, headache, shortness of breath, muscular weakness and drowsiness [18] . besides, light activity, like walking with a met value of 2, could increase the amount of inhaled co2 and decrease the amount of o2 via an n95 mask, increasing the work of breathing. therefore, we could assume this effect to magnify when performing any aerobic or resistance exercise at a higher workload.the resistance offered to the inspiratory and expiratory flow, for prolonged periods (about 10 mins), could result in respiratory alkalosis, increased lactate levels and early fatigue [9] . the aforementioned symptoms affect the exercising individuals psychologically as well as bring about physiological alterations such as muscle damage, muscle fibre switch and fast-twitch fibres size.further, poor saturation of haemoglobin would be anticipated due to increased partial pressure of co 2 at higher exercise intensity [19] . fig.2 demonstrates the extreme right shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, which would be higher than that expected during exercise.this acidic environment would unload o 2 faster at the muscle level, but due to higher heart rate and reduced affinity at the alveolar junction, the partial pressure of o 2 would substantially fall, creating a hypoxic environment for all vital organs.substantial evidence exists concerning the long term effects of exercise and the improvement in adaptive immunity [20] . though, moderate exercise, in the long run, is found to increase natural killer cell count and downregulate inflammatory factors such as tumour necrosis factors, acute bouts of vigorous exercise over a while may influence these changes negatively. exercising with facemasks induces an acidic environment, and thus mobility of hypoxic natural killer cells to the target cells would be affected, aggravating the chances of infection during the pandemic. a further change in humidity and temperature in the upper airway causes immotile cilia syndrome predisposing individuals to lower respiratory tract infections by deep seeding of oropharyngeal flora [21] .the reduced availability of o 2 and co 2 would increase the heart rate and blood pressure exponentially even at low workloads. this physiological alteration may increase aortic pressure and left ventricular pressures, leading to an upsurge of cardiac overload and coronary demand [22] . further increased respiratory load against the "valve breathing", leads to increased respiratory muscle load and pulmonary artery pressure, in turn, adding to the cardiac overload.these changes may be subtle in healthy individuals during exercise. still, in persons with established chronic illness, these changes may aggravate the underlying pathophysiology, leading to hospitalization or increased use of medication.hypercapnic hypoxia reduces renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate posing a risk of reduced renal functions. thus, aciduria and resulting tubular damage may potentially aggravate the compromised renal functions in individuals with established chronic diseases [23] . further, the autonomic dysfunction and reduced immune responses, increase the inflammatory substances such as c reactive protein, interleukins (il-6, il-12) resulting in generalized nephritis in chronic kidney failure patients [24] . additionally, poor renal artery flow causes hypoxemia in nephrons perpetuating the pathophysiology of poor renal functions.acute hypercapnia, a double-edged sword, on the one hand, elevates intracranial pressure, lowers cerebral perfusion, and triggers cerebral ischemia and, on the other hand, it is found to be neuroprotective decreasing the excitatory amino acids and minimizing the cerebral metabolism [25] . studies from obstructive sleep apnea [26] provide irrefutable evidence of hypercapnic hypoxemia affecting the postural stability, proprioception, altered gait velocities and falls. the above findings can be extrapolated to elderly persons as well as individuals with established respiratory diseases exercising with n95 respirator masks.though the respirator masks are perceived to be the barriers for preventing aerosol depositions to the respiratory tract, the bitter reality is that masks increase the risk of more in-depth respiratory tract infections. as quoted by perencevich et al. 2020, "the average healthy person shouldn't be wearing masks as it creates a false sense of security and people tend to touch their face more often when compared to not wearing masks" [27] . the surgical masks are debated to trap the droplets containing the virus inside, increasing rather than reducing the risk of infection.even with the usage of a protective face mask, social distancing while exercising outdoors is essential. to avoid the adverse effects of exercising with a face mask, the individual should first be aware of their exercise limit. low to moderate-intensity exercise would be beneficial and would help reduce the ill effects of mask breathing. when experiencing symptoms of dizziness, imbalance, excessive fatigue [13] , and shortness of breath, it would be advisable to stop and take a break, until symptoms subside. intermittent atmospheric breathing without the mask would be beneficial to restore the normalcy of breathing and reducing the stress on the cardiopulmonary system, in an area which is not densely occupied by people. individuals with chronic diseases should avoid venturing outdoors to exercise. home-based exercises, performed under the supervision of a health professional, would be preferred to avoid any adverse outcomes.exercising with facemasks might increase pathophysiological risks of underlying chronic disease, especially cardiovascular and metabolic risks. social exercisers are recommended to do low to moderate-intensity exercise, rather than vigorous exercise when they are wearing facemasks. we also recommend people with chronic diseases to exercise alone at home, under supervision when required, without the use of facemasks. given the identified and hypothesized risks, social distancing and self-isolation appear to be better than wearing facemasks while exercising during this global crisis.legends fig.1 . pathophysiological changes associated during exercise with facemasks. potential changes that occur in the immune, muscular, renal, brain, cardiovascular and metabolic systems contributing to anxiety and depression. gfr -glomerular filtration rate; paco2 -partial pressure of carbondixide; pao2 -partial pressure of oxygen;  -decreased;  -increased. . red dotted lines shows the right shift of the curve due to exercise without masks (paco2, ph and temperature). violet dotted lines shows the extreme curve shift during exercise with masks (paco2, ph and temperature)since december 2019, a number of patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology have been reported in wuhan, hubei province [1] . it was reported that most of these patients worked at or lived around the local huanan seafood wholesale market. severe acute respiratory infection symptoms occurred in most patients, with some patients rapidly developing acute respiratory distress syndrome and acute respiratory failure [2] . on january 7, 2020, a novel type of coronavirus was identified from the throat swab sample of a patient, and was temporarily termed as 2019-ncov by the world health organization (who). on february 11, the pneumonia caused by 2019-ncov was formally named as covid-19 by who [3] .the 2019-ncov spreads rapidly, mainly through droplet and contact transmission. until march 3, 2020, the number of confirmed cases reached more than 80,000 according to the report from the national health commission (nhc) of china. covid-19 was classified as one of the legal class b infectious diseases in china, but taking the highest level of prevention and control measures according to the "law of the people's republic of china on the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases."on february 11, 2020, "diagnosis and treatment protocols of covid-19 infection (6th edition)" was published by nhc of china [4] . it indicated that x-ray and computed tomography (ct) examinations were effective methods for the screening and diagnosis of this infectious disease [5] . however, most radiologists and radiological technologists in radiology departments had less experience when facing covid-19 patients. examination with nonstandard prevention procedures will lead to high risks of hospital cross-infection in the radiology department. in order to effectively reduce the infection risk of radiologists and radiological technologists, a consensus on "prevention and control measures in radiology department for covid-19" was presented under the endeavors of many radiologists and radiological technologists led by the chinese society of imaging technology, chinese medical association, aiming to guide the prevention and practical work in the radiology department.personal protection levels [6] general protection wearing work clothes, disposable medical masks, work caps, and gloves (if necessary).it is suitable for pre-examination and triage, fever clinic, and infectious diseases clinic. wearing disposable work caps, disposable medical masks (n95-type masks are recommended when contacting with confirmed patients), work clothes, isolation gowns, and disposable latex gloves (if necessary), and strictly implementing hand hygiene.it is suitable for medical staff who has close contact with suspected or confirmed patients. wearing disposable work caps, protective goggles or face shields (anti-fog type), medical protective masks, protective clothing or isolation gowns, disposable latex gloves, and disposable shoe covers, and strictly implementing hand hygiene.it is suitable for aerosol-generating procedures performed for suspected or confirmed patients, such as sputum aspirating, respiratory sampling, tracheal intubation, and tracheotomy, which may cause spraying or splashing of respiratory secretions and substances of the body. wearing disposable work caps, medical protective masks, protective face shields (fullscale respirators or positive pressure headgears are recommended), medical protective clothing, disposable latex gloves, and disposable shoe covers, and strictly implementing hand hygiene.an independent medical imaging examination room is needed and different working areas should be strictly separated.i. to prevent cross-infection, an independent medical imaging examination area or a dedicated radiological examination equipment (including x-ray photography equipment and ct scanner for infected patients) as well as a dedicated film printer should be available. according to the requirements for nosocomial infection prevention and control, the polluted area, semi-polluted area, and cleaning area need to be strictly separated and disinfected. if a dedicated examination room (such as a ct room) cannot be separated from others, strict equipment and air disinfection are required after the current patient scan and between patient encounters. fever clinics, radiological contaminated and semi-contaminated areas, and isolation wards are the key areas for healthcare-associated infections prevention and control, which must be terminally disinfected after the examinations for confirmed patients and before the examinations for next suspected patients. ii. a dedicated radiological examinations route must be established. iii. batch-based and time-separated services should be carried out for confirmed patients and suspected patients in fever clinic and ward, with a subsequent strict disinfection.requirements for medical staff in radiology department [8] administrator of nosocomial infections: at least one administrator needs to be designed, who is responsible for directing and supervising the disinfection and protection in the radiology department. they must guide the whole disinfection, make a clear division, and report in time to guarantee the staff and patients by avoiding to be infected by the virus.radiographers for bedside x-ray photography specific radiographers need to be arranged to carry out bedside x-ray photography in key areas and take standardized photography. these radiographers are required to strictly implement the secondary level of protection. in the case of work that may cause spraying or splashing of respiratory secretions and substances of the body, such as sputum aspiration, respiratory sampling, endotracheal intubation, and tracheotomy, the third level of protection is required. after each examination, the surface of equipment should be disinfected (wiped with 75% ethanol).the radiographers in charge of patient position should strictly implement the secondary level of protection. the radiographers in charge of operating equipment can adopt the first or secondary level of protection.staff for patient registration in the key areas patient registration should be completed by the radiographers in the key areas, and any material being in contact with the confirmed patients must be separately and safely stored. staff for patient registration in the non-key area should take the primary level of prevention. it is recommended to make full use of the hospital information system (his), picture archiving and communication system (pacs), and radiology information system (ris) to achieve paperless management.other staff working in the non-key areas in the radiology department it is recommended to take the general protection when working in the cleaning areas, take the primary protection when working in the semi-contaminated areas, and take the secondary protection when working in the contaminated areas. in the case of work that may cause spraying or splashing of respiratory secretions and substances of the body, such as sputum aspiration, respiratory sampling, endotracheal intubation, and tracheotomy, the third level of protection is required.the radiographers for bedside x-ray photography, dr, and ct examinations working in the isolation area are recommended to take a 2 + 2 working mode, due to the possibility of closely contacting with the confirmed patients. in the 2 + 2 working mode, the radiographers should complete a first period of 14 workdays in the isolation area, and subsequently take a second period of 14 days in a specific dedicated isolation ward for supervised medical observation before returning to normal work.processes of wearing and removing protective clothing [9, 10] process of wearing protective clothing seven steps of hand-washing; wearing a cap; wearing a medical protective mask (taking the leak test); wearing medical protective clothing (after removing shoes); wearing latex gloves (inner layer); wearing isolation clothing; wearing latex gloves (outer layer); wearing rubber boots/shoes; wearing boot/shoe covers; wearing goggles/face shield; checking tightness.in contaminated areas: clearing visible dirt; hand hygiene; taking off outer boot/shoe covers; hand hygiene; taking off isolation clothing and outer gloves; hand hygiene. in the semi-contaminated area: taking off goggles/mask; hand hygiene; taking off protective clothing, inner gloves, and boot covers; hand hygiene; taking off medical protective masks; taking off the cap; seven steps of hand-washing.cleaning and disinfection of radiology equipment [11] daily cleaning i. metal surface and painted surface can be wiped with soft detergent, and then dried with dry towel. corrosive cleaning agent, corrosive detergent, and corrosive polishing agent are not allowed. ii. chrome parts should only be wiped with a dry towel.abrasive polishes are not allowed. wax is suggested to protect the surface coating. plastic surfaces can only be cleaned with soap and water. iii. common glass cleaner except for amide products can be used to clean the touch screen. spray the glass cleaner on the cloth or towel, and then wipe the touch screen. be sure to remove the liquid drops in time to prevent it from flowing into the gap of the equipment.i. after each examination (including x-ray photography, ct, magnetic resonance imaging, or others), the equipment must be disinfected by wiping the surface using 75% ethanol. ii. corrosive disinfectants are not allowed. iii. disinfectant sprays should be used carefully, as they may penetrate into the equipment, resulting in short-circuit, metal corrosion, or other damage. if the spray disinfector is needed in the room, the equipment must be shut down, cooled, and completely covered with plastic film before starting the spray disinfection. then the equipment itself is disinfected by wiping the surface using 75% ethanol.visible pollutants should firstly be removed using disposable water absorption material, and then the floor should be disinfected by using 2000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine). furthermore, any other objects (such as handrail, door handle, window, and wall switch) should also be disinfected.air disinfection for the equipment room is recommended by using ultraviolet irradiation (continuous irradiation for more than 30 min), followed by ventilation for more than 30 min.all disposable protective products must be non-reusable. the reusable protective products (such as goggles) should be placed at the designated disinfection place, and be soaked in 1000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine) or 75% ethanol for more than 1 h.treatment measures of medical waste in radiology department [12] collection process of medical wasteall waste from confirmed patients are regarded as infectious medical waste, and should be managed strictly according to the following process. the process of disposing infectious waste is as follows: put the infectious waste into the medical waste collection bag (ideally be no more than ¾ full); spray the bag with 5000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine); seal the inner layer and outer layer in a goose-neck-type and spray the layers with 5000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine); paste special identifications in the outer layer, and store it in the specialized site for medical wastes.the cleaners should take the secondary level of protection and be responsible for handover registration, safe transportation, and proper storage of the infectious medical waste.radiological examination, especially chest ct, plays an irreplaceable role in the diagnosis of patients with covid-19. radiologists, radiological technologists, and nurses must have a great command of the individual protection and disinfection procedures when working in radiology department, especially in key areas.since december 2019, a number of patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology have been reported in wuhan, hubei province [1] . it was reported that most of these patients worked at or lived around the local huanan seafood wholesale market. severe acute respiratory infection symptoms occurred in most patients, with some patients rapidly developing acute respiratory distress syndrome and acute respiratory failure [2] . on january 7, 2020, a novel type of coronavirus was identified from the throat swab sample of a patient, and was temporarily termed as 2019-ncov by the world health organization (who). on february 11, the pneumonia caused by 2019-ncov was formally named as covid-19 by who [3] .the 2019-ncov spreads rapidly, mainly through droplet and contact transmission. until march 3, 2020, the number of confirmed cases reached more than 80,000 according to the report from the national health commission (nhc) of china. covid-19 was classified as one of the legal class b infectious diseases in china, but taking the highest level of prevention and control measures according to the "law of the people's republic of china on the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases."on february 11, 2020, "diagnosis and treatment protocols of covid-19 infection (6th edition)" was published by nhc of china [4] . it indicated that x-ray and computed tomography (ct) examinations were effective methods for the screening and diagnosis of this infectious disease [5] . however, most radiologists and radiological technologists in radiology departments had less experience when facing covid-19 patients. examination with nonstandard prevention procedures will lead to high risks of hospital cross-infection in the radiology department. in order to effectively reduce the infection risk of radiologists and radiological technologists, a consensus on "prevention and control measures in radiology department for covid-19" was presented under the endeavors of many radiologists and radiological technologists led by the chinese society of imaging technology, chinese medical association, aiming to guide the prevention and practical work in the radiology department.personal protection levels [6] general protection wearing work clothes, disposable medical masks, work caps, and gloves (if necessary).it is suitable for pre-examination and triage, fever clinic, and infectious diseases clinic. wearing disposable work caps, disposable medical masks (n95-type masks are recommended when contacting with confirmed patients), work clothes, isolation gowns, and disposable latex gloves (if necessary), and strictly implementing hand hygiene.it is suitable for medical staff who has close contact with suspected or confirmed patients. wearing disposable work caps, protective goggles or face shields (anti-fog type), medical protective masks, protective clothing or isolation gowns, disposable latex gloves, and disposable shoe covers, and strictly implementing hand hygiene.it is suitable for aerosol-generating procedures performed for suspected or confirmed patients, such as sputum aspirating, respiratory sampling, tracheal intubation, and tracheotomy, which may cause spraying or splashing of respiratory secretions and substances of the body. wearing disposable work caps, medical protective masks, protective face shields (fullscale respirators or positive pressure headgears are recommended), medical protective clothing, disposable latex gloves, and disposable shoe covers, and strictly implementing hand hygiene.an independent medical imaging examination room is needed and different working areas should be strictly separated.i. to prevent cross-infection, an independent medical imaging examination area or a dedicated radiological examination equipment (including x-ray photography equipment and ct scanner for infected patients) as well as a dedicated film printer should be available. according to the requirements for nosocomial infection prevention and control, the polluted area, semi-polluted area, and cleaning area need to be strictly separated and disinfected. if a dedicated examination room (such as a ct room) cannot be separated from others, strict equipment and air disinfection are required after the current patient scan and between patient encounters. fever clinics, radiological contaminated and semi-contaminated areas, and isolation wards are the key areas for healthcare-associated infections prevention and control, which must be terminally disinfected after the examinations for confirmed patients and before the examinations for next suspected patients. ii. a dedicated radiological examinations route must be established. iii. batch-based and time-separated services should be carried out for confirmed patients and suspected patients in fever clinic and ward, with a subsequent strict disinfection.requirements for medical staff in radiology department [8] administrator of nosocomial infections: at least one administrator needs to be designed, who is responsible for directing and supervising the disinfection and protection in the radiology department. they must guide the whole disinfection, make a clear division, and report in time to guarantee the staff and patients by avoiding to be infected by the virus.radiographers for bedside x-ray photography specific radiographers need to be arranged to carry out bedside x-ray photography in key areas and take standardized photography. these radiographers are required to strictly implement the secondary level of protection. in the case of work that may cause spraying or splashing of respiratory secretions and substances of the body, such as sputum aspiration, respiratory sampling, endotracheal intubation, and tracheotomy, the third level of protection is required. after each examination, the surface of equipment should be disinfected (wiped with 75% ethanol).the radiographers in charge of patient position should strictly implement the secondary level of protection. the radiographers in charge of operating equipment can adopt the first or secondary level of protection.staff for patient registration in the key areas patient registration should be completed by the radiographers in the key areas, and any material being in contact with the confirmed patients must be separately and safely stored. staff for patient registration in the non-key area should take the primary level of prevention. it is recommended to make full use of the hospital information system (his), picture archiving and communication system (pacs), and radiology information system (ris) to achieve paperless management.other staff working in the non-key areas in the radiology department it is recommended to take the general protection when working in the cleaning areas, take the primary protection when working in the semi-contaminated areas, and take the secondary protection when working in the contaminated areas. in the case of work that may cause spraying or splashing of respiratory secretions and substances of the body, such as sputum aspiration, respiratory sampling, endotracheal intubation, and tracheotomy, the third level of protection is required.the radiographers for bedside x-ray photography, dr, and ct examinations working in the isolation area are recommended to take a 2 + 2 working mode, due to the possibility of closely contacting with the confirmed patients. in the 2 + 2 working mode, the radiographers should complete a first period of 14 workdays in the isolation area, and subsequently take a second period of 14 days in a specific dedicated isolation ward for supervised medical observation before returning to normal work.processes of wearing and removing protective clothing [9, 10] process of wearing protective clothing seven steps of hand-washing; wearing a cap; wearing a medical protective mask (taking the leak test); wearing medical protective clothing (after removing shoes); wearing latex gloves (inner layer); wearing isolation clothing; wearing latex gloves (outer layer); wearing rubber boots/shoes; wearing boot/shoe covers; wearing goggles/face shield; checking tightness.in contaminated areas: clearing visible dirt; hand hygiene; taking off outer boot/shoe covers; hand hygiene; taking off isolation clothing and outer gloves; hand hygiene. in the semi-contaminated area: taking off goggles/mask; hand hygiene; taking off protective clothing, inner gloves, and boot covers; hand hygiene; taking off medical protective masks; taking off the cap; seven steps of hand-washing.cleaning and disinfection of radiology equipment [11] daily cleaning i. metal surface and painted surface can be wiped with soft detergent, and then dried with dry towel. corrosive cleaning agent, corrosive detergent, and corrosive polishing agent are not allowed. ii. chrome parts should only be wiped with a dry towel.abrasive polishes are not allowed. wax is suggested to protect the surface coating. plastic surfaces can only be cleaned with soap and water. iii. common glass cleaner except for amide products can be used to clean the touch screen. spray the glass cleaner on the cloth or towel, and then wipe the touch screen. be sure to remove the liquid drops in time to prevent it from flowing into the gap of the equipment.i. after each examination (including x-ray photography, ct, magnetic resonance imaging, or others), the equipment must be disinfected by wiping the surface using 75% ethanol. ii. corrosive disinfectants are not allowed. iii. disinfectant sprays should be used carefully, as they may penetrate into the equipment, resulting in short-circuit, metal corrosion, or other damage. if the spray disinfector is needed in the room, the equipment must be shut down, cooled, and completely covered with plastic film before starting the spray disinfection. then the equipment itself is disinfected by wiping the surface using 75% ethanol.visible pollutants should firstly be removed using disposable water absorption material, and then the floor should be disinfected by using 2000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine). furthermore, any other objects (such as handrail, door handle, window, and wall switch) should also be disinfected.air disinfection for the equipment room is recommended by using ultraviolet irradiation (continuous irradiation for more than 30 min), followed by ventilation for more than 30 min.all disposable protective products must be non-reusable. the reusable protective products (such as goggles) should be placed at the designated disinfection place, and be soaked in 1000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine) or 75% ethanol for more than 1 h.treatment measures of medical waste in radiology department [12] collection process of medical wasteall waste from confirmed patients are regarded as infectious medical waste, and should be managed strictly according to the following process. the process of disposing infectious waste is as follows: put the infectious waste into the medical waste collection bag (ideally be no more than ¾ full); spray the bag with 5000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine); seal the inner layer and outer layer in a goose-neck-type and spray the layers with 5000 mg/l disinfectant containing chlorine (except for chlorhexidine); paste special identifications in the outer layer, and store it in the specialized site for medical wastes.the cleaners should take the secondary level of protection and be responsible for handover registration, safe transportation, and proper storage of the infectious medical waste.radiological examination, especially chest ct, plays an irreplaceable role in the diagnosis of patients with covid-19. radiologists, radiological technologists, and nurses must have a great command of the individual protection and disinfection procedures when working in radiology department, especially in key areas.coronavirus disease 2019, also known as covid-19, has rapidly become a worldwide emergency. the (who 2020) has recently declared the global pandemic (who, covid-19 situation report-88).since mid-january 2020, there have been cases of infected new covid-19 cases in japan. as the covid-19 is pandemic outbreak, the number of patients in japan exceeded 1,000 on march 21st and 9,299 on april 17th (data sourced from japan ministry of health, labour, & welfare). in order to curb the spread of the epidemic, primary, middle and high school students suspended classes and undergraduate students extended their holidays. now, the spread of the new coronavirus is continuing. the government announced on april 7th that it made emergency statements for seven prefectures (saitama, chiba, tokyo, kanagawa, osaka, hyogo, and fukuoka) where covid-19 infection is spreading across the region, and it expanded the national emergency declaration on april 16th.facilities and stores that may come into intimate contact, such as recreation facilities, gyms and bars that serve alcohol at night, are closed due to the government's refraining from doing business. on the other hand, grocery stores, medical facilities, public transportation, banks, etc., which are essential to live, are required to make efforts to shorten business hours and suppress heavy contact.however, those facilities have not been requested or instructed to be closed. of the medical facilities, hospitals that treat infected people are in a critical situation, as in other countries, because the number of infected people is increasing day by day. the japanese society of infectious diseases announced that they should change the way of treatment of infectious diseases and announce the "clinical response to new coronavirus infectious diseases" to clinical sites involving medical treatment. japanese prime minister, shinzo abe emphasized that as far as possible not to go out for reasons that are not necessary or urgent, but will not be blocked, in order to reduce the economic pressure caused by new type covid-19 to the people, the government decided to issue 100,000 yen per person to relieve the stress of new type covid-19 on people's lives.at present, the age of patients with onset in japan is widely distributed from children to the elderly, but more than 90% of deaths are over 60 years old. china, italy and united states of america have reported cases of children dying of new type covid-19, so we should pay take it as a big serious (livingston & bucher, 2020; sinha et al., 2020) . one of the three major festivals in japan, gion festival, held in kyoto has been cancelled. in addition, masks have become a necessity for people. now it is difficult to get masks in japan. although the japanese government has taken measures to deal with new type covid-19, in the face of the epidemic, it is better for us to wash our hands frequently, ventilate frequently and avoid gatherings. not to go out as less as possible, if you have symptoms that are suspected of being infected, you should do your own home isolation or follow the hospital's isolation treatment system. this is an essential period for japanese fight against new covid-19.a few clinics and hospitals where infection has happened were already closed, but most clinics that do not be required to be closed, such as internal medicine, ophthalmology, otolaryngology and dermatology, provide most of the usual medical care.dental clinic is one of them. for the time being, the dental clinics offer the same treatment as usual. what is a little different from usual is that while taking precautions to see patients with suspected covid-19 infection (those who have concentrated contacts with infected person or those who have symptoms).due to the characteristics of the dental environment, the risk of cross-infection between dentists and patients may be high. in addition, a large amount of droplets and aerosols may be generated during dental treatment, but the standard protective measures in daily clinical work are not enough to prevent the spread of covid-19, especially when the patients are in the incubation period, are unknown of their infected or conceal their infection (puisieux, brabletz, & caramel, 2020) . to prevent the spread of infection, dentists are trying to prevent infection between patients and between patients and medical staffs. medical staffs are engaged in medical care to prevent clusters of infection in the clinic.here are the infection control methods in a private dental office (tada dental clinic, hyogo, japan) paper #1939). although this is likely to adversely affect the management, economy, employment, etc. of dental clinics, covid-19 is in a pandemic situation. it is necessary to reduce non-urgent treatments, such as routine dental cleaning and preventive treatments which can help prevent the spread of infection.in a private dental office (tada dental clinic, hyogo, japan), 95% of the patients visit with wearing their masks. moreover, over 90% of patients use alcohol disinfection of their hands at the entrance of dental office. at present, the spread and infection rate are relatively slow in the nearby areas. we should pay more attention to the future changes in the number of infected people and consider whether to go to the dental clinic. if the situation is going bad, the dental clinic should be closed in time. in 19 march 2020, world health organization has produced a document related to the use of medical masks in areas affected by novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 intended for control professionals, healthcare managers, healthcare workers, and community health workers [1] . regarding the use of face masks for civilians, world health organization and u.s. centers for disease control and prevention have both said that only people with covid-19 symptoms and those caring for them should wear masks [2] . in details, world health organization suggested to maintain at least 1 metre (3 feet) distance between yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing as one of the basic protective measures against the new coronavirus [3], while u.s. centers for disease control and prevention suggested about 6 feet or 2 meters distance from others [4] . an interesting article has been recently published by l. bourouiba in which she highlighted that "these distances are based on estimates of range that have not considered the possible presence of a highmomentum cloud carrying the droplets long distances", taking into account that spread during exhalations, sneezes, and coughs encompasses mucosalivary droplets following short-range semiballistic emission trajectories and multiphase turbulent gas cloud, as well. the author reported "for these and other reasons, wearing of appropriate personal protection equipment is vitally important for health care workers caring for patients who may be infected, even if they are farther than 6 feet away from a patient" [5] . furthermore, van doremalen et al. published in the new england journal of medicine on 16 april 2020, a study regarding aerosol stability of sars-cov-2 compared with sars-cov-1, demonstrating that the results obtained "indicate that aerosol and fomite transmission of sars-cov-2 is plausible, since the virus can remain viable and infectious in aerosols for hours and on surfaces up to days (depending on the inoculum shed)" [6] . in this overall scenario, the guardian reported on 1 april 2020 that world health organization considers changing guidance on wearing face masks because new evidence suggests wearing masks in public could help contain the pandemic [7]. in addition, leung et al. reported in the article published in nature medicine on 03 april 2020 that "our results indicate that surgical face masks could prevent transmission of human coronaviruses and influenza viruses from symptomatic individuals" [8] .taking account the need of face masks for a huge number of people, some countries have to face the issue of insufficient amount of personal protective equipment. in italy, this deficiency has boosted several industries to reset their production chain, moving from their usually target manufacturing towards the production of personal protective equipment in order to match the large quantities requested for the safety of citizens. this urgent request is encountering a barrier, which entails the customization of the production to delivery effective medical and non-medical masks.in this regard, it is important to distinguish between medical masks for healthcare professionals and civil protection workers (ffp2 and ffp3) and non-medical masks for civilians. the production of medical masks needs to respect the following european standards namely i) en 14683:2019 for the surgical masks -requirements and test methods which reports specification of construction, design, performance requirements and test methods for medical masks with the aim to limit the transmission of infective agents from staff to patients during surgical procedures; ii) en 149:2009 for the respiratory protective devices ffp2 and ffp3 able to protect against particles the operator and not the patient. these mask filters inhaled air but did not exhale air [9] .any other mask available on the market, is not a medical device or an individual protection device; to this purpose, this type of masks can be produced based to the art. 16, paragraph 2, of the italian legislative decree 18/2020, under the responsibility of the manufacturer who must in any case guarantee the safety of the product: the materials used not cause irritation or any other harmful effect on health, are not highly flammable, etc. these masks cannot be used in a hospital or healthcare environments as they do not have the technical requirements of medical devices and personal protective equipment.in 2002/657/ce concerning the performance of analytical methods and the interpretation of results, european commission has defined screening method as "methods that are used to detect the presence of a substance or class of substances at the level of interest. these methods have the capability for a high sample throughput and are used to sift large numbers of samples for potential non-compliant results. they are specifically designed to avoid false compliant results" [10] . the screening methods was then established as useful analytical tools for rapid and cost-effective analysis rendering the value chain of measure more sustainable; indeed more analyses using screening methods rely on less analysis using confirmatory methods, that required large and expensive instrumentation, combined with skilled personnel [13] .to face the delivery of safe face masks in timely fashion, arpa lazio together with department of chemical sciences and technologies of tor vergata university have collaborated to set-up a screening analytical system for fast evaluation of the capability of this type of masks to break down aerosol, inspired by the activity of other groups [11, 12] . herein, we describe the set-up developed to deliver a smart analytical system able to simulate the inhalation and exhalation and measuring the aerosol able to pass through the face masks tested.different types of face masks (fig. 1) were kindly supplied by companies whose names are omitted to avoid any form of publicity. the medical masks were bought at local pharmacy.analytical instruments air cube gas was used to create a constant flow at 6 l/min while fai opc optical particle counter was used to measure the particles before and after the aerosol passes through the masks.to evaluate the breaking down of aerosol through the face masks, a system was built in laboratory creating two chambers divided by the tested face mask. the first chamber (chamber 1, highlighted in red in fig. 2b) can be opened to load it with aerosol, while the second one (chamber 2, highlighted in green in fig. 2b ) is closed and connected to vacuum pump for simulating the respiratory action. the percentage of particles blocked by face mask tested is evaluated measuring the particles in chamber 1 (loaded with aerosol) and the particles in chamber 2, after the simulated respiratory action, by the optical particle counter.the detailed procedure is shown in fig. 2 . in phase 1, the chamber 1 is filled with aqueous aerosol produced by a commercial ultrasonic vaporizer ( fig. 2a) , and the particles present are measured by the optical particle counter (phase 2, fig. 2b) . after, the vacuum pump is switched on for 2 seconds simulating a deep respiratory action (phase 3, fig. 2c ) which boosted the moving of the particles from chamber 1 to chamber 2, passing through the face mask. then, the passed particles in chamber 2 were measured (phase 4, fig. 2d ). the particle counter is able to detect particles starting from eight different dimensional ranges: 0.28, 0.4, 0.5, 0.7, 1.1, 2.0, 3.0, 5.0 µm. for each range, the effectiveness of face mask for breaking down the aerosol was evaluated using the following equation: %eff = (ni -nf) /ni * 100 where ni is the count of the particles in chamber 1, while nf is the count of the particles in chamber 2. figure 2 shows the system made with material readily available in the laboratory; the same apparatus, made of methacrylate and equipped with the remote control of the aerosol, provides the same results.the face masks were tested in the inhalation and exhalation direction, by setting the face mask in the conventional use or in opposite side.the analysis conditions were chosen in order to create in chamber 1 an atmosphere heavily contaminated by aerosol particles. the flow rate of 6 l/min for 2 sec was chosen to simulate a deep single respiratory action. the acquisition time of the particle counter was set at 1 min to deliver reproducible measurements.to assess the effectiveness of face masks, at least 8 measurements for each type of masks were carried out, evaluating both the response in inhalation and exhalation using different masks of the same batch. in table 1 , the average filtration efficiency was reported taking into account the particles with diameters greater than 0.28 µm. the results obtained showed that the medical face mask is characterized by values higher than 97%, while only the face masks fabricated with three layers mainly constituted by tnt (non-woven fabric material) are able to reach values higher than 95%. these results are in agreement with a technical note of politecnico di milano which suggested the use of three layers and tnt as material [12] .to highlight the behavior of the breaking down of the aerosol particles at different dimensions, in table 2 we reported all dimension ranges of particles analyzed before and after the passing through the medical mask, non-medical masks type c and type d. as depicted in table 2 , the higher efficiency was observed at the higher particle dimensions. in addition, we reported also the measurement obtained when nitrogen was flown in chamber 2, observing a decrease of particles inside the chamber, as expected. the results obtained demonstrated that this method is able to discriminate easily the face masks suitable for aerosol breakdown, suggesting that it can be used as a screening method to evaluate the produced face masks in this urgency situation, in order to customize easily their production.the issue of covid-19 is having a huge impact of in different sectors ranging from health system to agriculture. in italy, the deficiency of the medical face masks for the people involved in health system as well as of the non-medical face mask for the civilians has boosted several italian industries to change their value chain for medical and non-medical face mask fabrication. to deliver medical face masks, the produced masks needed to be subjected to different tests following the european standards namely en 14683:2019 and en 149:2009 which required complex laboratory set-up and long analysis time. herein, we reported a set-up developed for screening analysis of medical face c=cotton, tnt= non-woven fabric material; rsd%=5 for 4 consecutive measurements masks as well as for testing the non-medical face masks using optical particle counter technique, which is used in en 779:2012 to evaluate the filter filtration efficiency, combined with pump able to simulate the respiratory action with the aim to deliver a simple analytical system for screening test of medical and non-medical face masks in timely fashion. in late 2019, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) due to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections started off in wuhan, china. the infection rapidly evolved and spread to most countries around the world, leading to a pandemic. as of 12 june 2020, more than 7.4 million people were infected, causing more than 418,000 deaths globally. clinical presentation of covid-19 ranges from asymptomatic to fatal pneumonia. underlying chronic respiratory diseases was identified as one of the risk factors for severe covid-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) is one of the commonest chronic respiratory diseases in the world and in hong kong. acute exacerbation of copd (aecopd) requiring hospitalizations is associated with accelerated decline in lung function, worsened quality of life, increased risk of future exacerbations and increased mortality. it is the fourth leading cause of death in the world but is projected to be the third leading cause of death by 2020 (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) .respiratory tract infection is one of the commonest triggers of aecopd in which influenza is associated with considerable mortality and morbidity (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) . both exposure to certain air pollutants and low temperature are also shown to confer increased risk of aecopd (15) .there is yet no evidence suggests the link between covid-19 and aecopd requiring hospitalization. as a respiratory tract pathogen, sars-cov-2 infections can potentially cause more aecopd. hong kong society had dramatic responses in infection control and voluntarily adopted universal masking and aggressive social distancing since the first confirmed case of covid-19 on 23 th january 2020. the percentage of wearing masks by the public was 74.5% on 20th to 23rd january 2020, 97.5% on 11th to 14th february and 98.8% on 10th to 13rd march 2020 (n=10,319, figure 1 ). it was obtained from a survey from the hong kong public opinion research institute (hkpori), which carried three-cross sectional telephone survey among general adult population in hong kong, with self-reporting of wearing a face mask when going out. telephone numbers were randomly generated by computer system.masking was not specifically defined but was generally understood by the public as surgical masks, while some may use re-usable mask (16, 17) . social distancing was widely practised by hong kong citizens, with some government policy since 25th january 2020 including clo-sure of all schools, work from home policy for most government employees, closure of recreational business and bars, and ban on gathering of more than four people in public places (18, figure 1 ). as such, for a city in close proximity to china, hong kong has a relatively low case load of covid-19. whether universal masking can provide additional benefits on aecopd, is the focus of our current study.this was a retrospective study to assess number of admissions for aecopd during the period of covid-19 in queen mary hospital (qmh) with reference to the admission number in the past 5 years. qmh is a tertiary hospital provides acute care under hospital authority, a public organization accountable for 90% of in-patient services in hong kong (19) . the study period was january to march 2020, when world health organization (who) confirmed the novel coronavirus, later called covid-19 infection on 9 january 2020, with the first imported case from wuhan to hong kong on 23 january 2020. patients above 45 years old with known copd admitted for aecopd from the period 1st january 2015 to 31st march 2020 were included in the study. data was obtained by retrieval of admission records from the clinical data analysis and reporting system (cdars) of hospital authority. principal diagnoses with icd-9 codes of 469 and 491 were searched on cdars. inclusion criteria include 1) age above 45-year-old 2) with known diagnosis of copd 3) and with aecopd.exclusion criteria include 1) age of 45-year-old or below 2) with copd admitted for causes of dyspnea other than aecopd 3) with coexisting pulmonary diseases including asthma-copd overlap syndrome and bronchiectasis, which are being identified as the secondary diagnoses in cdars. demographic data (including age, gender), clinical data/investigations (including date of admission, length of hospital stay, blood and sputum culture results, use of non-invasive ventilation and invasive mechanical ventilation) were collected. length of stay (los) and mortality were used as markers of severity of aecopd admission, with longer length of stay and higher mortality indicated more severe condition of patients. data on other acute admissions within the same period including heart failure (icd-9 code 428), intestinal obstruction (icd-9 code 560) and iron deficiency anaemia (icd-9 code 280) were taken as control diagnoses. these control diagnoses were taken as reference of health-seeking behavior during period of covid-19 with evaluating possibility of decreased hospital attendance due to various reasons including fear of being infected by covid-19 or not to overload hospital care.percentage of masking (16) , air quality, as measured by air quality health index (aqhi), temperature and incidence of influenza a and b in the period from january 2015 to march 2020 in hong kong were also collected and their associations with copd exacerbation were studied with highlights on the covid-19 period. relationship between percentage of mask usage and aecopd was calculated with assumption of 1% on the period prior covid-19, in accounting for the pregnant lady and immunocompromised patients who were advised to wear masks. aqhi was calculated by the hong kong environmental protection department (hkepd), based on the cumulative health risk attributable to a 3-hour moving average concentrations of four air pollutants, namely ozone (o3), nitrogen dioxide (no2), sulphur dioxide (so2) and particulate matter (pm 2.5 / pm 10 ). the aqhi system provided different health advice for people having different degree of susceptibility to air pollution, including people with existing heart or respiratory illnesses, children and the elderly, outdoor workers and the general public. it was reported in scale of 1 to 10 and 10+ and grouped into five health risk categories, namely low [1] [2] [3] , moderate [4] [5] [6] , high [7] , very high [8] [9] [10] and serious [10+] with different precautionary actions were advised. people with respiratory illness were advised to reduced outdoor physical exertion and to minimize their stay in outdoor when aqhi was high, very high or serious. the aqhi was reported hourly in 13 stations located in different area of hong kong (20) . the total number of hours with aqhi recorded as high, very high or serious were summed up and expressed as percentage of total number of hours collected in a month. log-linear model was used for statistical analysis of the possible association between aqhi and aecopd. mean ambient temperature in degree celsius of each month was collected from the hong kong observatory (21) . influenza incidence was collated from territory-wide laboratory surveillance data for both in-patients and out-patients in both public and private medical sectors from the centre for health protection, hksar, with relative static number of specimens collected over the period (22).for statistical inference about the association between covariates (air temperature, aqhi and mask usage) and admission count, log-linear modeling was used in this study. it was also applied for statistical inference for admission count between the three different time periods, namely first three months of 2020, first three months of 2015-2019 and all months in 2015-2019. to balance the model fitness and complexity, akaike information criterion (aic) was used for model selection. both traditional asymptotic test statistics and bootstrapping were considered. the later approach was a re-sampling method for statistical inference with less restrictive assumptions, which can help to handle relatively small sample size. it was designed to recover the distribution of model parameters and provided alternative estimates of key quantities such as confidence intervals and p-value based on some randomly shuffling the labels under the null hypothesis (23, 24) . bootstrap sample size was set as 9999 to achieve adequate precision for significance. two-sided tests were conducted for general differences and p<0.05 was taken as significant differences. fisher exact test was used to compare the mortality rate and percentage of los of more than 5 days between the two time periods.number of admission of the two time periods were classified into two categories (for mortality: death/alive or whether los exceeding 5 days) and hence formed a 2-by-2 contingency table. further details of these biostatistical methods are listed in appendix 1. the study was approved by the local institutional review board for ethical and scientific review. and mortality (p=0.528) were statistically insignificant between the two periods (table 1) .for the effect of wearing facemasks, the expected admission count would reduce by 1.0%with each percent of increase in masking (p<0.001). average monthly admission in the first three months of 2015-2019 was 92. increase in masking from 1% to 98.8% would decrease admission number by 59.2% to 38 admissions per month, given temperature remained constant. increase in one degree celsius in temperature would reduce aecopd by 3.0% (p=0.045). the percentage of aqhi with high to serious levels ranged from 0-13% in the period and ranged from 0-4.9% in first three months with worse aqhi observed in october and november ( figure 4 ). increase in one percent of aqhi with high to severe would increase admission count by 1.6% but was statistically insignificant (p=0.315). table 1 ).the average monthly admission for intestinal obstruction and iron deficiency anaemia were static over the period 2015 to 2020. average number of admissions was 24 per month for intestinal obstruction and 19 per month for iron deficiency anaemia (figure 2 ). in the first three months of 2020, the average number of admissions for intestinal obstruction was 27 and for iron deficiency anaemia was 21. the effect of wearing facemasks, aqhi and temperature were statistically insignificant. the difference in admission number between periods was statistically insignificant (table 1 ).our study is the first to show the change in hospitalization number of aecopd during covid-19 pandemic and its relationship with percentage of masking, temperature and air quality. compared with other conditions that require hospitalization for management, including heart failure, intestinal obstruction and iron deficiency anaemia, aecopd admission number in the first three months of 2020 was significantly lower when compared to the same periods in previous years. the drastic drop in admission number cannot be fully explained by change in health-seeking behaviors in fear of attending hospitals as shown by admission of control diagnoses were not decreased. the copd mortality and los more than 5 days were similar in the same period which suggested the severity of aecopd could be the same. universal masking and higher temperature were shown to associate with decrease in aecopd. worsening of air pollution with higher percentage of aqhi with high to serious was associated with more aecopd admission but was statistically insignificant in our study. however, air pollution is known to be associated with increase in aecopd and this should be acknowledged. the statistical insignificance can be accountable by the relatively small variation of percentage with high to serious aqhi in the period (ranges from 0-4.9% in the first quarter of years).aecopd is one of the most important complications of copd which could lead to adverse outcomes. prevention of recurrent aecopd is the main goal of respiratory physicians. both non-pharmacological and pharmacological therapies, including standard treatment based on gold guideline and influenza and pneumococcal vaccine have been advocated but the number of hospitalizations for aecopd remained static over the past five years (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) . yet there is no obvious reason accountable for the decrease in admission for heart failure in the period. this phenomenon should be acknowledged that the drop on admission may or may not due to obvious external cause.our observational study in hong kong suggested the benefits of masking and social distancing can potentially extend beyond prevention of covid-19, including early termination of influenza season and drop in the number of hospitalizations due to aecopd in the first quarter of 2020.the potential limitation of this study was that it only involved a single centre, qmh. the centre served an area in hong kong with relatively stable population size with no major service change in the past five years (31) . using districts with relatively stable population size and with only one acute hospital with accident and emergency department would remove the bias from population size change and also that from loss of patients due to admission to another centre within the same district. this can also use as a reference for projection of the condition of healthcare system in hong kong.moreover, our study only included patients with aecopd admitted to a regional tertiary hospital. some patients with mild attack might visit outpatient clinics hence not all patients with aecopd were included. however, patients with severe attack who attended outpatient clinics are generally referred to emergency department and admitted, hence they were included in our study. our study focused on patient population with more severe symptoms who required hospital admission after triage by emergency department. the severity of exacerbation was comparable with other period as shown by the length of stay and mortality data.our study showed the observational effect of decrease in aecopd with universal masking and social distancing which are both widely practiced in hong kong in covid-19 period.both factors occurred together and the possible effect of each component on decrease in aecopd admission cannot be differentiated in our observational study.the number of admissions for aecopd decreased in the first three months of 2020, compared with the number in 2015 to 2019 in hong kong. this was observed with the widely practice of universal masking and social distancing. we postulated that universal masking and social distancing could prevented respiratory tract infections which were one of the triggers of aecopd, hence was associated with decrease in aecopd during the covid-19 pandemic. this paper is an effort to model the epidemiology and stop the spread of the novel coronavirus, which is causing huge detrimental effects all around the world. the ultimate goal is to slow the spread of the virus, using evidence based public health interventions, which includes early case recognition, isolation and contact tracing. this disease has grown from being a small cluster of pneumonia in china to a global pandemic causing huge loss of life. therefore, there is a huge need for modeling the disease, and simulation of various control strategy implementation is necessary to make well informed decisions.incidence is the number of new cases of coronavirus in a particular population in a period of time. in general, incidence is reported for each country's population. the table below gives the incidence of all the country that has been affected majorly. 27 april 2020 [1] the incidence per 1million calculated in the table gives a better picture than the number of cases, on how the country is affected. for example, by comparing india and singapore, india has twice the number of cases than in singapore, and it does not mean that india more is affected. the incidence per 1 million for singapore is more than 100 time to that of india's. it is because the population of singapore is far less than india.the death per 1million data also gives the information on how each country is handling the infected cases.among all the countries, spain is in a very bad state with a mortality rate of 11.16%. the united states of america has the most number of cases (1.2 million as of may 8th, 2020) and has more than 75,000 deaths.the coronavirus spreads mainly from person to person, through respiratory droplets from an infected person (via. coughs or sneezes). these droplets can go into people who are nearby. it spreads, when people are near to each other. the droplets do not hang around in the air and can not go more than six feet from the source (about two meters).covid-19 spreads sustainably in a community in many affected regions. people are getting infected with the virus, mostly without knowing where they are infected.people also get infected when they come in contact with an infected surface and then touches their eyes or face.symptoms for covid-19 is not constant, and ranges from mild disease to severe illness. symptoms usually appears 14 days after being exposed to the virus. major indications of covid-19 are cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, new loss of taste or smell [2] .medical attention should be sought immediately if the following symptoms are noticed: trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion or inability to arouse, bluish lips or face [2] .with the restricted availability of testing kits, not everyone is eligible for being tested. if it only causes mild illness, people are asked to recover at their home itself. decisions on who to be tested are made by health departments and healthcare providers.by the end of april, a viral test has been authorized by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) that lets people to collect a respiratory sample (a swab inside of the nose) at home, and send it to a laboratory for analysis. in most areas the collection kits were made available via healthcare workers [3] . .things to do to implement social distancing: avoid contact with people who could be at risk, avoid public places, gathering and crowds, avoid clinics and hospitals, and avoid restaurants.it is every individuals responsibility to prevent this virus from spreading, and social distancing is a way collective effort in stopping the spread of this disease. in case of 3 emergencies in which we can not avoid going to different places, one should maintain at least a distance of 6 feet from one another.contact tracing is carried out by a public health staff. they get data from the patients with coronavirus to help everyone they have had contacted during the previous weeks while they were infectious. the identity of the patient is not revealed for their privacy. traced individuals are given information on the risk of being infected, and are asked to separate themselves from other susceptible people, and check for symptoms and illness. they are asked to monitor their body temperature twice a day, and if they have symptoms, they should isolate themselves and report to a health care worker.hospitalization or isolation is the process of separating the sick people from the non sick ones. with a steady rise in new cases of coronavirus, hospitals are working at maximum capacity, and infected individuals are admitted only when they show severe symptoms or have extreme illness. temporary medical clinics can be setup in areas where most infections occur can reduce the spread of the disease.quarantines are used by governments to prevent the spread of the virus. it is especially for individuals have no symptoms but were exposed to the sickness. it is important to keep them separated from susceptible people so that they don't infect others without their knowledge. quarantines are used during an outbreak, or an epidemic, or during a pandemic.it has been debated whether masks are effective or not. the truth is that it works. the effect of face masks is illustrated very clearly in the paper, 'to mask or not to mask' [14] .both hands should be cleaned before wearing the mask. there should be no gaps between ones face and the mask. never touch the mask, and discard them in a closed bin quickly, once they are damp. masks are effective only if the hands are washed properly and the used masks are disposed properly.individuals with medical conditions like heart/lung disease or diabetes are at a greater risk for developing serious illness due to the disease [4] . people who are most affected are ones with the following conditions: asthma, immunocompromised conditions, severe obesity, chronic kidney disease undergoing dialysis, and liver diseases.the kermack-mckendrick model [5] is a sir epidemiological model. it explains the rapid rise and fall in the number of infected cases reported in an epidemic. the model assumes that there is no change in the total population size (i.e., no vital dynamics and deaths due to disease), and that there is no incubation period.the model has three nonlinear odes:where, s is the number of susceptible people, i is the number of infected people, r is the number of recovered people who gained immunity, β is the infection rate, and γ is the recovery rate.the reproduction number of this model is was called as epidemiological threshold.to control the disease outbreak, r 0 should be less than 1. this basic model structure first published in 1927 have been developed into many complex epidemiological models over a century, and currently there are thousands of published models. this paper also uses the same type of modeling methodology.as there are many uncertainties in hoe the corona-virus is spreading, there is is a huge need for modeling the spread of the disease. many papers are being published once the pandemic began. the most predominant modeling papers are discussed here.a mathematical model for simulating the transmission of wuhan novel coronavirus [6] is a different paper than other modeling papers being published. they have developed a bats-hosts-reservoir-people transmission network model. they have simplified their model as reservoir-people transmission network. it is a brief paper with the modeling framework, the nonlinear equations and the first generation method derivation for the reproduction number.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.a mathematical model for the novel coronavirus epidemic in wuhan, china [7] . the model is a basic seir compartments with a v compartment(concentration of the coronavirus in the environmental reservoir) at the end. the model also includes the vital dynamics of the population. they got a high reproduction number estimate of 4.25. the inclusion of the vital dynamics in the model seems to have increased the ability of the disease to spread more. it is also noticeable that they have modeled three different transmission rate for every class that can be infectious. the paper is concentrated towards wuhan and therefore the dynamics vary a little from other modeling papers.report 9: impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. [16] this report is a very important, because many policies in the uk and other countries are made based on it. it discusses about various non-pharmaceutical interventions that are aimed at reducing contact rates in the population, and the conclusion was that no intervention can impact the contact rate if they are implemented separately. all interventions should be implemented to achieve a synergistic effect.forecasting the impact of the first wave of the covid-19 1 pandemic on hospital demand and deaths for the usa and 2 european economic area countries. [8] . this paper used data identification tools and statistical modeling to model the disease. they have predicted a huge demand for hospital and icu bed-days, and their estimation of the number of deaths of around 1,584,737 in usa from the first wave of seems unlikely. this gives us an idea on how compartmental modeling is better than statistical data analysis for epidemiological models.flattening the curve before it flattens us: hospital critical care capacity limits and mortality from novel coronavirus (sars-cov2) cases in us counties. [9] . this paper concentrates on the relation between available critical care and deaths that occurs when critical care bed limits are exceeded. they have devised for 4 critical care surge response scenarios. their concern is that the mortality data does not include normal patients with injury, who could not get treated due to suddenly overloaded healthcare system.to mask or not to mask: modeling the potential for face maskuse by the general public to curtail the covid-19 pandemic. [14] . this paper considers the importance of face mask in the prevention of the disease. two models, one with no mask use and the other with mask use and control strategies are created. simulations are done in both these models and the results are compared. it talks about inward efficiency (prevention from catching the disease) and outward efficiency (preventing the transmission of the disease). the model for the exponentially decaying infectious contact rate in this work is inspired from this paper. the model is parameterized for the data for new york and washington. they found that the usage of masks have a huge impact than what we already believed it to have.a case study of the covid-19 coronavirus. mathematical modeling of epidemic diseases. [10] . this paper deals with simple models, but demonstrated the effects of various control strategies. it begins with an explanation of the basic sir model,cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . followed by compartmental seir models for the coronavirus. the paper also compares two scenarios where in one, the recovered people gets lifetime immunity, and the other has re-susceptible factor in the model. other simulations such as short lock down, and healthcare system saturation is also presented.refined compartmental models, asymptomatic carriers and covid-19. [11] . this paper talks about the various possible compartmental models which can be used as the base model for the novel coronavirus. a discussion on these models (modified seir, splitting the exposed group into different compartments, and including asymptomatic population), explains them well. this paper is highly illustrative with many simulations.construction of compartmental models for covid-19 with quarantine, lockdown and vaccine interventions [12] . many epidemiological models are formed and the dynamics are analysed. they also explore the transmissibility of the viral infection during different control strategies like quarantine, lock-downs, and vaccinations. the dynamics of coronavirus is simulated for the data in ghana. it is interesting to see that the basic reproduction number is less than 1, and they expect that the disease will be gone in two to four months. the graphical representation of the model framework used in this work is inspired from this paper.modeling the spread of covid-19 with comsol multiphysics [13] . comsol multiphysics is a virtual dynamical simulation software. they have used the software to simulate the compartmental models with an aim to flatten the curve. they have presented a basic seir model an a seir model with many sub-compartments of exposed and infectious class. it is amazing how a physics simulation software can be used to simulate dynamics of epidemiology.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. a deterministic model of the coronavirus 2019 disease transmission, is used to estimate the parameters in the united states of america. this model includes factors which reduces the transmission of the disease, such as social distancing, hospitalization and contact tracing of asymptotic individuals. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. .the modeling framework consists of susceptible, exposed, pre-symptomatic infectious, symptomatic infectious, asymptomatic infectious, hospitalized-non icu, hospitalized icu,and recovered, with the classes respectively denoted s(t), e(t), p(t), i(t), a(t), h(t), c(t), and r(t). in addition, a cumulative death class is also included and is denoted as d(t).after the incubation period in exposed class, they become infectious, but they are pre-symptomatic for a period; a part of them eventually become symptomatic and the others asymptomatic. a fraction of detected infectious individuals (by symptoms for i(t) class; by contact tracing for a(t) class) are moved to the hospitalized class (non-icu), h(t), where they are isolated from general public. some fraction of hospitalized patients ultimately require critical care and they are moved to hospitalized icu class. some fraction recover and some die in the classes i(t), a(t), h(t) and c(t). based on these assumptions, the deterministic model for the transmission dynamics of covid-19 is given by the framework in figure 1 , and the corresponding deterministic system of nonlinear differential equations is given below.where, n is the total population. n = s + e + p + i + a + h + c + rall the parameters in the model is defined and a default value is estimated. they are found by searching research literature, official reports or by fitting the model to the available data. β(t) is the time dependent infectious contact rate, which has a exponentially decreasing structure [14] . the decrease is due to the prevention measures put into action by the 9 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . government and good will of the people.we assume that β decrease right from the beginning (without delay) because our initial condition β 0 for the model is set to be on 01-march-2020, during when they started to implement preventive measures. it decreases to β min as the time passes at the rate of r. β min required to get to disease free equilibrium is calculated from conditions for the basic reproduction number. the β min and r are fixed during the model fitting process. η the relative infectiousness of asymptomatic carriers compared to symptomatic carriers, and it is assumed that symptomatic individuals are 50% more infectious than the asymptomatic people [16] . the value is set to 0.44.σ is the transition from exposed to pre-symptomatic class, where 1 σ is the incubation period (average 5 days [17] for coronavirus). so, the value of σ is 1 5 . σ p is the transition from pre-symptomatic to infectious class (i or a)). calculated similar to σ. the period of stay in this class is an average 3 days. "this virus continues to spread across the country, because we have asymptomatic transmitters and we have individuals who are transmitting 48 hours before they become symptomatic" -cdc director [19] .f is the fraction of pre-symptomatic individuals who eventually becomes asymptomatic. there is a lot of uncertainty in this fraction [20] . the average value is set to be 0.5. φ i h is the rate of hospitalization of symptomatic people. the median interval from symptom onset to admission was 7 days (interquartile range [iqr] = 3-9 days) [21] . the percentage of hospitalization is 20 [22] . so, φ i h = (1/7)*0.2 = 0.028. σ a is the rate at which asymptotic individuals are detected using contact tracing and hospitalized. it is the product of the percentage of contact-tracing execution and the rate of asymptomatic hospitalization. contact tracing reduced the time taken to identify and isolate patients after onset of symptoms to 2.7 days [23] . ct ia control variable (varied in the simulations)default ct is taken to be 0.1. therefore, default σ a is (1/2.7)*0.1 = 0.037.φ h c is the rate of icu admission from hospitalization. in a study by chen wang et al. [25] , of the patients hospitalised 32% required admission to an intensive care unit. in another report from imperial college [24] , they calculate bed demand numbers assuming a total duration of stay in hospital of 8 days if critical care is not required and 16 days (with 10 days in icu) if critical care is required. with 30% of hospitalised cases requiring criticalcare, they obtained an overall mean duration of hospitalisation of 10.4days, slightly shorter than the duration from hospital admission to discharge observed for covid-19 cases internationally. therefore, if someone needs critical care, on an average they stay in the hospital for 6 days before moving to icu. so, φ h c = (1/6)*0.32 = 0.0533. also γ h , the recovery rate of hospitalized people for whom critical care is not required is 1/8; and γ c , the recovery rate of hospitalized in need of icu is 1/9 [26] .both γ i , the recovery rate of symptomatic individuals and γ a , the recovery rate of asymptomatic individuals, is on an average found to be 1/7. it is because, on an average the people in these classes recover in 7 days. δ i , the death rate of symptomatic individuals. it is found that the average duration between the onset of symptoms and death is 22 days [26] . the mortality rate among the cases found is 3.4% [28] . so, δ i = (1/22)*0.034 = 0.00154. δ a is the death rate of the asymptomatic population, is assumed to be half of δ i [29] so, δ a = δ i / 2 = 0.00077.δ h (death rate, hospitalized -non icu) it is found that the average duration between hospitalization and death is 8 days [26] . with the mortality rate of 3.4%, δ h = (1/8)*0.034 = 0.00425. δ c (death rate, hospitalized -icu) it is found that the average duration between icu admission and death is 7 days [26] . with the mortality rate of 3.4%, δ h = (1/7)*0.034 = 0.00485.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098418 doi: medrxiv preprintthe state-level time series for both cumulative mortality data and cumulative case data, compiled by center for systems science and engineering at johns hopkins university [31] , from march 1, 2020, through april 27, 2020, is used to calibrate the model initial conditions i(0) and infective contact rate, β 0 , when β(t) is taken as an explicit function of time. other parameters are fixed at default values in table 2 . parameter fitting was performed using nonlinear least squares algorithm im-plemented using the lsqcurvefit function in matlab.parameters calibrated for the model fitted for the mortality data (with β m set to be 0.1):the initial condition i(0) is fitted to be 11222.24501, that is 11223 cases should have been actually reported on march 1, 2020, but this condition seems to be high compared to the actual case data on that day.the infective contact rate, β 0 is fitted to be 1.16562. even though the model fits the death data nicely, the the number of cases through the time simulated is underestimated, and the initial case number i(0) is overestimated. therefore, the case data should also be used while fitting the model.parameters calibrated for the model fitted for mortality and case data (with β m set to be 0.1) are the initial condition and β 0 .the initial condition i(0) is fitted to be 5848.92619, that is 5849 cases should have been actually reported on march 1, 2020, and this condition could have been the actual case data (combining the reported and unreported cases) on that day.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. from the fitting the data for the united states, the best fit parameters are i(0) = 5849; and the initial infective contact rate β 0 of the time varying β(t), with fixed r = 0.04day −1 and β m = 0.1day −1 , is found to be 1.33877day −1 .next generation matrices is the best way to find the basic reproduction number, beacuse it is good to follow the infection as seen in van den driessche p., watmough j. [30] , f v −1 is the next generation matrix for the system at disease free equilibrium.where,the system is global asymptotic stable (gas) iff all eigenvalues of the next generation matrix have norm less than one, that is the spectral radius of the next generation matrix 13 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. .(ρ(f v −1 )) is less than one. in epidemiological models this spectral radius is called as the basic reproduction number of the model (r 0 ).therefore, in order to get the corona-virus to disease free equilibrium, the r 0 given above should be less than 1.currently, the β value is found to be approximately 0.5. therefore, by using all the default values given in table 2 , r 0 is found to be 2.71914.in the r 0 equation, after taking β out as a common factor, it has three parts summed up together, which needs to be decreased in order to bring r 0 to be less than one.the first part ( η σ p ) is a constant term since both η and σ p is fixed, and can not be controlled. using the default values this fraction is calculated to be 1.32.φ i h +γ i +δ i ), with default values for the uncontrollable variables f ,γ i ,and δ i , the only controllable variable is φ i h (the rate of hospitalization of the symptomatic people). to reduce the value of this whole fraction, φ i h needs to be increased, by reducing the number of days it takes to admit individuals after symptom onset. this can be implemented by increasing the number of temporary hospitalization facilities in places where the cases are increasing steadily; and by increasing testing speed and availability. if the maximum possible φ i h (0.033) is considered, the second part is calculated to be 2.7846.the third part( ηf ct.φa h +γ a +δ a ), with default values for the uncontrollable variables η, f ,γ a , δ a , and φ a h , the only controllable variable is ct (the percentage of contact tracing execution). if ct is implemented at maximum capacity (0.7), the third part is calculated to be 0.5446. therefore when the maximum possible rate of hospitalization is executed and contact tracing is implemented in full capacity,14 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . the infectious contact rate must be brought less than 0.215 to control the disease, even when the hospitalization rates are increased, and the contact tracing is implemented at full potential.as presented in the report from the center of evidence based medicine [20] , the percentage of people remaining asymptomatic varies drastically in many different case studies. therefore, analyzing uncertainty in f is important. as seen in the figure 4 , even 10% deviation of f from the default value causes a huge difference in the model simulation. it is always better to expect the worst case scenario in situations like this and make decisions so that many lives can be saved.it can also be observed that the actual data till 4/27 lies well within the range, and the future data is expected to be within the limits till 08/28 as shown in the simulations.the infectiousness vary from person to person, this factor is very sensitive and affects the predictions hugely. therefore, analyzing uncertainty in η is also important.as seen in the figure 5 , even 4% to 6% deviation of η from the default value causes a huge difference in the model simulation. it is always better to expect the worst case scenario in situations like this and make decisions so that many lives can be saved.it can also be observed that the actual data till 4/27 lies well within the range, and the future data is expected to be within the limits till 08/28 as shown in the simulations.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . it is important to analyze how changes in control parameters of our mathematical model affects the whole model. this can be done by analyzing correlation of the parameters with reproduction number.the correlation between r 0 and β is clear from the r 0 equation, they are positively correlated.all the parameters in the equation is positive, therefore,r 0 and β has a positive correlation.when β is increased r 0 is also increased. therefore, to keep the reproduction number as low as possible, the infectious contact rate must be maintained as low as possible. this can be done by implementing various control strategies such as social distancing.the correlation between r 0 and ctall the parameters in the equation is positive, therefore,16 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098418 doi: medrxiv preprint r 0 and ct has a negative correlation.when ct is increased, r 0 decreases. therefore, to keep the reproduction number as low as possible, the implementation of contact tracing of asymptomatic individuals is crucial, and it must be maintained as high as possible.the correlation between r 0 and φ i hall the parameters in the equation is positive, therefore,r 0 and φ i h also has a negative correlation.when φ i h is increased, r 0 decreases. therefore, to keep the reproduction number as low as possible, the hospitalization rate should be be maintained as high as possible.one key difference between isolation by contact tracing and hospitalization, is that when people are traced, they don't even know that they could be sick, but for hospitalization a patient need to have a severe illness.simulations of the epidemiological model is performed in matlab. the differential equations are solved using the function called ode45, which solves non-stiff differential equations using medium order method. the sample code is given in the appendix for reference three control strategies (social distancing, contact tracing asymptotic population, and increasing hospitalization rate) are simulated, and the parameters responsible for implementing these strategies are varied and plotted together to analyze and compare. these kind of simulations helps in making decisions during a pandemic.strict rules on social distancing should be implemented and followed, to prevent the spread of the disease. the simulation in figure 6 shows that, if strategies to increase social distancing are implemented (that is, reducing β), the number of new cases can be reduced, and the recovery from the coronavirus pandemic is quicker. the number of estimated deaths also decreases by a significant amount in the order of 10 5 .two new conditions (with β = 1 and β = 0.5) are simulated along with previously simulated model, and the plots are shown in figure 6 for comparison.the time taken to reach reasonably low number of cases is reduced by at least two weeks. considering that the control measures are implemented continuously, the best possible time to remove social distancing without getting the disease back again, would be by early august of 2020.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . with pressure from many groups of people who are affected financially, and with the government stuggling to handle the economy, the social distancing control measure is expected to be stopped in may,2020, bringing a lot of concern on how to stop the spread. the plot of simulations in 7 shows what will be the situation if that happens (say from 05/20). the number of cases will start to rise again, this eventually will force us to maintain social distancing again. therefore, there will be a bigger peak in the number of reported cases, and it will take 5 more months to get out of this situation. the number of deaths will also increase as it takes longer to stop the spread of the disease.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . the plot of simulations in 8 shows what will be the situation if the same thing happens from 06/09. the number of cases will start to rise again, this eventually will force us to maintain social distancing again. even though, the peak in the number of reported cases is not increased more than what was already reached, it will take more than 8-9 months to get out of this situation. this shows us how important social distancing is. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . distancing at all after 06/09. the simulation is frightening as the number of cases goes upto 40 million.the majority of new infections are created by infected people who is showing no symptoms, they can either be totally asymptomatic or presymptomatic. to reduce the spread through them, contact tracing should be implemented. it is done by finding about all the people who were contacted by symptomatic individuals in the last two weeks. if they are tested to be positive of the disease, then they are hospitalised.it is also possible that the person traced was the one actually who got infected, when they got in contact with this symptomatic person. either way, contact tracing is a way to find and isolate people who could potentially carry the virus around and causing new infections. this process of isolating those who could potentially carry the disease around, is not executed at full potential, because not everyone who are exposed or asymptomatic can be found out by tracing previous contacts.the simulations in figure 10 shows the predictions for two new values for the percentage of contact tracing implementation ( ct = 0.3 and ct = 0.7), along with the default value of 0.1. there is significant reduction in the number of cases over the month of may and after.it can also be seen that the number of recorded death estimate increases, this is because the people who will die from this disease without knowing they had the disease, are now found and tested using contact tracing, and their deaths are recorded. hospitals are struggling to handle the load of new cases. therefore, it is reasonable to increase the number of temporary facilities and in many areas as possible. this will reduce the time taken from symptom onset to hospital admission, and thus the hospitalization increases.φ i h is increased in the simulations as shown in figure 11 . two new rates -φ i h = 0.04 (in which takes 5 days to hospitalize someone), and φ i h = 0.05 (in which takes 4 days to hospitalize someone), are simulated. it can be seen that there is a decrease in the number of reported case estimate. increasing φ i h did not impact the number of cumulative deaths very much, as seen in the simulations below. from the simulations of the three control strategies, social distancing seems to have a bigger reduction in the number of diagnosed cases. no single control meothod will give the best result. it is only when all the control strategies are implemented, the considerable change is seen.a good compartmental framework of the model is designed by including all major classes of people. the most unnoticed classes during the modeling process of the coronavirus are the pre-symptomatic people and those that are in need of critical care. they are included in the model, and the model parameters are defined using the data from various research papers, official reports, and interviews. once the parameters are fixed, model is fitted to the cumulative case and mortality data given by john hopkins university. the fit gave the values for β 0 to be 1.33877 and i(0) to be 5849, which actual infected cases in the us (on march 1, 2020).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . different aspects of the model have been analyzed and the effect of various control strategies have been simulated.the disease free equilibrium is discussed and using the threshold analysis, basic contact rate to achieve dfe is calculated to be 0.215. the basic reproduction number is also calculated using the default values, and is found to be 2.71914, which is in the range similar to what most modeling papers produce.uncertainty in the fraction of the infectious people being asymptomatic and in the infectiousness of people with no symptoms are simulated, and the worst case scenarios are found. in the worst case, the number of cases can go up to 1.9 million by second week of march, 2020. the death toll can go up to 0.5 million by the end of august, 2020.basic sensitivity analysis is performed, and the correlation between different control parameters and the basic reproduction number are found. β 0 is the positively correlated, and therefore should be reduced. the contact tracing implementation and hospitalization rate of symptomatic people are inversely correlated, and therefore they must be increased as much as possible.the control strategies are simulated and the results are analyzed. the social distancing strategy seem to be best possible one right now. with the absence of vaccines, it is better to prevent the disease. if the social distancing strategy was highly implemented as shown in the simulations the number of cases during the peak can be reduced up to 1.1 million. the duration of the implementation is also reduced by at least two weeks.other simulations have also been added to discuss what will happen if the social distancing is stopped in mid of may, 2020, or june, 2020 and then the control measure is followed again. if the distancing is stopped in may and implemented again, it will take till the end of the year to recover from the disease. if the distancing is stopped in june and implemented again, it will take us to first few months of next year, which is not a welcomed situation.another simulation in which the social distancing is stopped totally on 06/09 is plotted and the results are alarming. the peak will drastically rise up to 40 million, and the death toll will go upto 4.5 million. fortunately, this will not happen, because the control measure can not be stopped abruptly as done in the simulations, and the government will take actions before something like that happens.another control strategy is contact tracing of asymptomatic individuals. the simulations shows that the number of cases can be decreases, though the change is not as predominant as it was in the case of social distancing. anyhow, implementing contact tracing along with social distancing will produce a good improvement of the control of the disease.the last control measure simulated was the hospitalization rate. increasing this rate is difficult , but even minor changes can bring a huge change. the current time it takes to hospitalize someone showing symptoms is 7 days. the simulation shows the effect of reducing this time to 5 and 4 days. as the rate increases to 0.05 (that is 4 days for. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098418 doi: medrxiv preprint admission), the peak number of cases could have been reduced to 1 million.in summary, this paper shows the advantage of mathematical modeling and their simulations during a pandemic like covid-19. the process helps in making good well informed decisions. in our case the united states of america should stay in lock down at least until july, 2020, to prevent major catastrophe. despite the protest against the lock down and people's social needs, the control strategies should be implemented for the greater good. it is only when humanity works together, this pandemic can be eradicated.appendix: matlab implementation of the model simulation . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . delta_i = 0.00154; delta_a = delta_i/2; delta_h = 0.00425; delta_c = 0.00485; r = 0.04; b_m = 0.1; dcdt=zeros(9,1); n = c(1)+c(2)+c(3)+c(4)+c(5)+c(6)+c(7)+c(8); dcdt(1)= -(1/n)*(b_m+((beta-b_m)*exp(-r*t)))*c(1)*(c(4)+eta*(c(5)+c(3))); dcdt(2)= (1/n)*(b_m+((beta-b_m)*exp(-r*t)))*c(1)*(c(4)+eta*(c(5)+c(3))) -sigma*c(2); dcdt(3)= sigma*c(2) -sigma_p*c(3); dcdt(4)= (1-f)*sigma_p*c(3) -phi_i_h*c(4) -gamma_i*c(4) -delta_i*c(4); dcdt(5)= f*sigma_p*c(3) -phi_a_h*c(5) -gamma_a*c(5) -delta_a*c(5); dcdt(6)= phi_i_h*c(4) + phi_a_h*c(5)-phi_h_c*c(6) -gamma_h*c(6) -delta_h*c(6); dcdt(7)= phi_h_c*c(6) -gamma_c*c(7) -delta_c*c(7); dcdt(8)= gamma_i*c(4) + gamma_a*c(5) + gamma_h*c(6) + gamma_c*c(7); dcdt(9)= delta_h*c(6) + delta_c*c(7) + delta_i*c(4) + delta_a*c(5); endthe new coronavirus, called 2019-ncov, is a new type of virus that was first identified in wuhan, china, in december 2019 (ghinai et al. 2020) . the 2019-ncov is from same family as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), communityacquired pneumonia (cap), and other common colds. the 2019-ncov is a relatively large virus with a size of about 1-2 nm and is from a group of enveloped virus family, containing a positive-sense single-stranded rna (fehr and perlman 2015; ebrahimi et al. 2020) . the virus is transmitted through direct contact with infected person's respiratory droplets (coughing and sneezing), as well as contact with infected surfaces. the 2019-ncov can survive for hours on surfaces, but a simple disinfectant can eliminate it (lai et al. 2020a ). covid-19 signs and symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. in more severe cases, the infection can lead to pneumonia or respiratory severe problems, and ultimately in rare cases, the disease will be fatal (huang et al. 2020a ).in the absence of a safe and effective vaccine, as well as a lack of specific drug treatment, the only solution is preventing its transmission, performing general education, and implementing appropriate prevention and control. precautions can help people prevent risk of infection, such as washing hands frequently with soap and water or an alcohol-based disinfectant gel, covering mouth with your bent napkin or elbow when sneezing or coughing, avoiding close contact with those who have symptoms, and being sure to see a doctor if have a fever, cough, or difficulty breathing (haybar et al. 2020) . the virus transfers through direct and close contact with respiratory droplets of the affected person (cough or sneeze) or contact with contaminated surfaces (ghinai et al. 2020; yu et al. 2020) , and it can survive for hours on surfaces, but a pure disinfectant can eliminate it.the covid-19 survival in the environment and its prevention and control common coronavirus viruses spread through respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, and nose and mouth are their two main entry routes (fig. 1) . in vulnerable and susceptible individuals, these viruses often cause only common cold that usually recovers spontaneously and has no serious side effects. however, viruses such as sars, middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mers), or 2019-ncov can cause an acute and lethal form of pneumonia or gastritis. the risk of environmental contamination by these three types of viruses is far greater than the other viruses . the outflow and spread of the virus from the body occur within about 6 days after infection and reaches its maximum 4 days later (jiang et al. 2020; nishiura et al. 2020 ). the environmental conditions necessary for the survival and spread of 2019-ncov are somewhat clear, but unlike animal coronaviruses, there is less and limited knowledge about the natural causes of 2019-ncov transmission (kamel boulos and geraghty 2020; khafaie and rahim 2020a) . although several studies on sars-cov have already been conducted, a limited number of studies have shown that humidity and temperature probably affect the activity and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov (table 1) . as simply can see in the table, most of the studies reported that temperature and relative humidity could have a significant impact on the incidence rate and transmission of sars-cov2.epidemiologic and field studies show that 2019-ncov, just similar to sars and mers, is spread through fine-grained particles (such as particles sneezing out of the mouth) (yu et al. 2020; schwartz and graham 2020) . in only a single old study (tang 2009 ), the survival of the airborne human coronavirus 229e (hcv/229e), a virus used in research as a representative or surrogate of coronary respiratory viruses, was studied under different temperature and relative humidity conditions. the study showed that under such conditions, the virus has a half-life of 27 and 67 h at 30% and 50% humidity, respectively, while its half-life at 80% humidity is only 3 h. when the temperature drops as 6 degrees, the virus's half-life is increased 3 h at 80% humidity. similar conditions and consequences have been reported for seasonal flu (lowen and steel 2014) . this severe effect of lowering the temperature on prolonging the virus's half-life at high humidity could help the 2019-ncov spread under these conditions. in spite of several clinical studies that claimed that spreading the virus into droplets can be prevented using appropriate masks, it is fig. 1 the importance of social distancing, close contact, particle size, percent of virus particle deposit in various regions of the upper airway, and the effect of humidity and temperature on the 2019-ncov activity challenging to prevent it from spreading into aerosol forms, as well as the type of mask makes no significant difference (long et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020b) . subsequent studies showed that viruses that had become airborne aerosols and spread through defective sewage were the possible cause of the sars coronavirus that killed lots of people in hong kong in 2003 (yu et al. 2004 ). in the same year, only one incident in sars contaminated 22 out of 120 passengers on a 3-h flight (olsen et al. 2003) . surprisingly, the contamination included people who were outside the person's 2-m distance, and viruses could not be transmitted to them through aerosols and droplets (la rosa et al. 2013) . although it is difficult to prove that the virus has spread only through aerosols and droplets, the relatively low humidity of the aircraft has undoubtedly contributed to the higher survival of the sars virus in the particles. but a later study did not observe that transmission of sars-associated coronavirus and suggested that the risk of transmission is not amplified aboard aircraft (vogt et al. 2006) . a research report from canada points to the fact that open oxygen masks can help to spread disease agents such as sars, in fact, viruses such as sars are transmitted through the droplets emitted from these masks (somogyi et al. 2004) . air exhaled through the oxygen masks transmits viruses in the droplets farther away, increasing the risk of the respiratory disease spreading to health facilities. further research is needed to fully determine that the sars virus and similar viruses can survive and stay live and spreadable in the warm and humid environment of oxygenated air.research findings on the impact of humidity and temperature on the survival of the virus in airborne particulate matter indicate contrary to that. li et al. conducted a comprehensive study on the spread of the sars virus at the hong kong hospital and found evidence of the transmission of the virus aerosols. they also suggested improving the air conditioning or ventilation system to reduce the risk of spreading such diseases . the 2019-ncov is claimed does not survive at temperatures above 26°c, but it can survive for approximately 5-10 min on the skin, 6 to 12 h on plastic materials, and 12 h on metal (fig. 2 ).because safety and ethical considerations do not allow the covid-19 infection test on the human specimen, researchers used human coronavirus, 229e (hcov-229e), as a surrogate to study the survival of the coronavirus on human hands. initial findings from these tests show that about 45% of hand-infected viruses survive and remain viable after 1 h (warnes et al. 2015) . such a survival time is much longer than other viruses, such as the para-influenza virus type 3, which disappears after only 10 min. in another study, researchers used human fingers to show that by washing only with water, the concentration of hcov-229e was reduced by 70%; however, with the use of hand-sanitized alcoholic disinfectants, the concentration of this virus decreased by 99.99% within 30 s (geller et al. 2012) . this study highlights the importance of effective hygiene and disinfection preventing and controlling of infectious diseases caused by coronavirus family.there is no evidence that corona is transmitted through food or drinking water and recreational water. one study shows that sars in the water can survive to a very limited degree (wang et al. 2005) .coronavirus is more stable and more resistant to environmental surfaces than other coated viruses (warnes et al. 2015; otter et al. 2016) . recently, molecular methods such as pcr have been studied for the transmission of pathogens to the environmental surfaces of aircraft (maris 1990 ). however, the detection of pathogenic viruses in environmental samples seems to be necessary to assess their potential ability to infect and spread the disease. mathematical simulations also confirm the fact that environmental levels play an essential role in the spread of coronavirus in health facilities (ikonen et al. 2018 ).three-level biosafety has been suggested for protectivity: (1) level 1 protection (disposable hats, disposable surgical masks, disposable isolation clothing, and disposable gloves) (wang et al. 2020c) ; (2) level 2 protection (level 1 but with medical protective masks such as n95, goggles or protective masks, and as outer cover a medical protective suit); (3) level 3 protection (level 2 but with the addition of face mask or a medical mask, goggles, or face mask to a full set or with an electric air filter respirator) (pei et al. 2020) .wearing a face mask is suggested for healthcare workers and people who have respiratory symptoms, but is not recommended for healthy people (organization wh 2020a). nonmedical masks made of other materials such as cotton fabric has not been well evaluated (esposito and principi 2020) .scientific research to date on the covid-19 has yielded no conclusions that the covid-19 outbreak will decline with the start of the warm season. many researchers have said it is too early to predict whether the covid-19 will decrease as the season progresses (mahase 2020) . studies have hypothesized that areas where covid-19 has suffered the most have similar weather patterns . countries located in the east and west of the globe did not have a significant impact on the prevalence of the disease among communities, and on the other hand, the north and south have provided a model for the relative prediction of disease outbreaks (gates 2020) , but now scenario has changed, and countries located on east and west of globes (usa & japan) have already declared emergency, and this statement was in contradiction with reality. also, it is estimated that this disease will reach saturation in the usa in july 2020 (arias velásquez and mejía lara 2020), and outbreak of covid-19 significantly correlated with average temperature, minimum temperature, and air quality (bashir and ma 2020) .there are striking similarities between average wuhan city air temperature in january (time of outbreak here) and other polluted places in february, as well as their humidity (vetter et al. 2020) . the temperature at meteorological stations in these areas between 4 and 9°c and in cities due to urban factors has been slightly above and between 5 and 11°c (sajadi et al. 2020b) . it can also be predicted that with the onset of summer in northern hemisphere of the covid-19, it may be slightly influenza-like in the tropics and spread simultaneously in the southern hemisphere (anderson et al. 2020 ).in addition to known factors influencing the transmission of viruses, such as population displacement and human-to-human contact, environmental factors can affect transmission of droplets and the virus's survival, but for covid-19 disease, the evidence is still very limited. absolute humidity, which is defined as water in the ambient air, is considered a robust environmental factor for virus transmission (huang et al. 2020b; oliveiros et al. 2020; islam et al. 2020; qi et al. 2020; berumen et al. 2020; guo et al. 2020; barreca and shimshack 2012) . in examining the relationship between climate and sars-cov-2, it is important to note that different regions of the world, which have had a high prevalence in recent weeks, have had different climates; also, no significant relationship has been found so far (sajadi et al. 2020b ) ( table 1 ). in analysis of regional regression, countries affected by high prevalence of disease are divided into different regions, and in these regions, climate will be examined and recorded in several changes. then, for first period, from first day of outbreak to day of study, regression of daily aggregate growth against average temperature and relative humidity will be taken (bukhari and jameel 2020b) . in this model, we try to control variables such as population and gdp (table 1) . however, temperature was not associated with epidemic growth of covid-19 and case counts (zhu and xie 2020).in a study by wang et al., the effect of air temperature and relative humidity on the transmission of 2019-ncov from 105 samples of viruses carrying infected and contaminated pairs calculated the number of daily virus production per 100 chinese cities with more than 40 confirmed cases. they reported that high temperatures and high humidity significantly reduced transmission of virus, respectively. also, 1°c significantly reduces temperature increase and 1% decrease in relative humidity of daily virus production. previous studies have shown that high temperature and humidity reduce the transmission of influenza and sars, which is consistent with wang et al.'s study. this study showed that the arrival of summer and rain in the northern hemisphere might effectively reduce 2019-ncov transmission .in a study by lou et al., they looked at the number of covid-19 reproductions across china's provinces and found that rising temperatures and humidity necessitated the arrival of spring and summer in the northern hemisphere alone without extensive public health interventions. it does not reduce the number of viruses . therefore, it is important to understand the impact of environmental factors on the increasing prevalence of covid-19 to support disease control decisions . it is especially important in areas with high temperatures and humidity, where the risk of transmission is minimized ). distribution of significant disease prevalence in the community at limited latitude and longitude, temperature, and humidity is consistent with the behavior of seasonal respiratory viruses. due to the fact that temperature and humidity are known factors in the survival of sars-cov, mers-cov, and influenza (chan et al. 2011) , the prevalence of covid-19 in long periods of time has occurred at certain levels of temperature so that conditions of prolonged exposure to this temperature range increase the risk of disease outbreak (rahman et al. 2020b ). in addition to prolonging half-life and survival of virus, other possible mechanisms related to temperature and humidity, including droplet stabilization and increased virus spread in the nasal mucosa, like other respiratory viruses, are further evidence that these two factors affect 2019-ncov (schaffer et al. 1976; shirbandi et al. 2020) . it is important to note that although colder areas are relatively free of 2019-ncov, they can affect the survival of the virus due to the low freezing cycle (lamarre and talbot 1989) . the researchers also found that low humidity was a factor in transmission of influenza in laboratory and onset of seasonal flu (lowen et al. 2007; shaman et al. 2009 ).many researchers and politicians have suggested that the covid-19 disease will go away on its own in warmer weather in the coming months in the northern hemisphere (roy 2020) . some have even said that the sars experience in 2003 is an evidence of this claim. what can now be said in response to this claim based on existing studies is that it is possible to reduce the transmission of 2019-ncov in hot and humid weather with the closure of gathering centers such as schools and universities, but it is not logical because these reductions do not occur alone or without any effective public health-related intervention. it should be noted that even sars does not disappear for natural reasons, but does not survive due to very severe public health interventions. these include isolating and quarantining infected people and people in contact with them, social distancing, and other targeted actions.therefore, it can be concluded that in case of 2019-ncov, it is expected that, like other beta-coronaviruses, virus may be slightly more effective at low temperatures, such as in winter, although the underlying mechanism is not well-known. therefore, the size of this change in transmission and pathogenicity of the virus is expected to be moderate and will not stop by itself. comparing to the pandemic, the 2019-ncov is expected to be less immune to humans and even easily transmitted outside the cold season. changing seasons and closing down gathering centers such as schools and universities may help, but it is unlikely to stop the transmission of the virus. to make effective policy, it is necessary to determine whether the closure of gathering centers such as schools and universities may help to reduce the rate of transfer effectively, in which if it would not be effective, the resources are wasted during such closures. for example, recent evidence suggests that children may be as susceptible as adults (bi et al. 2020) , so the critical question is whether the virus is easily transmitted under different temperature and humidity conditions. finally, except for a limited number of articles. it is currently being published and shows that there is no conflict in the results regarding the effect of these two variables on the survival and transmission of the virus.coated viruses such as influenza virus and coronavirus are much more vulnerable to disinfectant chemicals than other viruses such as noroviruses. even before detection of sars virus, disinfectants have been tested against other human and animal-infected coronaviruses. a comparative study shows that disinfectants needed to kill non-coated parvovirus are 20 to 500 times denser than disinfectants needed to kill coronavirus (maris 1990; lai et al. 2020b; organization wh 2020b) . the resistance of hcov-229e against disinfectants has been compared with the coxsackievirus, adenovirus type 2, and influenza virus type 3 using the quantitative laboratory method, which showed that coronavirus is much more vulnerable to disinfectant chemicals than two other uninfected viruses (maris 1990 ).the more practical and quantitative method of qct-2 showed that ethanol could kill 99.9% of hcov-229e (policy et al. n.d.) . other studies showed that alcohol-based mixture such as lozenge that contains amyl meta-cresol and dichlorobenzene alcohol could have direct and significant effects in reducing the infectivity of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) (oxford et al. 2005; morokutti-kurz et al. 2017) . another research evaluated the impact of alcohol-based hand sanitizer on positive cases of mers-cov and showed that using this mixture had a significant increase in the utilized amount of virus, as well as hand hygiene compliance rates increased to 88% (al-tawfiq et al. 2019).formaldehyde 4% is used as a complete sterilizer and disinfectant. however, for safety reasons, its use as a regular disinfectant is not recommended. this disinfectant can kill the tgv virus in 99.999% in 5 min, and a 2% solution can kill more than 99.9% of hcov-229e (sattar et al. 1989 ).phenolic-based ingredients have a long history of using coal tar soap with creosol. although some disinfectants use the same historically active chemical, changes in creosol have been made to make them more effective against germs. for example, o-phenyl phenol with a concentration of 200 ppm is quite effective against coronavirus (sattar et al. 1989 ). however, adding detergent or ethanol can increase its effectiveness and eliminate 99.9% of the hcov-229e within 5 min. similarly, chemicals made from phenolics need other helpers to be effective (shah et al. 2020 ).many studies were ongoing (according to clinicaltrials.gov database). according to this database, bacillus calmette-guérin (bcg) vaccine, which primarily used against tuberculosis (tb), will be intervening. other vaccines such as inactivated sars-cov-2 vaccine, lv-smenp-dc vaccine, measles-mumps-rubella vaccine, autologous dendritic cells loaded with sars-cov-2 antigens (av-covid-19), chadox1 ncov-19, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor blocker (arb), igm and igg antibodies, vpm1002 (development of the bcg vaccine) , and adoptive cellular transfer (act) are ongoing. there are no food and drug administration (fda)-approved vaccines to prevent or trial covid-19. however, fda issued emergency use authorization (eua) for emergency use of remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients (grein et al. 2020 ).the scientific evidence in this review article suggests that the spread of 2019-ncov may be influenced by climatic variables such as temperature and humidity. apparently, warm, humid weather may indicate less transmission of the 2019-ncov.considering the topic that seems to impose both the positive and negative data on the possible effect of environmental factors, especially humidity and temperature on the stability and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov, almost all available evidence revealed the possible positive effect.countries located in the east and west of the globe did not have a significant impact on the prevalence of the disease among communities, and on the other hand, the north and south have provided a model for the relative prediction of disease outbreaks (gates 2020) . the government and public health organizations can take steps to reduce the rate of covid-19 transmission in the future. for example, in addition to helping their people, leading countries can help low-and middleincome countries (lmics) prepare for the epidemic and most effectively fight against the disease (khadka et al. 2020) .many lmic health systems are now vulnerable, and a pathogen such as covid-19 can quickly lead to serious problems and challenges and eventually collapse of healthcare system. given the natural inclination of richer countries to give priority to their own people over other countries, this has led to a political and economic leverage in poor countries. pioneer countries can save the lives of their own people by slowing the global transmission of the covid-19 by helping to prepare african and south asian countries to fight the disease (gates 2020) .helping lmic is essential to strengthening the primary care system with the infrastructure to fight epidemics. welltrained healthcare workers not only provide vaccines but also monitor disease patterns as part of early warning systems that warn the world of a possible outbreak. given the limited testing capacity in african countries, the numbers of confirmed cases of covid-19 may greatly underestimate the true burden, although there was little evidence of unexplained outbreaks of the virus. at face value, the figures suggest that an african continent people had suffered fewer covid-19 deaths than the top list countries such as usa, russia, and uk (zhao et al. 2020b; khafaie and rahim 2020b) .according to epidemiologists, 2019-ncov is not among the thermophile viruses, so it will become inactive once the cold season begins. however, others suggested that 2019-ncov disappears at 30°c, which is a misconception about the virus. it is also reported in the multimedia that it is better to use fried food to eliminate covid-19, while the virus is coldfriendly and will survive longer with lower temperatures. based on the results of new studies on the 2019-ncov, the virus can survive on the surface for 4 to 28 days, but if the temperature drops to less than 30 to 40°c, the life span of the virus will be reduced rather than eliminated (casanova et al. 2010) . some scholars think that if the temperature reaches 30°c, the virus will not survive, which is a misconception, because at this temperature, the virus's survival will reduce and does not mean that the virus will completely eliminate . since the bats' body temperature is 48°c, so the 2019-ncov has nothing to do with these creatures (levesque et al. 2016) . the virus is also sensitive to humidity in addition to temperature; therefore, sars coronavirus and possibly 2019-ncov have a longer life span of 50% than 30% humidity (chan et al. 2011 ). according to published data, the human coronavirus can survive at temperatures of 20°c for up to 9 days, and if the temperature rises to more than 30°c, it perhaps decreases 2019-ncov viability, but the lower the temperature is associated with the more virus activity, in such a way that it can continue its activity for up to 28 days (casanova et al. 2010) . thus, the most effective way to reduce the activity of this virus is to use disinfectants such as ethanol 70%. these types of substances can kill the virus within a short minute.currently, in a modeling study, using the classification of covid-19 confirmed cases was investigated as one of the epidemic diseases. consequentially, the average daily temperature and relative humidity of hubei province in china and the number of covid-19 confirmed cases were selected. they demonstrated that the relative humidity and the maximum daily temperature had the highest impact on the confirmed cases. the daily temperature and relative humidity affected 2019-ncov positively, and extreme daily temperature, with an average of 15.4°c, affected this virus negatively (pirouz et al. 2020) . recently, a published evidence reports that 2019-ncov significantly contaminates air, surface environment, and protective equipment by droplets of an infected person, meaning that environment is an important issue to consider because it is a potential medium of transmission; thus, it is necessary for strict adherence to environmental and personal protection and hygiene, as well as social distancing (ong et al. 2020 ).we are poorly aware of their survival in the environment and the precise factors of their transmission. however, limited studies in this field show that 2019-ncov is more resistant to environmental factors than other coated viruses. the environmental conditions necessary for the survival and spread of 2019-ncov are somewhat clear, but unlike animal coronaviruses. the effect of humidity and temperature on the 2019-ncov activity is controversial. researchers in the field of epidemiologists believe that the 2019-ncov is not a thermophilic virus, so it will be activated with the onset of the cold season.according to published data, human coronavirus can survive for up to 9 days at 25°c, and if this temperature rises to 30°c, its lifespan will be shorter. the 2019-ncov is sensitive to humidity, and the lifespan of viruses in 50% humidity is longer than that of 30%. also, temperature and humidity are important factors influencing the covid-19 mortality rate and may facilitate 2019-ncov transmission. seasonal factors are recognized to play an essential role in the transmission of viruses responsible for various respiratory diseases. besides, most of these diseases reach epidemic proportions and key outbreak during winter. recently, researchers claimed that the two main causes contribute to the description of any association between viral outbreak and the seasonal factors, including changes in environmental parameters and human behavior. specifically, changes in temperature and humidity disturb the viral stability and transmissibility. thus, considering the recent and available evidence, it seems that low temperature, as well as dry and unventilated air, may affect the stability and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.the coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) pandemic presented in wuhan, china, and has so far affected more than 4 million people worldwide (may 9, 2020), with a mortality range of almost 7% [1] . interestingly, the majority of people infected by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) have mild disease that does not require hospitalization [2] . covid-19 appears to be transmitted humanto-human via droplets, i.e. when a person coughs, sneezes or talks loudly, or via direct contact, i.e. contact of a contaminated hand with the mouth, nose or eye conjunctiva [3] . infection has been estimated to have an incubation period of 2-14 days (mean: 6.4 days) [3] . asymptomatic patients in the incubation period may potentially transmit the virus [4] . moreover, children with covid-19 may have mild symptoms or may be asymptomatic [3] . for these two reasons, the temporary closure of schools and daycare facilities has been employed as a containment measure.ultrasonography (us) is widely used in children and can be performed in radiology departments of general or dedicated paediatric hospitals, in private hospitals or practices, in intensive care units, in emergency departments, in clinics or even in ambulances, where available. disinfecting us transducers is important because of the risks of cross infection from dirty probes, which is mostly relevant when probes touch infectious material [5] .in the paediatric setting during the covid-19 pandemic, it is important to operate with a plan designed not only to protect health care workers and thus ensure continuity of care, but also to prevent transmission of infection among patients and their accompanying carers. it is also important to use personal protective measures prudently so resources remain available. for this reason, there were discussions among radiologists, trained nurses and infectious diseases specialists in two greek hospitals to formulate feasible protective measures for us in a general hospital with paediatric units and in a dedicated paediatric hospital.we present our modified conditions of us service during the covid-19 pandemic. we understand that epidemiology, policies and health care conditions may vary from country to country and from hospital to hospital. our modifications were based on the instructions of the national organization of public health in greece and considered protection of staff, protection of the general population, local settings and protection of resources. we describe scenarios of us scanning not only for covid-19 patients, but for all possible current settings.as of march 11, 2020, containment measures to protect the general population in greece have been increasingly strict and follow the european centre for disease prevention and control social distancing measures [6] .these comprised closure of schools and universities, closure of all stores except supermarkets and pharmacies, no indoor gathering of people or outdoor activities with the exception of limited solitary exercise keeping distance (>2 m) from other citizens, an intense "stay at home" campaign, encouragement of work and education from home whenever possible and restrictions on transportation. travellers from abroad were strictly introduced into a 14-day quarantine and expected to soon be denied entry into the country. on march 23, people were told to stay home (enforced lockdown).regarding patient care, outpatient appointments have been cancelled or postponed to reduce potential exposure to asymptomatic carriers. as a result, the number of us tests of outpatients has dramatically decreased. to date, the incidence of covid-19 in greece is less compared to other european countries.general guidelines for health care workers that apply to ultrasonography national guidelines are written in greek and comprise (among others) general information, recommendations on patient triage, basic precautions, risk assessment for health care workers and protection measures during manipulations around patients with suspected coronavirus infection [7] . they are in line with the world health organization (who) and european centre for disease prevention and control guidelines [8, 9] . there are also detailed instructions about donning (wearing personal protective equipment, which includes mask, glasses or goggles, waterproof gowns, long gloves) and doffing (undress in an ordered "inside out" technique to avoid droplets/ contaminated material). explicit instructions with photographs and sketches are mounted on the walls of all examination rooms in radiology departments [10] . similar instructions in english are also available from european organizations [11, 12] (fig. 1) .health care workers who provide care to covid-19 patients should be fully protected while those caring for non-covid-19 patients without respiratory symptoms should wear protective equipment according to standard precautions and risk assessment [8] .health care practitioners should also be aware of and apply the general preventive measures both during duty and in everyday life [7, 8] :a. perform hand hygiene frequently with an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly dirty or with soap and water if hands are dirty. b. avoid touching eyes, nose and mouth. c. practice respiratory hygiene by coughing or sneezing into a bent elbow or tissue and then immediately dispose the tissue. d. wear a medical mask if you have respiratory symptoms and perform hand hygiene after disposing of the mask. e. maintain social distance (suggestion of 1-2 m depending on the country) from individuals with respiratory symptoms and socialize as little as possible (<10 min).based on the mode of transmission of covid-19, a plan on a local level is mandatory [13] . ideal personnel protection during us scanning would involve routine personal protection equipment for contact, droplet and airborne transmission [8] . however, this is unrealistic and would cause an unnecessary and a potentially harmful waste of resources [8, 12] . considerations for a logical, feasible plan are listed in table 1 .characteristics of our hospitals with emphasis on paediatric services, available us machines and modifications for dedicated covid-19 areas and machine recruitment are summarized in table 2 . locating all of the us machines in large hospitals can be challenging, as they may be moved, be uncatalogued or may be unknown to personnel [14] . leaving us machines in designated covid-19 areas is a measure in line with efforts to move covid-19 patients inside the hospital as little as possible [7] . us is not expected to be performed routinely in patients with covid-19. however, it may be requested for emergencies, hospitalized patients and selected outpatients who are all potential carriers. to date, the authors' collective experience involves us in 27 suspected covid-19 patients, 12 adults and 15 children of whom 3 (all adults) were eventually confirmed to have covid-19. it should be pointed out that one additional adult tested positive following the us scan, and personnel were quarantined because they scanned the patient as per routine, wearing only a surgical mask and gloves while the patient was not wearing any protection. no us personnel have developed symptoms suggestive of covid-19.triage of patients is essential [7] . recognizing a symptomatic possible covid-19 patient before they enter the hospital ensures quarantine and the performance of necessary imaging tests under appropriate precautions [15] . according to who and radiology expert panels, trained personnel should ask about fever, signs/symptoms of respiratory tract infection or close contact with someone with confirmed or suspected covid-19 [15, 16] . these inquiries are routinely asked at the entrances of both hospitals and also by radiology personnel ( fig. 2 ). information either on the request form/electronic system or via phone about the child, family and accompanying person's symptoms and epidemiological history provides an index of covid-19 likelihood before the patient's arrival at the radiology department. cancellation of us examinations that are not deemed urgent are considered on a case-by case basis and preferably following discussion with the referring physician. however, definitively excluding the disease cannot be achieved on the basis of history and clinical examination, or even by a chest radiograph [17] . this is why we apply protection measures during routine scanning and not exclusively for suspected/confirmed covid-19 patients.standard of practice in both hospitals has changed according to the probability of scanning a covid-19 patient. we could identify three main scenarios: a) children and adults arriving at the emergency department with respiratory symptoms or a history of contact and also with (table 3) . one should bear in mind that in highly endemic areas, all patients could potentially be asymptomatic covid-19 carriers in the incubation period. consequently, modifications comprised the use of portable machines as much as possible, use of protective equipment by patients and accompanying people, use of protective equipment by personnel depending on the level of suspicion for covid-19 as prudently as possible, the reduction of scan duration based on the choice of the more confident/experienced operator, the reduction of the number of individuals in the scanning room, and a more meticulous selection of patients and disinfection procedures (table 3) [7, 8, 15, 16, [18] [19] [20] . four state-of-the art us machines in the ultrasound unit, two of them are used as portable also, one more us machine permanently at picu and one at nicuthe us machines at picu, at nicu and at icu have been assigned as "covid-19 equipment," when required. one machine at the emergency department and one at the "coronavirus-19" ward have been recruited exclusively for suspected/confirmed covid-19 patients.one of the two portable us machines of the ultrasound unit has been transferred in the dedicated covid-19 radiology area (next to the x-ray room where only radiographs of suspected covid-19 patients are performed) and is dedicated to confirmed/suspected covid-19 children referred from the emergency department. it is also transported to covid-19 wards, picu and nicu for suspected/confirmed covid-19 patients. the second portable us machine (bedside examinations, surgery room) and the us machines at picu and nicu are used only for non-covid-19 patients.icu intensive care unit, nicu neonatal intensive care unit, picu paediatric intensive care unit patients at the neonatal or paediatric intensive care units, regardless of the probability of covid-19, are examined at bedside by regularly disinfected machines, especially in the event of previous covid-19 patient scanning, as per standard operation in these settings. protection with a simple disposable gown, hygiene of probes with soap water or nonalcoholic solution, followed by hand hygiene, use of mask and gloves and finally cleaning of used probes with disinfectant containing hydrogen peroxide ensures the protection of neonates and children from cross-contamination and are not meant to protect the radiologists.similarly, interventional procedures that are performed under us guidance, including contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography (cevus), us-guided pneumatic or saline reduction of intussusception, us-guided core needle biopsy and percutaneous drainage of various fluid collections, are being performed with advanced measures of staff and patient protection, probe protection with covering and subsequent disinfection (due to the probe's vicinity with body fluids and because they could be considered aerosol-generating procedures when children are not sedated). these measures are routine in both suspected/confirmed covid-19 children and elective outpatients, due to the probability of infection by asymptomatic children, as per local guidelines.the routine use of a simple mask by patients who are asymptomatic is controversial. in environments with restricted resources or low incidence for covid-19, such a measure is considered unnecessary for routine us scanning [21] . however, in centers with available recourses, personal hand hygiene and a simple mask or facial coverage on patients, especially on those with respiratory symptoms, are strongly advised by local authorities [16, 18] . moreover, correct application of a mask on a child for the duration of stay in the us suite is not always feasible. we have been surprised by how well children can wear masks. we have had children as young as 4 years old who tolerated the mask, probably because everybody including their parents was wearing one as well. in this context, children ages 5 years or older may adhere, while nontolerant children include mainly toddlers and uncooperative children of any age.personal protective equipment accompanied by appropriate donning and doffing is an indispensable measure in confirmed covid-19 cases [8] . the ultimate goal is to prevent infected hands from touching the face, mouth, nose and eye conjunctiva of us operators [17] . instructions about personnel protection are continuously being revised, depending on the area of the examination, patient risk profile and nature of the personnel-patient contact [21] . there is a consensus for protection with fitted respirator masks (n95 respirators, ffp2 or the equivalent), eye goggles, robe and appropriate shoes for aerosol-producing procedures like intubation, suction, turning the patient into a prone position, etc., in confirmed covid-19 patients [22] . this is the best practice for us, provided there is no shortage of respirator masks. however, in procedures that do not produce aerosol, instructions vary, and simple face masks instead of respirator masks are acceptable in the event of shortages [22] . in an attempt to save materials, our staff dealing with non-covid-19 patients wear short-sleeved uniforms, avoid touching the face with hands, avoid close contact with the patient as much as possible, reduce scanning time as much as possible to 14 min in the room per patient and perform personal hand hygiene from the elbows down regularly (local guideline). masks may remain on the examiner's face for 2 h provided that they are not touched by bare hands or used gloves and they are not moved over or under the face. this is in accordance with measures suggested in case of a shortage of materials [9] . our teams decided to adopt these measures from the start to save protective equipment for confirmed hospitalized covid-19 cases and aerosol-generating procedures and we will potentially revise them depending on risk during the pandemic (table 3 ) [17] .us equipment is a possible transmitter of infectious diseases, as shown in tests of probes used in emergency departments and intensive care units, especially concerning interventional procedures or contact with body fluids [23, 24] . to date, there is no consensus regarding best practice for probe disinfection, even during routine us procedures [5, 24] . few facilities adhere to a regular disinfection plan [5] . the virus sars-cov-2 is detectable in aerosols for up to 3 h and in other materials for 4-24 h depending on the composition of the material, with simultaneous great reduction of virus titer [25] . this stability likely contributes to transmission in health care settings [25] . consequently, probes in our hospitals are disinfected after each scan with an antiviral agent like sodium hypochlorite that is left on the probes until dry, while soap is also an acceptable option in restricted resources [9] . surface disinfection with 0.1% sodium hypochlorite or 62-71% ethanol significantly reduces coronavirus infectivity on surfaces within a minimum 1 min exposure time [26] . the use of sheaths does not change the type of processing recommended for the transducer, due to the potential for breakage of the probe covers and we consider them in confirmed covid-19 children, especially in the event of an interventional procedure [26] . the decontamination of the imaging room after caring for a suspected covid-19 patient includes a 1-h downtime for passive air exchange [15] .disinfecting portable machines can be the responsibility of the personnel who work in the room that hosts the machines and/or the responsibility of the personnel who use the machines, depending on local protocols, staff availability and workload. ideally, a trained cleaning team is responsible for all machinery in dedicated covid-19 areas according to the local operation plan and a logbook that mentions the exact time and names of the personnel who performed each scan and disinfected the machine afterward ensures appropriate procedures. we understand this may not be available in all hospitals and that trained personnel should disinfect machines and surfaces, depending on local instructions.we have modified our us services following the probability of different covid-19 scenarios. we hope that increased training of staff and regular simulations on the use of personal protective equipment and meticulous hand hygiene may prevent personnel infection and us-related patient contamination. extra challenges for children include the necessity to triage parents/accompanying people together with patients, the appropriate application of hand hygiene and masks on symptomatic children. triaged us machines in designated areas, regular but selective personnel protective measures, routine hand hygiene, and the wiping and disinfection of probes and adjacent surfaces may prove to be successful protective measures. in conclusion, we tried to provide lines for action or confirmation of preparedness that readers may find relevant to their own health care systems [15] .on january 7, 2020, china reported a cluster of cases of pneumonia associated with a novel pathogenic coronavirus named, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2). this novel coronavirus was first identified in wuhan, hubei province, china. on january 30, 2020, the international health regulations emergency committee of the world health organization declared the outbreak a 'public health emergency of international concern'. since then, on march 11, 2020 based on the published literature and data from epidemics related to other similar viruses, the majority of these infections present with influenza like symptoms with mild upper respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms, with most cases including cough, breathing difficulty, fever, headache, altered sensation of smell or taste, diarrhea, vomiting, body ache, and rashes. in some cases, covid-19 can cause serious complications including acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, multi-organ failure, and death. the majority of the confirmed cases with covid-19 have been reported in adults, especially older individuals with co-morbidities 2 . children have had relatively few infections reported in the literature to date [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] .the mode of transmission for covid-19 is known to be via exposure to respiratory droplets and fomites. person-to-person transmission occurs during close exposure to a person infected with covid-19 or after contracting it from surfaces with secretions containing viable virus. the role of small respirable particles (aerosols or droplet nuclei), to close proximity transmission is currently not clear. airborne transmission from person-to-person over long distances is unlikely. viral shedding has been noticed in the stool samples of infected patients 7, 8 , however, it is uncertain if covid-19 can be transmitted via the fecaloral route. currently, there is no vaccine for covid-19 and multiple investigators across the globe are working towards creating an effective vaccine to prevent this infection 9 .in the face of a growing pandemic with covid-19, there is an urgent need for proactive preparation and planning to combat covid-19 in the vulnerable patient population in the neonatal intensive care unit (nicu) and to safeguard patients, their families, and the healthcare personnel (hcp) taking care of them. the aim of this article is to provide a roadmap to the various aspects of preparation needed to safely counter potential covid-19 infections in the neonatal intensive care unit (nicu) setting. this guidance document is based on the centers for disease control and prevention's (cdc) current recommendations for covid-19, and its adaptation to our local resources.the following definitions will be used frequently in this article. they have been adapted from the information at cdc website and they may change in the future due to the evolving situation and understanding of covid-19.any person with suspected exposure or any symptoms consistent with covid-19 who is currently being investigated is placed under this category.any procedure that may cause the release of aerosols in the environment puts the person performing them at a higher risk of exposure. some of the examples include intubation, extubation, open airway suctioning, nebulization, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, continuous positive airway pressure, bag and mask ventilation, and bronchoscopy.we do not have sufficient information from the published literature regarding pregnancy outcomes, birth defects and fetal loss in pregnant women with confirmed covid-19infection. there are limited case reports and retrospective reviews from china reporting premature births among mothers with covid-19 infection during pregnancy. other viral respiratory infections in mothers during pregnancy may cause increased rates of congenital defects, premature births, and low birth weight among newborns. ongoing monitoring for outcomes is important in order to learn more about the impact of covid-19 in both the short-term and the long-term period on the maternal and neonatal population.vertical transmission from pregnant women with covid-19 to fetuses during pregnancy or to newborns during and after delivery is not entirely understood but seems to be less likely based upon the currently available data. in the limited data published in scientific reports, outcomes among neonates born to mothers with confirmed covid-19 remain inconclusive but appear to indicate a lack of in-utero infection or vertical transmission 10, 11 . a case series published by chen et al. for nine mothers with covid-19 pneumonia, all of whom had a cesarean section and had healthy newborns 10 appears to confirm this. four of the nine infants were born late preterm at 36 weeks, and one was born early term at 37 weeks gestational age. six mother-newborn dyads were tested for sars-cov-2 in the amniotic fluid, cord blood, neonatal throat swab, and breast milk samples, and all samples tested negative for the virus.province, china to mothers with confirmed covid-19. three neonates among 33 were found to be positive for covid-19, all delivered by cesarean section 12 . two were born at 40 weeks gestation and developed a fever. the third neonate was born prematurely at 31 weeks gestation due to fetal distress. this study presented limited information regarding a detailed timing of separation of the newborns from the mother and other family members with covid-19 who may have been in close contact with the newborns after delivery. there was also insufficient information on the method of feeding for the neonates, all of which makes it difficult to determine if the infection among these newborns was vertically or horizontally transmitted. in a case series by zhu et al. outcomes of 10 neonates, including two pairs of twins, born to mothers with covid-19 were reported 13 . one neonate died, six were born premature (31 to 34 weeks gestational age), and two were small for their gestational age. none of the newborns that got tested (with nasopharyngeal swabs) for sars-cov-2 were confirmed positive. but the authors reported fetal distress, respiratory distress, fever, thrombocytopenia, and abnormal liver function tests in some of these newborns despite testing negative for covid-19.researchers from china tested antibodies igg and igm for sars-cov-2 in a small case series involving six neonates born to mothers with covid-19. using a negative real time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test from throat swabs and blood samples they observed virus specific antibodies detected in the serum of all six newborns despite no physical contact with the mother after delivery 14 . two infants had igg and igm levels higher than the normal level (<10 au/ml) and inflammatory cytokine il-6 was significantly increased in all infants. none of the infants presented with any symptoms as of march 8, 2020 . in their editorial comment regarding this case series as well another case report published on the same day 14,15 , kimberlin et al. expressed caution in interpreting the results from these reports 16 . igm antibodies have a large polymeric structure and thus do not cross the placenta. when igm antibodies are found in a newborn, they may reflect fetal production following in-utero infection. igm enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay testing for congenital infections has a lower sensitivity / specificity than molecular diagnostic tests based on nucleic acid amplification and detection, and may have higher false-positive or false-negative results. one of the case reports described a very rapid decline in the level of igm antibodies in these newborns 15 , which is very unusual for igm levels in other congenitally acquired infections in which they typically last for a few months. given this information, it remains unclear if these reports represented a true congenital infection, or just an artifact of resulting antibody levels.as the majority of currently reported covid-19 infections in pregnant mothers occurred during their third trimester, it would be prudent to closely follow infants born to the mothers who tested positive during their first and second trimester. since it is a novel infection just recently identified in humans, there is no information on long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes amongst infants born to mothers with confirmed covid-19 infection during pregnancy, as well as for infants who get infected themselves.the following are our recommendations to allow for optimal safety for mothers, their is also valuable. based on our experience, we have developed a delivery preparation checklist that we have found to be useful and that can be modified for use by other institutions (tables 1).all hcp must enter the delivery room with appropriate ppe and follow recommended infection control practices based on the maternal covid-19 status and the risk factors for super spreading events. infant bag-valve mask set-up should include a hepa filter to minimize aerosols produced during positive pressure ventilation. as mentioned previously, having an identified team available for high and low risk deliveries, with back up team members outside the room, may provide sufficient coverage if help is needed for the mother or infant. some team members could help in other tasks such as; a runner to the lab/ blood bank, nurses and pharmacists helping with the preparation of medications. after routine care or the need for resuscitation, the family should be updated. there should be a process outlined for cleaning the room and equipment, before and after use, by a suspected or confirmed covid-19 patient. a detailed debriefing should be done after delivery and the safe disposition of the infant, in order to review how things went and identify areas of improvement. mock drills and simulation exercises with multidisciplinary teams to evaluate readiness and identify gaps as well as learning opportunities should be considered.there are multiple scenarios that may require the transport of a newborn within a facility; such as transfer from the delivery room to a newborn nursery or to the nicu, for investigations (e.g. magnetic resonance imaging), to the operating room, and to the mother's postpartum room. infants should be isolated and separated after delivery from mothers who are suspected or confirmed with covid-19, in order to avoid exposure. based upon the medical needs, neonates could be transferred to the newborn nursery or to the nicu. there should be clear communication between the delivery team, designated elevator services (if needed), and the recipient unit or area, regarding transfer of an infant. ppe such as gloves and gowns should be changed before transporting the infant, but masks can continue to be worn if not soiled or wet. there should be a dedicated transport isolette that is cleaned appropriately, before and after use, as per hospital disinfection guidelines.many sick newborns requiring a higher level of care are transferred to regional perinatal centers. it is helpful to engage in preemptive planning, such as using a checklist to prepare for transfer of a neonate born to a pui or covid-19 positive mother. clear communication between the referring and accepting teams should take place, including the condition of the patient, and symptom history of the mother and/or family members who may have close contact. if unsure of the status of the patient with regards to covid-19, a discussion of the case with the pediatric id and ipc teams should take place as soon as the call for a transfer request is received in order to help in ensuring the correct designation of the newborn. all members of the transport team, including the driver, should use appropriate ppe while transporting the infant. before leaving the patient's room, isolation gowns, and gloves should be changed, but masks may continue to be worn if not soiled or wet as discussed earlier.we are still learning about various potential modes of transmission, clinical spectrum and duration of viral shedding in a covid-19 patient. in the absence of sufficient evidence, we suggest taking a cautious approach regarding close contact between a mother with suspected or confirmed covid-19 and her infant. more data from different geographical regions is required before we know conclusively about epidemiology and vertical transmission of this infection.these infants should be designated as a pui. they should be temporarily separated from their mothers and placed in a separate isolation room. in the interest of patients and their families, this is an unfortunate but necessary undertaking. there should be a clear dialogue and shared decision making between clinicians and families and the need for such intervention should be explained, preferably before delivery. all efforts should be made to provide support to the mother while she is separated from her newborn. clinicians should document any refusal to follow recommendations of isolation and document any discussion regarding the risks of infection that could result from failure to isolate the newborn from the mother after birth. infants not requiring intensive care may be admitted to the mother/ baby unit but remain separated. as mentioned earlier, these rooms should have negative pressure, with clear signage outside the room, and all hcp should take appropriate precautions and use ppe while taking care of these newborn infants. although aiir are preferred, neutral pressure rooms could be considered based on the clinical status of the mother and the infant. newborns should be bathed as soon as possible to remove potential virus contained in secretions that may remain on the skin. there should be a limit to the number of visitors allowed, with a process in place for screening symptoms at every visit.for source containment, mothers should wear a mask whenever the neonate is in the room.if, due to a limitation of a facility's resources, or due to the mother's wishes, a newborn is rooming-in with the mother, there should be a physical barrier, such as a curtain, with a minimum of six feet distance between both patients. the mother or other caregiver should put on a mask and follow strict hand hygiene before and after feeding and when they have any close contact with the newborn. breastfeeding and handling of breast milk is discussed in the later sections.at our institution, infants are tested for sars-cov-2 at 24 hours of life, with a second test completed at minimum 24 hours apart, or at discharge for a well newborn. for patients in the nicu, a second test is done five days after the first test or earlier on discretion of clinical teams. if both tests are negative and the patient is doing clinically well, the infant can be discharged home. medical management of a neonate with covid-19 is beyond the scope of this article and should be done in consultation with the infant's primary medical team and id teams.neonates born to mothers with a suspected (pui) or a confirmed diagnosis of covid-19 are placed in a separate aiir. stable neonates with respiratory support up to 2 litres/ minute by nasal cannula, can be placed in a neutral pressure room with droplet / contact / eye-shield precautions and a hepa filter. infants on respiratory support greater than 2 litres/ minute nasal cannula or those that may require an aerosol generating procedure, should be placed in an aiir with airborne/ contact/ eye-shield precautions. there should be clear signage outside the room regarding infection prevention precautions needed before entering. all hcp who enter the room of a patient with known or suspected covid-19 should adhere to aforementioned infection prevention precautions and implementing staffing policies to minimize the number of hcp who enter the room is suggested. only essential personnel should enter the room, for example, physical exams should be limited to the attending physician. facilities should consider dedicating specific hcp to care for these patients in order to minimize the risk of transmission and exposure to other patients and other hcp.ideally all suspected patients would be placed in a separate room. if there is more than one patient, covid-19-suspected or positive patients could be cohorted together with patients of similar status based on availability of local resources and space.a log of every hcp entering and exiting the patient's room should be kept. in addition, dedicated or disposable non-critical patient-care equipment such as blood pressure cuffs should be used. all pui or positive infants should have a bag-valve mask with a hepa filter at the bedside to reduce the risk of aerosol spread if the infant requires positive pressure ventilation. if equipment will be used for more than one patient, cleaning and disinfection between uses should be carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions. similarly, environmental surfaces and the room should be properly cleaned before and after use.medical waste should be carefully disposed of in the same way as infectious medical waste 17 . every health facility should assess their own bed surge-capacity and available resources, in order to develop a plan for the placement of a newborn and to adopt a locally suited approach consistent with the recommendations from the cdc. (see table 2 for our adaptation of cdc recommendations)due to widespread community spread in locations such as new york city, many staff members and/ or parents may get infected causing unintended exposure to neonates. the vulnerable patient population in the nicu may be at increased risk for severe infections; thus extreme caution is needed in order to prevent horizontal transmission of covid-19. at our institution, we mandated that hcp, mothers and caregivers wear a surgical mask in all patient care areas as an extra measure of precaution. due to high chances of horizontal transmission, any new onset of respiratory distress or fever in an infant in the nicu, with no alternate explanation/ diagnosis, testing for covid-19 should be strongly considered. in general, if the primary team is thinking of sending a respiratory viral panel, they should consider sending a test for covid-19. if a pui infant has a negative covid-19 test result, prior to ruling out covid-19 as a diagnosis, an alternative diagnosis should be determined.we recommend consulting ipc and id teams for further patient specific guidance on repeat testing, possibility of alternative diagnoses and maintenance/ discontinuation of isolation precautions.so far, there are only rare case reports of newborns with covid-19. sars-cov-2 attaches to angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2) receptors to enter cells. there is a concern that due to the presence of ace2 receptor on neurons, there could be a pertussis-like respiratory center suppression in neonates if they get infected with covid-19. therefore all neonates with any degree of illness who are born to mothers with covid-19 should be observed until their illness is resolved. if there is a new confirmed covid-19 infection in a neonate, the same guidelines should be adopted for care of a neonate by hcp and family based upon respiratory status and likelihood of infection in a newborn. although currently inconclusive, the majority of neonatal infections seem to follow horizontal transmission rather than vertical.breast milk is not contra-indicated for newborns with maternal pui or confirmed covid-19infections. it is critical to follow adequate infection prevention measures for collecting expressed breast milk. in the limited available literature, covid-19 has not been detected in breast milk 10 , and per current cdc guidelines, expressed breast milk is encouraged. mothers should be encouraged to express their breast milk to establish and maintain milk supply. a dedicated breast pump should be given to mothers, as a well as a mask to wear while pumping 18 . mothers should use strict hand hygiene before, during and after a pumping session. all parts of a breast pump should be thoroughly washed and sanitized as per the manufacturer's instructions in conjunction with cdc guidelines 19 . an alternative caregiver or nurse can feed expressed breast milk to the infant. to support breast milk feeding in infants who remain admitted to the nicu after their mothers have been discharged, facilities should devise a plan to allow for breast milk drop-off from an asymptomatic partner or caregiver.mothers can start direct breastfeeding when they have been afebrile for a minimum of 72 hours without the use of antipyretics and the majority of their respiratory symptoms are resolved. they should be instructed to wear a mask, and to practice strict hand hygiene as well as the thorough cleaning of the breast before and after breastfeeding. if the mother cannot provide breast milk, and there is an option for donor breast milk at the facility, this could be offered. all accepted donor milk is pasteurized and this heat-treatment kills both bacteria and viruses. feeding options and the clinical plan for an infant should be discussed with the mother ideally before delivery.although mothers are encouraged to use the strict infection prevention measures, care and consideration to prevent covid-19 through direct contact with breast milk containers should be considered. with community spread and the potential for many asymptomatic carriers of covid-19, a cleaning process should be in place when receiving breast milk from all mothers during the covid-19 pandemic. every breast milk container received from a pui or covid-19 positive mother should be considered as a potential vector. as a result, each container should be cleaned with a disinfectant wipe and placed in a new clean plastic bag.as information continues to be fluid during the covid-19 pandemic and recommendations may frequently change, it can be difficult for the multidisciplinary team to continuously track and follow evolving recommendations. therefore, clear pathways of communication are needed to update hcp in order to provide care to mothers and infants as well as to allow hcp to educate families on the most up to date information. there should be a pre-defined electronic or physical space where the latest information could be obtained by any hcp if needed. some of the ways to successfully keep team members up to date may include twice daily multidisciplinary huddles, daily rounding by a multidisciplinary leadership team, and a synthesis document of key practice changes with links to pertinent policies. education documents for families to take home should also be created and frequently updated with recommendations to allow for standardized teaching to the families. another important staff education initiative includes information around ppe. all hcp should receive training regarding the correct use, proper donning, doffing, and disposal of any ppe. additionally, the use of safety monitors in the units which perform live observational audits and coaching, allows for real time corrections and prevention of ppe breaches.while a neonate born to a mother with a confirmed diagnosis or pui is admitted to the nicu, all medical information should be regularly provided to the mother and other due to the current covid-19 pandemic, visitation to our nicu has been restricted to a maximum of two people (only parents, or two people as per individual family situation), with only one person at a time is allowed at the bedside. a similar restricted visitors' policy was employed at our unit during the recent measles outbreak in the new york city metropolitan area. a medical history of any sickness, fever, and of any upper respiratory symptoms is taken from all caregivers before entering the hospital in order to ensure that only healthy caregivers can visit the patient. visitors should be asymptomatic and wear a mask while visiting the nicu or well-baby nursery. family care partners or parents who are allowed to visit, should strictly follow the infection control guidelines and use appropriate ppe while providing care to the newborn. mothers with covid-19 should not visit the nicu until they are afebrile without the use of antipyretics for at least 72 hours, with improvement of respiratory symptoms and two negative rt-pcr tests for sars-cov-2.if the mother remains afebrile for greater than 24 hours and respiratory symptoms have nearly resolved, consider discharge of the medically stable newborn with the mother. if the mother is still febrile or has significant respiratory symptoms a caregiver who does not have symptoms can care for the infant. if the infant will be discharged to a home where there is a pui or covid-19 positive mother or partner, it is highly recommended that the infected person should not care for the infant unless there is no alternative. a covid-19 positive mother or partner should wear a mask, perform strict hand hygiene, and keep a distance of at least 6 feet from the newborn until they are afebrile for 72 hours with near resolution of respiratory symptoms and 7 days have passed since the beginning of the symptoms, or two rt-pcr tests for sars-cov-2 done a minimum of 24 hours apart have been negative. facilities should develop a process to safely identify and discharge an infant to an alternative caregiver if the mother or partner is unable to care for the infant at the time of discharge. discharge instructions should be given in the mother's room or via video/ phone conferencing if needed. infants will be transported to the mother's room or to the family at the hospital lobby for discharge. parents, caregivers, and other family members should engage in the usual preventive steps to avoid the spread of respiratory infection specifically practicing hand hygiene, covering coughs, and staying up to date on vaccinations, including influenza. the medical team should call the newborn's outpatient pediatric practice to confirm that the office is able to see the newborn. if unable to see the newborn, an alternative practice should be selected. it is important to emphasize that it is unusual for infants to have respiratory symptoms within the first few days of life, and hcp should have a low threshold for considering covid-19 on the differential, even if the initial test in the newborn may be negative.there is a widespread concern regarding the national shortage of ppe and hence limited supply to hospitals. in particular, many n95 masks are made in, or their raw material for production is obtained primarily from, hubei province in china, which was the first epicenter for this outbreak. therefore, there was a backlog of ppe reported by multiple institutions. critical supplies, including identifying alternative products for ppe, should be continuously assessed. there should be an institution-based plan to conserve and develop re-use protocols for critical supplies including n95 respirators and surgical masks, in order to prepare for extended supply chain disruptions. transparency to the staff and actions to allow for the hcp team to feel confident and safe while caring for patients is of the utmost importance.at our institutions, guidelines have been implemented for the use of n95 respirators by hcp when caring for a patient on airborne and airborne-combination precautions. our institutions developed indications for the safe use and re-use of n95 respirators, if it has a tight fit but not restricting breathing, and is not wet, damaged or contaminated. n95 respirators can be safely stored in a clean paper bag between uses during a shift.in a scenario of widespread covid-19 in a community, there may be an increase in admissions to the nicu, as well as a shortage of staff and hospital beds. there needs to be a local institutional plan in place for such situations, so patients can be cared for safely and transferred out, if needed, with prior preparation for safe transports. due to significant usage of oxygen while caring for patients with covid-19 throughout the hospital, a back up system to ensure continuous oxygen supply should be devised. our institution has established staffing and employee wellness task forces to identify external clinical resources and support our staff who may be asked to care for covid-19 patients. there are daily multidisciplinary leadership and management calls to set an operational tempo, assess preparedness, and prioritize enterprise-wide action. we developed a plan for our nicu regarding census and staffing, involving clear directions for patient care and when to initiate transferring patients out if needed. there should also be a plan for cohorting of suspected or confirmed cases of covid-19 in the nicu and well-baby nursery if space becomes an issue. medical service providers will also be under tremendous psychological pressure due to overwork, shortage of medical resources, patients' poor outcomes, infection among their colleagues, or other detrimental experiences. medical staff should be provided with adequate psychological support, as their physical and mental health is crucial in the context of a pandemic.we share this guidance for the preparation of the nicu at a regional perinatal center during the global novel covid-19 pandemic. children seem to be less affected with this infection based on the limited published literature, however, one of the most vulnerable pediatric patient populations is cared for in nicus. current data on the effects of covid-19 in fetal life and among neonates after birth is uncertain. as such, there is a need for proactive preparation and planning to manage these viral infections in neonates in ways that safeguard the patients, their families, and the healthcare personnel providing their care. our understanding of covid-19 is still evolving; therefore, we strongly suggest continuously monitoring the latest updates from cdc and local health authorities. every health care facility should evaluate their available resources and make locally suited guidelines to take care of newborns with suspected or confirmed covid-19, consistent with recommendations from cdc. the spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has presently become the most serious public health concern. the first cases were reported in wuhan, hubei province, china, 1 and additional cases have been reported in over 100 countries around the world. among these cases, children including infants are prone to cov-2 infection. 2 3 new challenges have occurred during the perioperative management of airway and the anesthesia of children with sars-cov-2 infection. to ensure the safety of surgical pediatric patients and healthcare workers, this article aims to describe a proposal for the prevention of infection and for perioperative anesthesia management.protocols and plans for emergency surgeries should be done in a hospital assigned for patients with sars-cov-2. selected surgeries should be postponed in principle. the decision of whether limited surgeries should be performed requires multidisciplinary team consultation. patients suspected of sars-cov-2 are treated the same way as those diagnosed with sars-cov-2. 4 anesthesiologists need to get information from medical record, and talk with supervising physician and the parents. the key points that need to be known are the symptoms such as fever (>37.3℃), cough, sore throat and the chest ct scan, which should be confirmed by anesthesiologist and surgeon 5 and/or positive test to sars-cov-2 by real-time pcr.the pediatric patient is prone to be anxious when separated from parents, which leads to saliva spraying with sars-cov-2. midazolam or dexmedetomidine should be given before the patient enters the operating room (or) from his parents. surgical mask should be put on all the way.preparation for the surgery negative-pressure (below 5 pa) or with separate entrance and exit should be ready for the surgeries. laminar flow and clean air conditioning in the or should be shut off if there is no negative-pressure or. air circulation system with virus inactive should be installed temporarily if possible. materials and machines should be ready enough according to the type of surgery. other irrelevant appliance should be removed out of or. an obvious signboard of isolated surgery should be hung outside the door. experienced anesthesiologists and nurses should be assigned to manage the surgery. as few doctors and nurses should be required as possible. two anesthesiologists should be involved, one attending and one resident. everyone who enters the or should receive strict training open access for putting on or off protective clothing. one would not be permitted to manage the patient unless he/she put on the clothes with tertiary prevention correctly according to technical guideline for prevention and control of novel coronavirus infections at medical institutions 6 and gets the permission from the prevention supervisor.disposable supplies are the best choice. three filters are recommended. one is filter with heat and moisture exchanger at the top of endotracheal tube. the other two are filters placed on the both sides of the breathing loop inlet and outlet, respectively. two anesthesiologists and three nurses are involved. circulating nurse transports the patient to negative-pressure or with the help of a resident. optimal transport bed is the one with increased crew protection along the assigned private route. disposable surgical blanket is the substitute when increased crew protection is not acquired. a surgical frame should be put above the head to keep the airway open. patient would be reassessed by the attending nurse after entering the or. instrument nurse and first circulating nurse should be present inside the or. the second circulating nurse is responsible for delivery at the buffer room. the second circulating nurse should get dressed with secondary containment. participants for transportation should put on the clothes with tertiary prevention.symptoms of most children and infants with sars-cov-2 are mild, such as fever and cough. 4 proper anesthesia plan should be given with personalized precision medicine to every infant. the general principle is the adequate oxygen supply, optimal anesthesia medicine with minimum side effect, avoiding cough reflex and agitation and ensuring the safety of both patient and staff. 5 6 anesthetic protocol and principles in order to avoid droplet and possible aerosol pollution from patients' respiratory tract caused by unanticipated crying, intravenous sedatives or mask-inhaled, sevoflurane should be used for induction. as for the american society of anesthesiologists (asa) class i-ii patients with stable cardiopulmonary function, on the basis of satisfying surgical operation, it is recommended to apply intravenous anesthesia without intubation combined with regional nerve block or caudal block anesthesia excluding stomach satiation, brain surgery, craniofacial, ear-nose-throat (ent) surgery, cardiothoracic and laparoscopic surgery. maintain patients' spontaneous breathing and oxygen inhalation by continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) with an airtight mask, then keep monitoring and prepare for intubation as soon as possible. as recommended, patients with a preoperative asa class iii and above or in severe cases are anesthetized with tracheal intubation, intravenous and inhalational technique combined with general anesthesia. low flow closed air is required. lung-protective ventilation should have lower tidal volume (3-8 ml/kg) and limited plateau pressure (below 30 cm h 2 o). 7 intubation should be performed by an experienced anesthesiologist to ensure first-time success of intubation. in cases of difficult airway, the laryngeal mask should be placed after first failure for intubation to avoid the risk of infection caused by repeated attempts of intubation. 8 proper removal of protective equipment is recommended under the guidance of infection control protection supervision. protective clothing should be discarded in a double-folded, yellow, medical garbage bag and wrapped in designated area.the key points of protection during endotracheal intubation are to prevent patients from coughing during the operation and to prevent the discharge of patient secretions. the following necessary notes should be taken into consideration: (1) oxygen supply before induction: remove the medical protective masks or surgical mask while mask oxygen inhalation; (2) induction: there should be rapid induction of anesthesia and intubation, adequate muscle relaxation to prevent cough. medication should be taken in the following order: midazolam, propofol/etomidate, rocuronium, fentanyl/sufentanil. opioids should be injected slowly to avoid choking and coughing. tracheal intubation should be performed after spontaneous breathing disappears and muscle relaxes completely; (3) before tracheal intubation, the anesthesiologist should wear an additional layer of rubber gloves; then remove them immediately after intubation is finished. a laryngoscope should be used for intubation. the disposable transparent laryngoscope sleeves should be discarded after use. for hand-held lens handles, a protective sleeve cover (specimen bag or sterile ultrasound probe cover, tightly sealed with a rubber band) should be used, the protective cover after use should be discarded and then repeatedly wiped and disinfected with hydrogen peroxide disinfection wipe or alcohol cotton; (4) judgment of catheter depth: the distance scale of the tube to the incisor, the degree of bilateral thorax undulation, the co 2 waveform of the ventilator's expiration and the breathing parameters for comprehensive judgment should be observed. it is not easy to judge the depth of the catheter by auscultation of breathing sounds; (5) for patients with oral secretions, if without airway obstruction, it is recommended to perform airway aspiration after completing the tracheal intubation. disable central suction, enable electric suction device, use closed suction system for tracheal suction to prevent secretion pollution.proposed medicine for anesthesia management is propofol, remifentanil pump or sevoflrurane inhalation and rocuronium intermittent bolus. keep intensive intraoperative monitor. monitor invasive blood pressure and central venous pressure if necessary for hemodynamic stability. critically ill children might have pathological conditions such as acute lung injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome, heart failure, acid-base imbalance and electrolyte disorders, in which case more attention and close monitoring is needed. 9extubation and transfer patient with cpap is observed for 5-10 min in or and then transported to the isolated ward postoperatively. those with intubation need to be reassessed after surgery. if children with mild diseases and stabilized condition are under monitoring, extubation could be carried out after tracheal suction under deep sedation. before extubation, an appropriate amount of lidocaine is injected intravenously and mouth and nose are covered with two pieces of warm and moist gauze to avoid the discharge of secretions caused by choking. indications for extubation are regular spontaneous respiration, tidal volume over 6 ml/kg and end-expiratory carbon dioxide partial pressure (petco 2 ) below 50 mm hg. antagonists are not recommended for the patient. appropriate postoperative analgesia can reduce crying or agitation after extubation. patient could be sent to the isolation ward directly after extubation if the steward score is ≥5.to avoid children waking up or moving during transport, it is recommended to deepen the anesthesia or to give additional muscle relaxant before the severe children leave the or. the patient is transferred to the isolation ward directly after exbutation. care should be provided to enhance respiratory support and organ functional support in time, and prevent secondary infections. extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) should be supported if necessary. 2 10 patient should be transported back to the ward with the same bed and the same route before surgery. staff involved in transport should put on the new clothes with tertiary prevention.perioperative infection prevention all medical waste should be discarded into doublefolded, yellow, medical garbage bag or buckets in strict accordance with relative rules and made sure that 'novel coronavirus infection' logo is specifically marked.anesthesia machines should be routinely disinfected with anesthesia sterilizer. video laryngoscopes, anesthesia carts and other anesthesia facilities should also be wiped and disinfected with hydrogen peroxide disinfection wipes. the infection control team should check and record the disinfection for trace-back investigations.proper removal of protective equipment is recommended under the guidance of the infection control and protection supervisor. protective clothing should be discarded in a double-folded yellow medical garbage bag and wrapped in designated area.all healthcare staffs are vulnerable to infection. patients' blood, body fluids, secretions and discharge are all contagious which must be isolated. anesthesiologists must prevent blood and non-blood infections from being transmitted. during the operation, anesthesiologists should try to keep a certain distance from the operating bed to prevent blood contamination of children on the bed.the sharp instruments in or should be carefully recovered and treated to prevent stab wounds and the iatrogenic occupational exposure. iatrogenic occupational exposure treatment should be started immediately once it happened. 11 furthermore, much attention should be paid to tracking and management after contacting with suspected or confirmed cases. after exposed to those suspected of or confirmed with to sars-cov-2, one's complete blood count, c reactive protein and pulmonary imaging should be evaluated individually if symptoms such as fever, cough or fatigue occurr. each case should be reported to the department, and isolated from the outside. specially trained staff should be set up in each department for recording and keeping trace of the suspected cases in order to take following measures: postoperative infectious prevention should be performed in accordance with the relevant regulations of the 'hospital air purification management regulations' and 'medical institution disinfection technical specifications'.owing to special physiological and pathophysiological characters of children (especially infants and young children), it is necessary for medical staff to follow the requirements strictly for the protection from novel coronavirus infections in airway management and perioperative anesthesia management, in order to avoid passive infection during airway management and other contacting operations. appropriate anesthetic technique provides adequate oxygen and the best role in protecting the organ functions, which contribute to the pediatric treatment and disease control of epidemic situations of novel coronavirus infection.contributors hjj finished this article as the main author. hyq organized and looked for references. sq designed and reviewed this article. the other authors discussed the whole article and offered experience for this article.funding this paper was supported by zhejiang university special scientific research fund for covid-19 prevention and control.competing interests none declared.ethics approval not required for this review article.provenance and peer review commissioned; externally peer reviewed. open access this is an open access article distributed in accordance with the creative commons attribution non commercial (cc by-nc 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use is non-commercial. see: http:// creativecommons. org/ licenses/ by-nc/ 4. 0/.the concept of personal protective equipment (ppe) for the surgeon has been in place for greater than 100 years. the aim has been to protect both the surgeon and the patient.however, as zoonotic respiratory pathogens emerge, surgeons and their teams will need to adapt quickly to what will adequately protect them and their patients. there has been a generalized call for more personal protective equipment (ppe), however, there is a wide array of ppe available. high quality evidence related to the epidemiology of coronavirus disease eyes, or that eye protection beyond what is already routine is helpful in preventing transmission. nevertheless, eye protection is recommended when caring for a patient with known or suspected covid-19 infection by the united states centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) (19), in korea in a number of different patient care situations (29), and in hong kong for high risk patient interactions (16) .since covid-19 is thought to spread via droplets, less data regarding the transmission of covid-19 is focused on gowns and gloves, which are the ppe components of contact precautions. handwashing has been unequivocally recognized as an essential measure to slow contact transmission; its frequent practice is less reliant on new or additional health care resources and therefore will not be discussed in further detail here. gowns are rated by ansi/aami (american national standards institute/association for the advancement of medical instrumentation) pb70:2012 standards level 1-4, with level 4 having the greatest protection against viruses (30). during the sars epidemic, two studies found that uninfected healthcare workers in hong kong more often wore gowns as a part of their ppe when compared to infected healthcare workers (11, 28) ; one of these studies also reported a significant difference for wearing gloves (27). both reported uninfected healthcare workers were more likely to wear all recommended ppe (11, 28) . it should be noted that in a laboratory environment, aerosolized sars-cov-2 has a median half-life of 5.6 hours on stainless steel, and 6.8 hours on plastic (31), and has also been detected on surfaces in patient zero transmissions (39) . of these healthcare workers, 35/41 (85%) were using a surgical mask for respiratory protection (39) . thus, since surgical face masks filter particles larger than 0.1-5.0 µm and the droplets that carry sars-cov-2 are larger, it stands to reason that there should be adequate protection from transmission of covid-19 in low risk circumstances. these findings have led many institutions to promote use of surgical face masks in lower risk patient interactions, and advocate for the futility of n95 respirator masks especially during times of scarcity. it should be noted, however, that the cdc recommends use of a surgical face mask if a respirator is not available when caring for a patient with known or suspected covid-19 (19).filtering facepiece respirators (ffr) are ppe designed to protect against respirable particulate matter (irrespective of whether they are inert or biologic particles). the most commonly used ffr do not require electricity (non-powered), and function simply as a mask.they are classified by the percentage of challenge particles >0.3 µm filtered out during testing (95%, 99%, 99.9%) and by the type of particles filtered out. -r‖ rated ffr are somewhat resistant to oil, -p‖ rated ffr are more strongly resistant to oil, while -n‖ rated ffr are not resistant to oil. ffrs have an assigned protection factor (apf) of 10 meaning they can reduce aerosol concentration to 1/10 th of the ambient air (i.e. blocking 90% of airborne particles). they must meet certification tests established by niosh (national institute of occupational safety and health), however, the fda does not perform independent testing of any ffr other than surgical n95 masks (40) . surgical n95 masks are constructed to prevent contamination of the sterile field while providing the same protection of conventional n95s. the fda publishes certified vendors of surgical n95s as a resource for individuals and for purchasing institutions (41) . the different types of ffrs are presented in table 2 .copyright © 2020 wolters kluwer health, inc. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.ffrs have been tested against ultrafine viral particles (0.02-0.5 um) (42) . results varied slightly by the type of viral particle, but with airflow rates for non-strenuous breathing, n95 penetration was 0.23-1.68%, and n99 penetration was 0.96-1.03%. of note, viral penetration did increase with moderate airflow (simulating strenuous breathing), up to ~5% for n99 and n95 ffrs (41) . another study compared viral penetration of n95 masks to surgical masks, and showed that while n95 penetration was 5%, level 2 surgical mask penetration was 21%, and level 1 surgical mask penetration was 85% for moderate airflow (43) . the extrapolation of this data to infection by droplet transmission may be flawed, however, due to the larger size of the droplets (10-100 µm) that carry sars-cov-2 viral particles in a non-experimental setting. an example of this is the similar transmission rates of influenza to healthcare workers using n95 or surgical masks described above (33, 35) .there are several studies that examine n95 use as it relates to transmission of sars-cov and sars-cov-2. as mentioned above, yen at al. compared hospitals with and without infected healthcare workers during the sars-cov epidemic in taiwan and found that 100% of hospitals with zero sars-cov healthcare worker infections used n95 masks in -zones of risk‖ (36) . a case matched study of healthcare workers infected with sars-cov compared their ppe use to healthcare workers who were not infected (28). nearly 100% of the participants used either a surgical mask or an n95 mask, and there was no difference in the type of mask used when comparing infected and non-infected healthcare workers (28). a study specifically examining critical care nurses also found no differences in the rates of becoming infected when using a surgical mask compared to an n95 mask (44) . wang et al.published healthcare worker infection rates from wuhan university from december 2019 and showed that none of the 278 staff members who wore n95 masks became infected (45) .doctors and nurses on surgical floors who did not interact with covid19 patients were considered low risk and did not wear masks, and 10/215 (4.6%) of these individuals ultimately became infected (45) . currently, the cdc recommends use of an n95 mask when caring for a patient with known or suspected covid-19 if available and recommends an n95 or higher respirator when performing or present for aerosol-generating procedures (19). in korea, n95 masks at minimum have been recommended for all hospital interactions except disposal of medical waste (28). in hong kong, they are recommended for staff working in triage, with confirmed covid-19 cases, and when performing aerosol generating procedures (16) .because of the covid-19 pandemic, resource scarcity has raised the prospect of reuse of ffrs. extended single use of ffr is favored over limited reuse because of the risk of self-inoculation (45) . for extended single use, this is most practical when patients are cohorted (patients with a common diagnosis in the same unit) (46) . it has been shown that donning an ffr up to 20 times maintains good fit however quality of fit decreases with subsequent uses and best fit was seen after the first 5 donnings (47) . a veterans administration study also revealed the median tolerance time for ffr masks to be 6-7 hours due to heat and facial discomfort, suggesting that health care workers cannot be expected to work prolonged shifts (>=12 hours) in an environment which requires continuous ffr (48) .it should also be noted that bleach and microwave decontamination of ffrs may damage or render masks unsafe (49) . conversely, ultraviolet irradiation and ethylene oxide may be more suitable for decontamination (49) . researchers at duke university recently published a verifiable decontamination protocol for n95 respirators using hydrogen peroxide vapor (50).unpublished data from stanford university suggests that heating n95 masks to 70 o c for 30 minutes is sufficient to destroy coronavirus particles and does not diminish filtration per hour and may re-circulate air (55) . it is known that aerosol transmission of infectious diseases can be influenced by ventilation (9, 56) , which suggests that transmission of sars-cov-2 may be lower in an operating room. this must be weighed, however, against the fact that aerosolizing procedures are much more likely to take place in an operating rom.intubation is thought to be a particularly high-risk aerosolizing procedure. viral loads of sars-cov-2 are known to be high in the upper respiratory tract of infected patients (57), and a study of critical care nurses from toronto during the sars-cov epidemic found that these nurses were more likely to become infected when present during intubations (44) . for this reason, specific recommendations regarding ppe for intubation of patients with covid-19 have been made (58). sars-cov-2 is also present in bodily tissues; while nearly all patients (93%) have evidence of virus in their sputum, some (29%) also have virus in the stool (59) . only 1% have evidence of virus in the blood (59) . taken together, this suggests that pulmonary and upper respiratory surgeries are likely to be higher risk, but that colorectal and gi surgeries may also have greater risk of transmission. questions have been raised regarding risk during laparoscopic surgery, and if cauterization can aerosolize sars-cov-2 (60) . there is evidence that hepatitis b virus and human papillomavirus may become aerosolized during electrocautery (61, 62) , although they both are dna viruses that have different mechanisms of transmission and sites of infection compared to sars-cov-2, challenging this inference. nevertheless, given the paucity of data, and since it is known that virus rna may be within the stool, every attempt should be made to minimize the evacuation of cautery smoke into the operating room per current guidelines from the society of american gastrointestinal and endoscopic surgeons (63) . this can be done using devices that filter released carbon dioxide (63) .a study of 3 patients with sars-cov who underwent caesarean sections reported that no healthcare workers in the operating room were infected when using the following copyright © 2020 wolters kluwer health, inc. unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.ppe: powered air-purifying respirator with a hood covering the face and shoulders, goggles, gown, gloves, and cap (64) . of note, 2 out of 3 of these patients developed wound infections, but their being treated with high dose steroids may have been a confounder (64) . prior to the covid-19 pandemic, use of paprs in combination with body suits was already popular in orthopedic surgery. a randomized controlled trial that accrued from [1974] [1975] [1976] [1977] [1978] [1979] demonstrated that orthopedic surgeons who used paprs had significantly decreased aerosolized bacterial counts in the operating room and decreased incidence of deep joint sepsis (65) ; the application of this study to modern operating rooms, however, has come into question (66) . a study of simulated joint surgery using fluorescein demonstrated that spread of respirable particulate matter to the proceduralist was eliminated with a powered airpurifying respirator and a level 4 gown (67). a similar study also showed that individuals wearing surgical masks without a papr had evidence of particulate matter within their nostrils, eyebrows, and eye lashes (68) . while certainly not definitive, these studies suggest that papr may be effective in reducing aerosolized transmission of covid-19. table 2 . comparison of non-powered filtering facepiece respirators that cover the mouth and nose. minimum efficiency is the efficiency of the respirator to filter out 0.3 µm test particles. apf=assigned protection factor; fda=us food and drug administration table 3 . our hospital's recommendations regarding operating room personal protective equipment during the covid-19 pandemic. all recommendations are in addition to routine personal protective equipment (eye protection, gown, gloves) used during operations to maintain sterility. or=operating room; papr=powered air-purifying respirators. 1 aerosolizing procedures include endotracheal intubation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, bronchoscopy, open suction of the respiratory tract, sputum induction, use of nebulizer therapy, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, and high frequency oscillatory ventilation. 2 high risk procedures include ear, nose, throat, thoracic, transsphenoidal neurosurgery operations. surgical mask or better for all staff interacting with patients and in the or (including cleaning staff)  n95 or better mask for all staff in close contact with the patient (<6 feet away)  papr for aerosolizing 1 and high-risk 2 procedures  minimize staff in the operating room for aerosolizing 1 and high-risk 2 procedures to conserve ppe use  clean core staff bring supplies to the or to avoid multiple entry/exits to conserve ppe use  universal testing of patients pre-operatively when available/possible to enable appropriate ppe use  performing covid-19+ operations later in the day to promote complete decontamination  change scrubs after every procedureat the end of 2019, the first cases of a pulmonary disease of unknown aetiology were detected in wuhan city, china. in the following months, this new pathogen spread throughout europe and then worldwide; in march 2020, the world health organization (who) officially declared a pandemic alert.this new virus, highly infective especially through airborne transmission, is responsible for an acute respiratory syndrome, distinguished by an often asymptomatic, but potentially lethal, interstitial bilateral pneumonia 1 . this virus, initially named 2019‐ncov and subsequently renamed sars‐cov‐2, belongs to the coronoviridae family, along with the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers‐cov) and the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars‐cov) viruses 2 . the most updated epidemiological and genetic studies performed on infected chinese patients revealed that this pandemic originated from a zoonosis, after a single transmission event between an animal and a human, followed by subsequent, rapid interhuman diffusion 1 ,  3 .sars‐cov‐2 expresses membrane proteins that permit adhesion between it and specific receptors expressed on the surface of host tissue cells 4 . the most common receptor involved in the virus–cell interaction is angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ace‐2), which is present at high concentrations in lungs, myocardial cells and kidney, as well as on oral mucosa (especially of the salivary glands and tongue) 5 ,  6 . these structures have been considered as early targets of sars‐cov‐2, with infection causing a disease in humans known as corona virus disease 19 (covid‐19) 7 .the main infection pathways of sars‐cov‐2 are air and direct contact 1 . airborne infection occurs through droplets released by coughing, sneezing, exhalation or speech 1 ,  8 ; direct‐contact infection occurs through contact with contaminated surfaces and subsequent touching of the eyes, nose or mouth 8  (figure   1 ). saliva also plays a crucial role in the spread of infection, through both airborne and direct‐contact pathways 1 .the incubation period of sars‐cov‐2 varies between 3 and 14 days; however, a 24‐day incubation period has also been reported 9 . in most instances, the infection brought on by this new coronavirus is asymptomatic or causes few symptoms 2 . infected patients mainly exhibit night fever, dry cough, sore throat and asthenia; patients with more severe disease can exhibit dyspnea. the most severe symptoms occur in 15%–25% of infected patients, with a relevant impairment of respiratory function that leads to hospitalisation and assisted ventilation 2 . from a clinical perspective, this infection presents as a bilateral interstitial pneumonia, detected radiographically as bilateral ground‐glass opacity 10 ,  11 .covid‐19 diagnosis is based on clinical symptoms (e.g., asthenia, dyspnea, headache and hyperpyrexia) and epidemiological aspects, particularly involving patients who had previous contact with potentially infected individuals or who travelled through/resided in areas with high concentrations of infected people in the 2 weeks prior to symptom onset 9 .recently, a sudden loss of smell (anosmia) and/or taste (ageusia) has been encountered in many sars‐cov‐2‐positive patients. anosmia has been reportedly observed in most sars‐cov‐2‐positive german, swiss and italian patients; data from korea suggest that 30% of sars‐cov‐2‐positive patients exhibited anosmia as the primary presenting symptom 12 . a high‐resolution chest computed tomography scan can show bilateral impairment of lung parenchyma 13 . biomolecular diagnosis is performed through reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rt‐pcr) of samples taken from the upper airways; thus far, this procedure is the gold standard for correctly diagnosing sars‐cov‐2‐positivity 3 .no vaccine is yet available; infected patients are mostly treated with assisted ventilation, oxygen administration (2–15 l/min) and fluid maintenance 14 . promising results have been reported concerning the development of recombinant monoclonal antibodies for a specific viral antigen, as previously tested on patients with sars‐cov 15 .this literature overview focuses on publications regarding this new coronavirus and supplies valuable indications to dental professionals concerning protective and preventive measures that can be adopted.pubmed, embase, scopus, web of science and cochrane databases were used to identify publications on covid‐19 and covid‐19 dentistry‐related aspects, which had been published from the beginning of january 2020 to the end of april 2020. the terms used for the identification of keywords were: covid‐19, 2019‐ncov, sars‐cov‐2, covid‐19 transmission, coronavirus pneumonia, coronavirus infection, severe acute respiratory syndrome, atmospheric contamination, droplets, aerosol, ppe/dpi, covid‐19 guidelines, airborne contamination, masks and respirators, and covid‐19 dental‐related aspects. the inclusion criteria used for screening were papers written in the english language or in the italian language with an english abstract, which reported on covid‐19 and dentistry‐related aspects of covid‐19. the exclusion criteria were: papers in a language other than english or italian with no english abstract; and studies not reported in the above‐mentioned databases. studies were first screened according to titles and abstracts and examined by two reviewers (v.c. and d.b.); studies that fulfilled the inclusion criteria were selected and their full texts were obtained. the contents were analysed and results were extracted if the papers provided original data regarding sars‐cov‐2. citations in each article selected during the main search were reviewed for potential relevance.dentists, dental hygienists, dental assistants and patients have always been at high risk of cross infections because of their exposure to pathogenic microorganisms and viruses derived from the oral cavity and airways 16 ,  17 . these groups of professionals face daily risks of contagion and infection transmission because the dental environment typically involves dangerously high levels of microbes 18  as a result of close contact with the patient’s oral cavity and the presence of bacteria and viruses in the aerosols created by dental instrumentation 1 ,  16 .a study performed on a mannequin fitted with phantom jaws, and seated on a dental chair, showed that the highest levels of aerosol contaminants can be found within 60 cm from the patient’s head, mainly on the right arm of the dentist, on their mask, and around their nose and eyes. moreover, the aerosol generated by an ultrasonic device can remain suspended in the air for 30 minutes after the procedure 19 . therefore, dental procedures can be considered as one of the most probable causes of sars‐cov‐2 infection because such procedures require close proximity to the patient’s mouth, possess a risk of contact with saliva, blood and other biological fluids and involve the use of instrumentation that creates large aerosols 4 ,  19 ,  20 .an in vitro study showed that sars‐cov‐2 maintained viability in the air for at least 3 hours and that its viability half‐life was nearly 1 hour 21 . moreover sars‐cov‐2 demonstrates persistent adherence, for a maximum of 9 days, to various surfaces 1 ,  21 ; therefore, all surfaces and instruments in a dental clinic should be considered as potential sources of virus transmission because infected droplets from saliva or aerosols could land on any exposed surface 16 ,  19 ,  22 .thus far, many doubts remain regarding the type of mask that best protects against covid‐19. different types of mask have been developed in recent decades; each mask offers a different degree of protection. surgical masks were conceived with a one‐way protection design – to capture bodily fluids leaving the wearer – thus protecting the patient from the risk of contamination by healthcare personnel 17 ,  24 . however, a study performed on mannequin heads showed that surgical masks were also able to provide a filtration effect for the operator, in that they filtered an artificial aerosol made of water and sodium bicarbonate. two different types of surgical masks – rectangular and shell‐shaped – were tested; these showed filtering efficiencies of 92% and 96%, respectively 24 .in dentistry, the most indicated ppe for airway protection is the filtering face‐piece (ffp) mask, which can also block virus particles. ffp masks are designed to protect the wearer and are divided into the following different categories based on their filtration efficiency towards powders ≥0.3 µm in diameter: ffp1 (80% minimal total filtration efficiency); ffp2 (94% minimal total filtration efficiency); and ffp3 (99% minimal total filtration efficiency) 17 ,  25 . these ffp scores are determined in accordance with en standard 149:2001 and en 143, maintained by the european committee for standardisation. by contrast, us standards are determined by the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh), which classifies oral respirators as n95 (95% minimal total filtration efficiency), n99 (99% minimal total filtration efficiency) and n100 (99.97% minimal total filtration efficiency). comparing european and us classifications, an ffp2 respirator corresponds to an n95 mask, while an ffp3 respirator corresponds to an n99 mask (table   1 ).because air droplet covid‐19 particles are estimated to be 0.06–0.14 µm in diameter 26 , the most efficient masks are presumed to be ffp2/n95, ffp3/n99 and n100. surgical masks, however, remain valid devices for all procedures that do not create an aerosol.in addition to the filtration efficacy, facepieces can be further distinguished as valved or non‐valved respirators. valved respirators facilitate air exhalation, leading to less moisture buildup inside the mask; thus, they can filter the entering air, but do not filter the wearer’s exhaled air. non‐valved respirators provide good two‐way protection by filtering both inflow and outflow of air 25 ,  27 .ffp3/n99 and n100 facepieces without valves seem to be the devices primarily indicated to guarantee the highest level of protection for both operator and patient, but it is quite challenging to achieve normal air exhalation when these facepieces are used for an extended period of time  23 . in dental procedures, the mask should be considered as disposable and the mean surgical period does not exceed 2 hours; therefore, it is suggested to use a mask with the highest filtration efficacy without a valve, or a valved mask covered by a surgical mask.in the dental field, eye protection has been consistently indicated to minimise contact of the eyes with mechanical (e.g., slivers and foreign bodies), chemical (e.g., acids and disinfectants) and biological (e.g., saliva, blood, oral fluids) agents 18 . the ocular pathway is known to be one of the most frequent routes of infection with sars‐cov‐2 1 . eyewear with enveloping frames should be used, and should have wide lenses to cover the face as much as possible. alternatively, plastic shields may be preferred to glasses because of their greater capacity to protect the face from aerosol droplets. these shields can be worn directly on the forehead or can be included in the surgical mask 17 . from a practical point of view, the use of a shield is compatible with wearing glasses or magnification loupes; it is much more difficult to achieve proper eye protection while using a microscope.a triage area is mandatory for initial evaluation of patients, and this area should be set up in such a way that close contact between individual patients and between patients and healthcare personnel is avoided 4 . preliminary evaluation of patients should consist of body temperature measurement and a brief survey to investigate possible fever, respiratory issues, cough or dyspnea in the past 14 days, as well as contact with individuals who could have been potentially infected 1 .patients answering ‘yes’ to any of the survey questions and who have a body temperature of >37.5 °c (99.5 °f) should be confined to their home or hospitalised 1 . patients answering ‘yes’ to any of the survey questions to the survey and who have a body temperature of <37.5 °c (99.5 °f) should not be treated for at least 14 days. patients who have recovered from covid‐19 can be treated 30 days after symptom remission 4 . patients answering ‘no’ to the survey questions and who have a body temperature of <37.5 °c (99.5 °f) can be treated, but procedures that cause aerosol production should be avoided.each potentially contaminated surface should be cleaned and then disinfected with hydro‐alcoholic disinfectants containing an alcohol concentration of >60% 1 ,  4 ,  28 . a recent review of 22 selected studies evaluated the persistence of human coronavirus on various surfaces and the effects of multiple disinfectant agents on virus inactivation. this review revealed that coronaviruses can persist on plastic, glass and metal surfaces and remain infective for a maximum of 9 days, with a mean infective period of 4–5 days. the authors found that coronavirus could be effectively eliminated in 1 minute when the surfaces were disinfected with 62%–71% ethanol, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite 22 .more recently, the sars‐cov‐2 survival rate was studied in aerosols, as well as on copper, cardboard, stainless steel and plastic. sars‐cov‐2 was viable in aerosols, with a progressive reduction of its infectious titre within the first 3 hours and a median half‐life of approximately 1.1 hours 21 . moreover, sars‐cov‐2 appeared to be more stable on plastic and stainless steel than on cardboard or copper; the following differences were found regarding the duration before sars‐cov‐2 became inactive: 72 hours for plastic, 48 hours for stainless steel, 24 hours for cardboard and 4 hours for copper 21  (table   2 ). thus, for environmental disinfection, it may be useful to place a dispenser containing an alcoholic gel (with an alcohol concentration of 60%–85%) in the waiting room, for hand cleansing.a valid method to reduce the microbial load in the oral cavity is rinsing before dental procedures. there remains controversy regarding the effectiveness of chlorhexidine against coronavirus 1 ,  29 . because sars‐cov‐2 is sensitive to oxidation, mouthrinses containing 1% hydrogen peroxide or 0.2% povidone‐iodine have been proposed 1 .hand hygiene is considered the most important preventive measure to reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms between dentists and patients 4 . soap and cleansers must be rubbed extensively on both hands, until the appearance of abundant foam. this foam has been shown to dissolve the lipid sheath around the viruses, causing dispersion and decomposition of viral molecules. this action is mediated by the surfactant agents in soaps and cleansers, which can enter the virus lipid membrane through hydrophobic interactions, eventually causing it to lyse 30 . at concentrations greater than 60%–65%, alcohol can dissolve fatty molecules of the external lipid layer of the virus, which leads to disruption of the virus particle; therefore, friction with an alcoholic hand sanitiser is suggested after handwashing.when possible, it is recommended to avoid dental procedures that could cause cough and regurgitation. orthopantomography (opg) or cone beam computed tomography (cbct) are preferred; periapical x‐rays should be avoided because they could provoke hypersalivation, coughing or vomiting 4 .when handpieces or ultrasonic devices must be used, the use of a rubber dam is indicated as this significantly reduces the amount of aerosol containing saliva and/or blood, providing a 70% reduction of droplets around the surgical field 31 . when isolation using a rubber dam is not possible, manual instrumentation is preferred over high‐speed handpieces 1 .considerable reduction of droplet spread during dental procedures can be achieved using either high‐speed saliva ejectors or surgical ejectors, and the use of such devices is therefore highly recommended 31 . simultaneous assembly of two ejectors (e.g., a high‐speed ejector and a high‐volume evacuator) may also be useful.handpieces generally used in dentistry can draw and then expel biological fluids and contaminants that can become deposited on the patient or the dentist, leading to cross infection 1 ,  32 . because it has been shown that anti‐retraction handpieces effectively reduce the return of bacteria and viruses into the tubing system, the use of handpieces without an anti‐retraction system should be avoided during the covid‐19 pandemic 16 ,  28 .although there is a lack of information concerning environmental sanitation related to coronaviruses, some options are always useful for reducing bacterial and viral loads in dental clinics. common sense‐based guidelines suggest an adequate air change after each dental procedure by opening the windows in surgical rooms and in the waiting room. safe distances must be maintained between patients in the waiting room.in the early 1990s, the air quality in a dental clinic was shown to become extremely polluted by aerial microbiota after the most common dental procedures 16 . when no aerosol is created, most sars‐cov‐2 droplets precipitate and deposit on surfaces. when handpieces or ultrasonic devices are used, the aerosol generated can transmit the virus into the air where it can persist, viable, for more than 3 hours 21 .currently, there is no evidence regarding sanitation devices that are especifically effective against sars‐cov‐2. the following air sanitation systems were developed in the past and are commonly used in medical settings.air depuration systems have been developed to filter and recirculate the air of surgical rooms and medical and health clinics. air is drawn through different filters: the first stops bacteria and larger droplets; the second reduces gas components; and the third reduces the numbers of the smallest droplet particles and the smallest microorganisms. these systems can filter droplet particles smaller than 0.01–0.3 µm, with a filtration efficiency of 85%–99% 16 ,  33 .ozone is a natural gas, and one of the most effective systems for environmental sanitation. it provides highly reactive free radicals that can oxidise bacteria, viruses and organic and inorganic compounds, thereby effecting bactericidal action towards air contaminants. because ozone is heavier than oxygen, it precipitates on tissues and disinfects both air and surfaces 34 .germicidal ultraviolet (uv) radiation also represents a valid sterilisation option: uv light can damage microbial dna and rna, thus preventing reproduction of microbes and reducing the harmful effects of infectious organisms. these uv lights can be installed with a filtration apparatus and used in water‐ and air‐circulation systems to eliminate powders, bacteria and viruses 35 .none.none.to the editor-the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) recently recommended the use of face masks in public settings to help slow the spread of the sars-cov-2 virus. 1 currently, a mask shortage continues in the united states and around the globe. in contrast, taiwan has had a surplus of masks since february and exported masks in april to other countries to help fight this pandemic. in this letter, we discuss how taiwan ensured adequate stockpiles of masks for both healthcare workers and the general population.taiwan registered its first case of covid-19 on january 21, 2020. 2 as of april 17, 2020, taiwan has recorded just 395 cases of covid-19. in response to the emerging threat of covid-19, the taiwanese government produced a stockpile of 44 million surgical and 1.93 million n95 masks before the first case was reported (fig. 1a) . 3 subsequently, the government implemented bans on exportation and requisition of mask-manufacturing companies to ensure adequate local reserves of masks. the government also introduced price fixing of masks to prevent bidding wars and to ensure universal access of masks to all citizens. rationing of surgical masks was implemented to prevent panic buying of masks, which would drain local supplies. the mask rationing system was delicately adjusted according to the production of masks and the amount required by healthcare workers, while ensuring that the entire population had adequate access (fig. 1a) . the initial rationing system limited every person to 2 surgical masks per week. the purchase was tracked using the individual's national health insurance card-health insurance that covers 99% of residents. with the resumption of school classes on february 21, the purchase limit for surgical masks was increased to 4 masks per week for children (fig. 1a) . 4 with the increased production of masks, the quota increased to 5 masks for children and 3 masks for adults per week. by the end of february, taiwan was producing 5 million masks daily and had a substantial surplus of masks (fig. 1b) . 4 as of april 9, 2020, the purchase quota was increased to 9 surgical masks per person per 2 weeks. the ban on the export of masks was lifted, and taiwanese nationals can now send masks to relatives residing abroad. to help the rest of the world to battle the pandemic, taiwan also exported 10 million masks to the united states, europe, and its allies in april 2020. 4 since the outbreak, many asian countries have recommended or mandated the use of surgical masks in the healthy general population. 5 previously, the us cdc recommended that masks should only be worn by healthcare workers, caregivers, or symptomatic individuals. part of this rationale was that universal masking in the general population may limit the amount of masks available to healthcare settings. however, taiwan's example illustrates that this supply problem may be overcome through a combination of policies such as increased mask production and rationing, and ensuring that the demand and supply of masks remain in balance (fig. 1b) .although the use of surgical masks in the healthy population has not been directly proven to reduce the spread of the coronavirus, it may provide source control and protect against asymptomatic transmission. 5 recent mechanistic studies have suggested that surgical masks may reduce the transmission of the coronavirus if worn by patients. 6 furthermore, a recent meta-analysis showed that masking practices may produce marginal reduction in transmission of respiratory virus in the community. 7 at a population level, even marginal reduction in transmission may substantially slow the spread of the sars-cov-2 virus. economically, mask interventions have been shown to be cost saving in a pandemic setting. 8 taiwan created a sufficient stockpile of masks for both the healthcare settings and the general population, and its example could serve as a model for other countries to learn from as we continue our fight against the covid-19 pandemic.coronavirus disease , which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has spread to 216 countries in just a few months. the numbers of cases and deaths have been on the rise since the first case was identified in wuhan, china in early december 2019 [1] . the covid-19 pandemic has posed a great challenge for healthcare systems, as the disease has spread explosively, exceeding hospital capacities and placing healthcare workers (hcws) at high risk of exposure. the proportion of infected mode of transmission 1 in general, respiratory viruses can spread through multiple modes of transmission: contact, respiratory droplets, or aerosols [13] . contact transmission can occur through direct physical contact with virus-laden respiratory secretions from infected individuals or indirectly through contact with inanimate objects or environments contaminated with the virus [13] . conventionally, respiratory transmission is classified as either droplet or airborne transmission [4, 7] . it is generally accepted that droplet transmission occurs through deposition of large droplets (>5 µm in diameter) on the mucous membranes (eyes, nose, or mouth) of susceptible people. it occurs when a person is in close proximity to an infected person, as large droplets travel only short distances (<1 m). airborne transmission occurs through inhalation of aerosols (≤5 µm in diameter) generated from the respiratory tract of an infected person. aerosols remain suspended in the air for a prolonged period, allowing them to be transmitted over a long distance [4] .however, mode of transmission cannot be simply dichotomized. there is no clear cut-off to differentiate small and large droplets. different cutoffs have been suggested based on the area of the respiratory tract where particles deposit (respirable particles <10 µm in diameter penetrating the lower respiratory tract or inspirable particles 10 -100 µm in diameter depositing in the upper respiratory tract) [14] or based on how they behave (particles <10 µm in diameter suspended in the air or particles >20 µm in diameter that settle fast by gravity) [15] . particle size is dynamic; it depends on the initial size and composition, the force and pressure at emission, environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, relative humidity and airflow), and the time spent airborne [4] . the distance traveled and the length of time particles remain suspended in the air is also determined by particle size, settling velocity, relative humidity, and airflow [16] . large droplets settle faster due to gravity, contaminating the near vicinity; some of them can rapidly evaporate to form aerosol particles termed "droplet nuclei," which behave as other aerosols. settled droplets may facilitate fomite transmission and can be re-suspended in the air by diverse human activities. large droplets can also move horizontally for more than 2 meters from the source during coughing or up to 8 meters during sneezing [17] . they can remain suspended for prolonged periods in certain environments, especially where turbulent airflow is abundant, such as in hospital settings where doors open constantly [15] . particles of varying sizes (0.01 -500 µm) are produced not only by medical procedures but also by respiratory activities such breathing, speaking, singing, coughing, or sneezing [18] [19] [20] [21] . the proportion of aerosol-size particles differs according to the respiratory activities and individuals [21] . as such, it is important to understand that the size of the particles and the resulting behavior follows a continuum; it may overlap either side of this cut-off [21] .however, being airborne does not in itself guarantee effective transmission through aerosols. the virus in aerosols must remain viable in a sufficient quantity to be inhaled by a susceptible host. the virus contained in droplets is subject to biological decay over time, which is affected by the initial metabolic state of the virus, genetic characteristics, and the environment [22, 23] . in this context, the relative contribution of different modes of transmission should be considered, albeit the possibility of airborne transmission does exist. airborne transmission can be classified as obligate, preferential, or opportunistic. in obligate airborne transmission, transmission occurs only via inhalation of aerosols (e.g., in tuberculosis). though transmission occurs through multiple routes in preferential airborne transmission, it predominately occurs through aerosols (e.g., in measles, varicella). in opportunistic airborne transmission, the virus is transmitted predominantly through other routes; however, the virus may be transmitted through aerosols under favorable circumstances where aerosols are generated by performing agps (e.g., in influenza, sars-cov-1 infection) [7, 22, 24] .the current consensus regarding the transmission of sars-cov-2 is that it is transmitted mainly through respiratory droplets and contact and that airborne transmission is possible during agps [9] [10] [11] 25] . although no study has conclusively linked sars-cov-2 transmission to contaminated environmental surfaces, indirect contact with fomites is considered a possible route based on the evidence of heavy environmental contamination in healthcare settings, objects used by covid-19 patients [26, 27] , and the finding that the virus remains viable on plastic surfaces for as long as 3 days [28] .however, there has been controversy whether sars-cov-2 can become airborne when agps are not performed. some studies have suggested the potential of airborne sars-cov-2 transmission. in one experimental study, viable sars-cov-2 was detected in the air for 3 hours when an aerosolized environment was created using a three-jet collison nebulizer and a goldberg drum [28] . however, though this experimental condition may simulate circumstances when agps are performed, it does not reflect real-life clinical settings. a study in nebraska detected viral rna in air samples collected in covid-19 patient rooms more than 6 feet way from the source patient and in the hallway outside patient rooms, but failed to detect viable virus in air samples [29] . guo et al. detected sars-cov-2 rna in air samples collected in intensive care units and general wards at a hospital in wuhan, but the viral rna was not detected on face shields, in buffer rooms, or in doffing rooms [30] . liu et al. also found a high concentration of viral rna in air samples from patients' toilet areas and staff ppe removal areas in two hospitals in wuhan, suggesting re-suspension of the virus from contaminated surfaces [31] . however, both studies in wuhan did not investigate the infectivity of the virus in those air samples. the presence of viral rna in the air does not necessarily indicate viable virus in sufficient amounts to cause infection, nor does it mean that the virus can effectively be transmitted through this route [11, 32] . further studies are needed to determine whether it is possible to detect viable sars-cov-2 in air samples from patient rooms in which no agps are performed and what role it may play in transmission. more importantly, in the study by liu et al., viral rna was reduced to undetectable levels in staff ppe removal areas after implementation of rigorous disinfection procedures, which emphasizes the importance of environmental disinfection to prevent the spread of the virus in the perspectives of infection prevention and control. in contrast, other studies have shown that viral rna was not detected in air samples collected from covid-19 patient rooms [26] , 10 cm away from the patient's chin [27] , or 2-5 meters away from the patient [33] . transmission did not occur among hcws wearing surgical masks when they were exposed to a covid-19 patient, even during endotracheal intubation [34, 35] . no instances of transmission were observed among hcws caring for covid-19 patients when they used surgical masks as part of ppe routine care [36] .based on these findings, it is believed that sars-cov-2 is mainly transmitted through droplets and contact, and that airborne transmission is possible under certain circumstances when aerosols are generated during agps or support treatment [9, 11] . at the same time, the possibility of airborne transmission should carefully be considered as new evidence emerges.in this context, the who currently recommends droplet and contact precautions for hcws caring for covid-19 patients and airborne precautions for settings where agps or support treatment are performed [25] . for droplet precaution, use of medical masks (also referred to as surgical masks) and eye protection (goggles or face shields) is recommended. for contact precaution, long-sleeved water-resistant gowns and gloves are recommended; when agps are performed, use of n95, filtering facepiece (ffp)2, ffp3, or equivalent respirators is recommended instead of surgical masks, and additional use of aprons is suggested if gowns are not fluid-resistant [37] (table 1) . however, there are inconsistences in the recommendations of organizations and countries. ppe recommendations in canada [38] , australia [39] , and the united kingdom [40] are consistent with those put forth by the who. the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and the european center for disease control and prevention (ecdc) initially recommended airborne precautions for any situations involving contact with covid-19 patients; however, they have modified their recommendations to specify that surgical masks are acceptable alternatives if respirators are not available [9, 10] . despite this difference, airborne precautions are commonly recommended when agps are performed ( table 1) . although the transmission risk for hcws may differ based on procedure being performed [41] , agps listed in the guidelines generally include endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, tracheostomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, sputum induction, non-invasive ventilation, manual ventilation, airway suctioning, and nebulizer therapy. in the ecdc guidelines, prone positioning of the patient and disconnecting the patient from a ventilator are also considered agps [10, 42] . surgery or procedures in which high-speed devices are used can also generate aerosols [43] . although it remains uncertain whether sars-cov-2 is transmitted through this route, such procedures may impose substantial transmission risk in dental-clinic settings [44] . collecting nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs for sars-cov-2 tests can provoke coughing and sneezing, possibly leading to the production of aerosols [9, 10] . however, this procedure requires less time and may pose a less significant risk than other agps. for this reason, the recommended respiratory protective equipment for collecting swabs differs among guidelines ( table 1) . the australian and canadian guidelines emphasize the need for a point-of-care risk assessment to determine the likelihood of exposure based on a patient's symptoms, tasks, and specific environments [38, 45] .in korea, airborne and contact precautions continue to be recommended in any situations involving any contact with suspected or confirmed patients, with some modifications. initially, the korea center for disease control and prevention (kcdc) guidelines recommended coveralls with shoe covers for contact precautions, goggles/face shields for eye protection, n95 or equivalent respirators for respiratory protection, and powered airpurifying respirators (paprs) when agps are performed [46] . in the march 2020 revision of these guidelines, long-sleeved water-resistant gowns and kf94 masks were recommended [47] . these modifications may have caused confusion and misunderstanding among hcws [48] . to select appropriate ppe, it is important to know the differences among respiratory protective equipment (respirators, surgical masks, paprs) and protective clothing (coveralls, gowns) and their benefits and drawbacks.the main difference between medical masks and respirators is their purpose. medical masks, also known as surgical masks, are designed to reduce spread of infections from the wearer to others and to protect the wearer's mucous membranes in the nose and mouth from exposure to large respiratory droplets and splashes or sprays of blood or bodily fluids. they are loose-fitting devices not designed to filter small airborne particles [49] . in contrast, respirators are designed to protect the wearers from inhaling hazardous airborne particles by filtering airborne particles (an air-purifying respirator) or supplying clean air to the wearer (an atmosphere-supplying respirator). air-purifying respirators are further divided into three categories: filtering facepiece respirators (ffrs), elastomeric facepiece respirators, and paprs [49] . ffrs, generally known as respirators, are disposable particulate respirators classified in accordance with their filtering efficiency. in healthcare settings, ffrs with at least 95% filtering efficacy, also known as n95 respirators, are commonly used for airborne precautions and need to tightly fit the face to provide proper protection. other types of airpurifying respirators can be used as alternatives to n95 respirators [49] [50] [51] .the who has released the disease commodity package (dcp) for covid-19, a datasheet that lists critical commodities and technical specifications [52] . according to this dcp, surgical masks worn by hcws should meet the standards of en 14683 type ii, ir, iir or american society for testing and materials (astm) f2100 minimum level 1, or the equivalent, while surgical masks won by patients (for source control) should meet type i, level 1, or equivalent standards. the following are recommended for ffrs: 1) the minimum n95 respirator according to the food and drug administration (fda) class ii under 21 cfr 878.4040 and the cdc national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh), 2) the minimum ffp2 respirator according to the en149, eu ppe regulation 2016/425 category iii, or 3) the equivalent [52] . to choose the proper equipment, it is necessary to understand the standards and requirements to which surgical masks or respirators must conform.most surgical masks are composed of three-layers: an outer fluid-repelling layer, a middle layer serving as a high filter, and an inner moisture-absorbing layer. surgical masks without this three-layer feature cannot provide adequate protection [53] . in the us and europe, surgical masks are classified as medical devices and regulated accordingly. in the us, five elements are tested to standardize their quality: fluid resistance to synthetic blood, particulate and bacterial filtration efficiency, breathing resistance (pressure drop), flammability, and biocompatibility [54, 55] . in europe, similar standard requirements have been adopted [56] . surgical masks are categorized into levels 1, 2, or 3 in the us and i, ii, or iir in europe ( table 2 ).in korea, however, there are no minimum standards or standardized testing methods to determine the filtering efficiency of surgical masks, and the efficiency of the filters in available surgical masks may vary widely. fluid resistance to water is the only performance test required for surgical masks in korea [57] . fluid resistance reflects only one of the surgical mask's purposes: to minimize the amount of fluid that could transfer from the outer layers through to the inner layer in cases of splash or spray. however, the surface tension of water is greater than that of blood, and blood can penetrate through fabrics more readily than water [58, 59] . the lack of equivalent korean standards makes it difficult for hcws to choose appropriate surgical masks as recommended by the who. also, it is difficult to uniformly recommend the use of any surgical mask during care for patients with covid-19 in korea unless reliable korean standards for surgical masks are established. healthcare facilities should cautiously check whether products meet the standard requirements when procuring surgical masks for hcws.ffrs are labeled according to their filtering efficiency and the national regulations defining the standard conditions. in the us, there are nine classes of ffrs according to filtration efficacy (95%, 99%, and 99.97%) and the filter's oil resistance (n, r, and p). n95 respirators filter 95% of airborne particles 0.3 microns in size and are not resistant to oil. they are regulated under niosh cfr part 84 [60] . the european standard (en149:2001) places ffrs into three classes: ffp1, ffp2, and ffp3 according to their filtering efficiency (80%, 94%, and 99%, respectively) [61, 62] . as the korean standards follow the european standards, ffrs manufactured in korea are classified similarly: kf80, kf94, and kf99 ( require ≤343 pa at 85 l/min. since pressure drop increases with the flow rate, standard pressure drop requirements are similar, even though they appear different [64, 65] . in korea and europe, total inward leakage (til) is also tested on human subjects ( table 3 ) [62] . in the us, the til test is not performed. instead, fit testing must be performed prior to working in the environment where wearing a respirator is required and be repeated annually under the occupational safety and health administration (osha) regulation 1910.134 [66] . despite differences in test methods, it is generally considered that us n95, eu ffp2, and kf94 respirators are equivalent for filtering non-oil based airborne particles [64, 65, 67] .however, concerns have been raised because the fit test is not regularly performed in many korean hospitals, despite the korea osha recommending a fit test for wearers every year [68, 69] . respirators must fit the face tightly for effective filtering of airborne particles. noti et al. demonstrated that a poorly-fitting n95 respirator was not as effective as a tightly fitting respirator at blocking infectious viruses (66.5% vs. 99.6% blocked, respectively) and performed no better than unsealed surgical masks (66.5% vs. 56.6% blocked, respectively) in a simulation experiment [70] . in korea, the til test is performed on ten human subjects doing five types of exercise [63] . this til test can eliminate respirators that are inherently poorly-fitting and that do not comply with this requirement or identify that the tested respirator is generally well-fitting. however, fitting is affected by a wearer's face shape and size, age, and gender, as well as the respirator design [71, 72] . fit testing helps to select a respirator model that fits an individual's face well enough to provide at least the assigned protection factor of 10 [73] . fit performance was also found to vary by respirator model, ranging from fitting less than 5% to those fitting 95% of the test subjects [71] . in addition to the model type, ear-loop designs appear to be less effective in achieving a proper fit than head-band designs [67] . this is worrisome, since most kf94 masks have ear loops. as agps may put hcws at an increased risk for virus exposure and infection, the design of kf94 masks limits their use during agps. kf94 masks of various shapes and sizes and with elastic head-band designs should be offered to hcws to improve the fitting of the masks. a recent study on the current status of fit testing in korea showed that 82% of 52 hcws failed to meet the criteria of fit factor 100, even when using n95 respirators [68] . considering these findings, hcws should be fit-tested for ffrs, regardless of their labels (kf94, n95, or ffp2) to ensure respiratory protection. though it is challenging and laborious for hospitals to implement fit testing practices for all hcws in the midst of the covid-19 pandemic, protecting hcws is of paramount importance.even so, fit testing alone does not guarantee respiratory protection [74] . inappropriate donning and skipping the self-seal-check after donning an ffr were found to be frequent https://icjournal.org https://doi.org/10.3947/ic.2020.52.2.165 for european standards, at least 8 out of 10 individual wearers' arithmetic means for total inward leakage shall not be greater than the requirements as well.causes of improper fit [68, 74] . since training on the proper use of ffrs can improve fitting of the respirators among hcws [74, 75] , training programs should be implemented along with fit testing.the risk of exposure to blood or bodily fluids should also be considered when selecting the proper ffrs, because most ffrs are not water-resistant. to protect hcws against the splash/ spray of blood or bodily fluids as well as airborne particles (i.e., during an operation on a patient with covid-19), surgical respirators with fluid resistance properties should be used [49] . a surgical n95 respirator, which is approved by the niosh as an ffr and the fda as a surgical mask, is one example.paprs are increasingly used as an alternative to n95 respirators. paprs use a batterypowered fan to force air through a filter, cartridge, or canister to a tight-fitting facepiece or loose-fitting hood [49] . loose-fitting paprs are commonly used in healthcare settings, as they have several advantages: higher respiratory protection with an assigned protection factor of 25 (as compared to 10 for n95 respirators), a barrier against splash, and less difficulty in breathing. they are also reusable, and do not require fit testing [50, 76] .however, there are disadvantages to paprs use: they are heavy, may impede hcws' ability to care for patients, limit communication due to noise, require batteries to be recharged or replaced, and take up significant storage space [76] . although a fit test is not required, they do need to be properly sized, as protection can decrease with oversized or stretchedout paprs [77] . another disadvantage is that the wearer's exhaled air is unfiltered, which limits the use of paprs in close proximity to sterile fields [50, 76] . more importantly, risk of contamination during doffing procedures is high, requiring hcws to receive special training and assistance in the doffing process. cleaning and disinfection must be performed between uses. this process must be thorough and performed by trained individuals.loose-fitting paprs are suitable when agps are frequently performed (such as in intensive care unit settings), when hcws are not able to wear tight-fitting ffrs, or when the fitting of a ffr may be compromised. for safe use, healthcare facilities should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages associated with paprs. they must also establish a robust maintenance program, including hcw training for proper papr use and the cleaning and disinfection process prior to the use of paprs [76, 78] .infectious aerosol particles are produced by diverse respiratory activities, including speaking and breathing [79, 80] . hcws in close proximity to patients with covid-19 are at risk of short-range airborne transmission as well as large-droplet transmission [81] . as such, there have been debates regarding the effectiveness of surgical masks against the virus in routine patient care, and use of n95 respirators or the equivalent is often advocated [82] . however, no clinical trial has compared the effectiveness of surgical masks and n95 respirators in preventing covid-19 among hcws. based on the systematic review of five observational studies on hcws, wearing any mask (surgical mask or n95 respirator) reduced the risk of developing respiratory infection (odds ratio [or] for surgical masks, 0.13; 95% confidence interval [ci], 0.03 -0.62 vs. or for n95 respirators, 0.12; 95% ci, 0.05 -0.26) [83] . a recent randomized clinical trial in the us demonstrated no significant difference in the incidence of laboratory confirmed influenza between outpatient hcws wearing surgical masks and those wearing n95 respirators [84] . two meta-analyses, which were separately performed by different research groups, reached the same conclusion: surgical masks and n95 respirators offer similar protection against respiratory viral infection among hcws during non-aerosolgenerating care [85, 86] . based on these findings, the infectious disease society of america recommends that hcws caring for patients with suspected or confirmed covid-19 use either a surgical mask or n95 (or n99 or prpr) respirator and that hcws involved in agps use n95 or higher-level respirators [83] . chu , and both n95 and surgical masks had a strong association with protection when compared to single-layer masks [87] . the review, however, included only four studies comparing n95 or similar respirators with no mask, and two of them involved situations in which agps were performed. based on this review alone, it is difficult to generalize that the use of n95 or similar respirators provides more protection during routine care for patients with covid-19. therefore, the use of n95, ffp2, or higher-level respirators such as paprs should be prioritized when agps are performed. it is also necessary to vigilantly monitor situations or procedures that may increase the possibility of aerosol transmission, because many of the characteristics of sars-cov-2 remain unknown.the choice of protective clothing should be based on a thorough risk assessment of potential exposure to blood and body fluids and transmission modes. the risk of exposure may depend on the stage of the disease, the severity of symptoms, and the types of procedures conducted. once the risks are assessed, selection can be guided by the type of barrier, design, critical properties such as seams/closures, and donning and doffing features of the clothing.the who, cdc, and ecdc recommend the use of long-sleeved water-resistant gowns and gloves when caring for covid-19 patients. in its recent publication on the rational use of ppe, the who also specifies situations in which gowns should be donned. according to the who dcp for covid-19, en 13975, any performance level gowns or association for the advancement of medical instrumentation (aami) pb70, all level or equivalent gowns are acceptable [52] . regarding coveralls as ppe against covid-19, the who stated they are neither required nor generally recommended, and the cdc recommends them as an alternative in contingency situations. on the other hand, in korea, initial recommendations recommended only coveralls for body protection; the guidelines were subsequently changed to specify that either gowns or coveralls can be used. this may cause confusion among frontline hcws regarding what kind of protective clothing should be chosen. moreover, there is no national standard for hcw protective clothing in korea. therefore, it is necessary to understand the relevant international standards and test methods to select and procure the proper protective clothing.in the us, surgical and isolation gowns are medical devices subjected to regulation. ansi/ aami pb70 classifies surgical gowns and isolation gowns into 4 levels (level 1 being the lowest, level 4 being the highest) based on their liquid barrier performance [88] . tests for level 1 -3 gowns use water, but level 4 gowns are required to pass blood and viral penetration resistance tests at a pressure of 13.8 pa, which is considered water-impermeable (table 4) [59]. the designs of surgical and isolation gowns are based on the anticipated location (critical zones) and degree of liquid contact. for isolation gowns, the whole garment is anticipated to have direct contact with blood, bodily fluids, or pathogens, and the entire gown, including the seams, needs to achieve barrier performance. for surgical gowns, the front panel and lower sleeves of the gown are required to achieve barrier performance [88] . the european standard en13759 classifies gowns as either high performance or standard performance based on their resistance to liquid and microbial penetration ( table 4 ) [59, 89] . for gowns to protect hcws from infectious agents, the garments must meet the standard en 14126 performance requirements, which include tests for penetration resistance to blood/bodily fluids (iso 16603) or to blood-borne pathogens (iso 16604) under different hydrostatic pressures ranging from class 1 (0 kpa) to class 6 (20 kpa) [59, 89] . this standard is usually also used to evaluate and classify coveralls for hcws in europe. in the us, the nfpa 1999 standard is used to classify clothing items, including coveralls for hcws; the materials and seams are tested for viral penetration resistance using astm f1671, and the overall liquid integrity, strength, and physical hazard resistance are also tested [59] .as there are various performance levels of gowns and coveralls, it cannot be simply concluded that one is more protective than the other. the specific barrier properties should be thoroughly reviewed, and protective clothing appropriate for specific diseases should be selected accordingly. for example, for ebola virus disease, which is mainly transmitted through contact with blood or bodily fluids, gowns and coveralls should be resistant to penetration by blood and any bodily fluids or by blood-borne pathogens and compliant with the corresponding standards. using astm 1670 (13.8 kpa), iso 16603 class 3, or higher pressure (≥3.5 kpa). protective clothing resistant to blood-borne pathogen penetration includes ansi/aami level 4 gowns or coveralls made of fabric passing tests using astm f1671 (13.8 kpa), iso 16604 class 2, or higher pressure (≥1.75 kpa) [90] . for covid-19, any water-resistant level gowns are acceptable [52] . thus, the proper level of gown protection should be chosen based on the risk assessment of exposure, the pressure and type of contact, as well as the duration and type of procedure [91] .no study has compared the effectiveness of gowns and coveralls in reducing transmission of the virus to hcws, and gowns and coveralls are generally considered acceptable and effective [59, 92] . one of the major differences is the design. coveralls are designed to cover the whole body, including the back and lower legs, while gowns do not provide continuous whole body protection. when wearing gowns, protection of the back area can be compromised depending on the activities of hcws, such as squatting or sitting down, so sufficient overlap of fabric is necessary to cover the back. on the other hand, barrier protection can be compromised when using coveralls with a front zipper closure not covered with a flap of barrier material because seam barrier properties are essential for protection [59] . gowns are easier to don and doff, and they are more likely to be used correctly as hcws are relatively more familiar with gowns than with coveralls. in contrast, coveralls are difficult to doff, and the risk of self-contamination can be higher during the doffing process [59, [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] . hcws should be trained properly and should practice the use of coveralls before using them during patient care. moreover, coveralls generate more heat stress than do gowns, which leads to discomfort, fatigue, and dehydration. considering these differences, the decision of which of the two to use should be based on availability, hcw activities, and the physical characteristics of the work environment [59] .in summary, current data suggest that sars-cov-2 is primarily transmitted through respiratory droplets and close contact. airborne transmission may occur during agps in healthcare settings. ppe for droplet and contact precautions, such as surgical masks with eye protection, gowns, and gloves, are recommended for hcws in contact with suspected or confirmed covid-19 patients, and n95 or equivalent respirators should to be worn by hcws whenever agps are performed. although droplets and close contact are the main modes of sars-cov-2 transmission, selection of the proper ppe should be based on a through risk assessment of the extent and duration of exposure and the properties of the ppe required for protection. degrees of respiratory protection and barrier properties differ according to various standards and test methods. therefore, it is important to understand the national or international standards for respiratory protective equipment and protective clothing, and ppe certified to provide effective protection against sars-cov-2 should be chosen. healthcare facilities must check the specifications of products thoroughly before procuring them. it is also important to ensure that hcws are well trained for the proper use of ppe, because appropriate donning and doffing is essential for proper protection. the overuse of ppe can lead to supply shortages when high levels of protection must be used, potentially exposing hcws to greater risk of infection. therefore, ppe should be appropriately selected and rationally used. it should bear in mind that ppe is the last line of protection and its use alone does not effectively reduce transmission risk. effective administrative and engineering controls, including early identification of suspected patients and source control, must be implemented simultaneously. furthermore, basic infection prevention measures, such as frequent hand washing and rigorous environmental cleaning and disinfection, must beacute respiratory tract infections (artis) are the most common causes of both morbidity and mortality worldwide, especially in developing countries.[1] in saudi arabia, viral pathogens are the most common of artis with the highest detection rate in children.[2]when large numbers of people come together for a social function, a huge public event or sports, there is a high risk of disseminating respiratory infections. most respiratory infections are easily transmitted, but they have an incubation period of several days, during which they are most contagious.[345]the world has learned from the recent emerging infectious diseases such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome in 2002, highly pathogenic influenza a virus subtype h5n1 (bird flu) in 2005, and h1n1 influenza (swine flu) in 2009; about the need to cooperate in developing better surveillance and control measures. public health authorities should give priority to the improvement of the awareness of the public on infection control measures. the world health organization requires countries to report all new cases of emerging infectious diseases according to the international health regulations.[1] these global measures help countries to assess and increase their preparedness and readiness to the spread of infections.[6]nonpharmaceutical interventions (npis) routinely recommended for mitigating respiratory infections, include respiratory etiquette, hand hygiene, and routine cleaning of frequently touched surfaces and objects. effective use of npis depends on the acceptance and participation of individuals who implement personal protective measures, and communities that implement communitywide measures.[7]in a cross-sectional, probable multistage sampling study of patients over 18 years, 1600 participants (48.9% male) were interviewed in mexico. the authors concluded that there was a higher acceptance rate for the pandemic influenza vaccine (with 90.6% willing to receive influenza a [h1n1] vaccine) compared to similar studies in other countries. the main reason given by 46.5% of participants for rejecting the vaccine was distrust; however, 34% had previously received the seasonal flu vaccine. furthermore, 68% considered influenza a (h1n1) a risk to their families. the researchers reported that handwashing was the most common measure of infection prevention reported by 47.5%, followed by the influenza vaccine (28%). the level of education and age significantly influenced their objection to the vaccine.[8]a descriptive analysis of a telephone survey was conducted in spain on 1627 participants, (51.6% women, 66.5% aged between 18 and 55 years, 52.7% unskilled manual workers and 49.1% lived in cities larger than 50,000 inhabitants). respondents perceptions, preventive measures, vaccination related to influenza (h1n1) were investigated. only 15.7% felt that they were at risk of contracting influenza. however, in the second wave of this study, after the epidemic peak, the proportion of those who felt they were at risk of contracting influenza was much lower, at 3.9%. it was found that the main measures adopted were those recommended by the government.[9]on the mississippi gulf coast, when 216 residents were interviewed for the primary sources of their information during the 2009 influenza pandemic, most participants (98%) were aware of h1n1 influenza. the most frequent sources of information cited were television (tv, 69%), newspapers (19%), and the internet (9%). the preventive measure most adopted was hand hygiene (41%); and that increased following the confirmation of the first influenza case.[10]in a literature review based on the health belief model, perceived susceptibility was the most significant factor that determined compliance. moreover, perceived benefit of mask wearing was found to have a significant effect on compliance as well. experience or perception of discomfort and sense of embarrassment were perceived barriers to the wearing of masks.[11]when elementary schools, household caregivers, students, and their teachers were asked to participate in a survey, the npi measures appeared to be high (90%) among teachers and the caregivers. it is essential to communicate the necessary information to the household caregivers and teachers through trusted sources.[12]in a cross-sectional study of 340 inhabitants in florida blanca, the best-known preventative actions were handwashing and use of surgical masks. gender was associated with varying levels of knowledge, while the awareness of preventative action was associated with exposure to the media. educational attainment was related to symptom control measures, and age was associated with the duration of handwashing and the use of quarantine.[13]another cross-sectional study involving face-to-face interviews of 221 respondents in tampin, negeri sembilan reported that 88.9% and 85.8%, respectively, indicated that they covered their mouths when coughing and sneezing with tissue paper or handkerchief. when coughing or sneezing 91.2% and 88.9%, respectively turned their faces away. the previous respondents disposed of their used paper tissues properly in a waste bin, and 91.2% claimed that they did not spit in public areas. the vast majority used water and soap to wash their hands before eating (93.8%) and after using the lavatory (98.7%). however, 81.9% washed their hands if they covered their noses and mouths when they sneezed. only 35.8% of the interviewees claimed to follow the handwashing steps given by the ministry of health. the use of face masks was moderate, with 76.5% of the respondents using face mask during a pandemic. furthermore, 75.2% ensured that their face masks were properly fitted and covered their mouths and noses. about 74.3% wore the ministry of health recommended face masks during the pandemic. slightly more than half of the respondents (54.0%) used face masks when they had influenza-like symptoms, and 40.3% admitted to reusing their face masks more than once. respondents' practices on social distancing were appropriate. those who avoided going to or taking their children unnecessarily to such crowded places as shopping areas were 88.9% and 83.2%, respectively. only 64.6% practiced safety measures such as the wearing of face masks in crowded areas, and 30.1% used hand sanitizers when necessary. as for self-health care, the majority (79.2%) avoided sharing forks and spoons with friends during a meal. only 37.2% of the respondents took the initiative to look for additional information on influenza a (h1n1) other than what was given by the government. about a third of the respondents took food supplements during the pandemic phase. a high percentage (68.6%) of the respondents did not wash their hands after shaking hands with other people. ethnicity, education, income, and practice score predicted the knowledge score. income and knowledge scores were predictors of practice score. there was a positive correlation between knowledge and practice scores.[14]in saudi arabia, of the 1548 adult participants who were interviewed in various shopping malls in riyadh and jeddah; 54.3% were very concerned while 60.8% had taken minimal or no precautionary measures. educational level was the only significant predictor of the degree of concern. participants who were male, older, better educated, and more knowledgeable took more precautions than others. the ministry of health reports of the characteristics of the disease were not enough to convince 38.3% of participants, and only 16.1% of the participants reported receiving information from health providers. frequent handwashing and face mask use in crowded areas were practiced by 57.7% and 56.2%, respectively. moreover, 36.6% avoided touching their eyes, noses, or mouths; and 38.0% covered their mouths and noses when sneezing or coughing. used tissues were disposed of in a bin after use by 26.9%, while 25.7% claimed that they avoided normal activities if they had flu-like symptoms.[15]the objective of the present study was to measure the level of community compliance and practice of the measures for the prevention of respiratory infections and to identify the source of information of the measures for the prevention of respiratory infections.an observational, quantitative, cross-sectional study was conducted in july 2014, in the five biggest shopping malls in each of the five geographic areas of riyadh. the study participants were selected from these five malls. the inclusion criteria were persons older than 15 years and arabic speakers.the questionnaire which was prepared in arabic by the authors had three main parts: sociodemographic, including age, gender, employment status, and the educational levels of participantsassessment of the degree of public compliance and practice regarding preventive measures against respiratory infections.[1] was tested using a predesigned face-to-face interview questionnaire with close-ended answers (yes/no) to question on participants' perception of susceptibility to respiratory infections and the use of masks for preventing respiratory infection. the questions were do you think you are susceptible to contracting any respiratory infection? which type of mask do you wear in crowded places? which type of mask do you wear in your daily life? which type of mask do you wear around infected people? likert scale (always = 5, often = 4, sometimes = 3, rarely = 2, and never = 1) was used to illustrate the questions on participants' practices: do you wash your hands with water and soap constantly?do you wash your hands with water and soap before eating? are you keen on using antibacterial soap? do you avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth directly with your hands?do you cover your nose and mouth when you sneeze or cough with tissue paper and dispose of it in the bin? if you do not have any tissue, do you use your elbow when you sneeze or cough?do you avoid crowded places? do you wear a mask in crowded places? do you wear a mask in your daily life? do you avoid people with respiratory infections?if you are around infected people, do you wear mask? do you take the seasonal flu vaccine?which type of mask do you wear in crowded places? which type of mask do you wear in your daily life? which type of mask do you wear around infected people?this scoring system was reversed in the case of questions (do you share your personal stuff with others [like towels]? do you share your personal stuff with others [like utensils]?). the total score from the 14 statements on practice for preventing respiratory infections was categorized into two as good (median score and above) and bad (below median score) practices. 3.population's source of information about the measures for the prevention of respiratory infections the study instrument was reviewed by two family physicians, one infectious disease consultant, one community professor, and one biostatistician. all the above reviewers were academic staff.a pilot study was conducted on 50 patients to check the applicability, clarity and cultural appropriateness, and to estimate the time required to complete the questionnaire. the questionnaires took approximately 15–20 min to complete. those who participated in the pilot study were excluded from the main study. assumingt 50% of persons were compliant and practiced the measures of prevention of respiratory infections, with ± 7% precision and 95% confidence level, the required sample size was 980, and 196 persons to be included from each of the five malls.ethical approval was obtained from the institutional review board, and informed written consent was obtained from all the participants. the participants provided their information in strictly anonymous and confidential manner.data were analyzed using spss pc+ version 21.0 statistical software (ibm, ny, usa). frequencies and percentages were used to describe categorical data and outcome variables. pearson chi-square test and odds ratios were used to determine the association between independent variables and outcome variables. binary logistic regression analysis was used to identify independent factors associated with poor practice for the prevention of respiratory infection. p < 0.05 and 95% confidence intervals were used to report the statistical significance of the results.out of 980 registered study participants, 869 (90.5%) participated in this survey. the age distribution indicated that 20.9% and 21.9% were in the 15–20 and 26–30 years age groups, respectively, while 5.4% were >45 years old. overall, 63.2% participants were female, 46.7% had university level of education, and 53.6% were employed [table 1]. about 48.3% of the participants thought that they were susceptible to any of the respiratory infections due to seasonal influenza (88%), coronavirus infection (20.2%), n1h1 (3.6%), and bird flu (5.4%).with regard to the participants' practices, 59.7% participants responded always washing hands with water and soap, and 62.5% responded always washing of hands with water and soap before meals. only 34.8% “always” used anti-bacterial soap, and 29.8% reported “always” avoiding touching eyes, nose and mouth with their hands. about 63.5% reported “always” covering their noses and mouths with a tissue when they sneezed or coughed and disposed of it in a bin. only 35.8% of them responded positively with “always” to the statement on using their elbow while they sneezed or coughed if they did not have a tissue paper. about 71% and 49.0% reported “never” sharing their personal stuff (towels), and utensils with others, respectively. only 21.2% “always” avoided crowded places and 9.1% used masks in crowded places. about 66.8% never wore masks in their daily lives. moreover, 45% avoided persons with respiratory infections. overall, only 38.6% “always” wore masks when in the presence of infected people, and 62.8% did not take the seasonal flu vaccine. furthermore, a larger proportion of the participants used surgical masks or they do not know (idk) what to do while in crowded places in their daily lives, and when infected persons were around [table 2 and figure 1].of all participants, 49.7% had poor practices. there was significant association between age groups, gender, educational level, and occupation and the type of practice (bad and good). the unadjusted odds ratios for age groups (21–25, 26–30, 31–35, 36–40 and >46 years) gave significantly higher odds ratios (1.72, 1.96, 1.59, 1.81, and 2.76) compared with the younger age group (15–20 years) with poor practice. moreover, being male showed a 1.40 times higher odds of having poor practice toward the prevention of respiratory infections compared with being female. participants with no education had significantly higher odds of having poor practice compared with those with postgraduate education. moreover, the odds of having poor practice were considerably higher among retired persons, employed, and unemployed participants (7.43, 2.58, and 2.13) compared with students. the binary multiple logistic regression analysis showed that only low educational level and occupation other than being a student were significantly associated with the poor practice of preventing respiratory infections. participants with no education, intermediate education, and secondary school level education had higher odds of poor practice compared with those with postgraduate education. in comparison with being a student, all unemployed, employed, and retired participants had higher odds of having poor practice for the prevention of respiratory infections [table 3].the multiple responses to sources of information about respiratory infections included electronic media (tv/radio) from 47.9% of participants, followed by social media (whatsapp and twitter) among 29.4% and 28.1%, respectively; and the least with friends/family, doctors, magazine/newspaper, and campaigns [figure 2].table 4 shows a comparison of the practices of those who considered themselves susceptible to respiratory infections and those who did not. the participants who perceived themselves susceptible to infections exhibit somewhat different preventive practices than their counterparts, but the differences were not statistically significant.the behavior of the public is vital in the prevention of respiratory infections.[16] the present study illustrates perceptions on the prevention of infections and safety practices with regard to respiratory infections in a sample of the urban population of riyadh.the research findings reveal a high awareness of susceptibility to seasonal flu (88%), but less susceptibility to coronavirus (20.2%), n1h1 (3.6%), and bird flu (5.4%) transmission. this finding might be reasonable since seasonal influenza is well known in the community while the other flu types seem to be newly emerging communicable diseases. the authorities recently initiated a public awareness campaign on the emerging flus as against the seasonal influenza which has existed for over a decade.in our study, 75.1% of participants had heard about flu earlier, but this was lower than what had been reported in other studies. this finding may be due to a lack of awareness and interest in health issues in our study population. similar to studies done in china, there were more female participants in the present study. this finding may be because women are usually keener about health issues than men.[171819202122]the majority of our participants were aware of the personal hygiene of hand washing following routine procedures and before eating; a measure that is very effective in preventing the transmission of respiratory diseases. however, only a third used antibacterial soap, which is less than found in previous studies. this provides an opportunity for the adoption of the religious teaching of handwashing after using the lavatory and before eating.[23]prophet mohammed (peace be upon him) always urged muslims to wash their hands before and after meals; the lavatory; touching a cadaver, or one's shoes; and handling anything soiled or suspect in any way.[24]in this study, 63.5% of the population always covered their noses and mouths when sneezing and coughing, two of the main modes of transmission of respiratory diseases. this finding is almost double what was reported in a previous study.[25]in our study, only 40% of the population used masks as a preventive measure in crowded places, and only 20% used masks in daily lives, which is much less than what was reported in a previous study.[25] in our study, 32.1% of the participants avoided crowded places; this is comparatively lower than the findings of the other study.[26] this may be the result of the lack of awareness of the preventive measures to be taken against the transmission of pandemic respiratory diseases. in this survey, only 13.7% had received the seasonal flu vaccine. a large proportion (62.8%) of the participants did not intend to take the vaccine. their primary reasons were that they were unsure of the benefits, and afraid of the adverse effects. this poor attitude emphasized the importance of conveying appropriate messages to the public to make them understand better the benefits of the vaccine and improve its uptake. moreover, poor attitude has an impact on infection transmission. therefore, attitudes should be improved to prevent the spread of an outbreak. this finding underpins the importance of awareness campaigns for frequenters of malls, sports stadium and jummah prayers.[2526]in the present study, the majority knew about respiratory diseases. similar to other studies, almost half of the participants agreed that tv and radio are the most common sources of information. the remaining participants obtained their information through whatsapp, from the ministry of health, doctors, and through campaigns. thus, the findings suggest the urgent need for educational programs that can explicitly improve knowledge and behavioral practices in this group.[2728]nil.there are no conflicts of interest.many guidelines and recommendations have been established to reduce the occupational risk while educating surgeons to make them better prepared to operate on hiv-positive patients. 2 the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (coronavirus disease 2019 ), which seems to be highly contagious and has easily spread worldwide, is a much different virus causing a much different disease. orthopaedic surgeons should be fully aware of the current situation regarding the covid-19 pandemic and prepare to take proper precautions against the occupational risk of exposure, especially in asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic surgical patients. by april 7, 2020, the sars-cov-2 was responsible for 1,383,436 confirmed cases of covid-19, involving 209 countries around the world; 378,881 cases have been confirmed in the united states. as an example, centers of disease control and prevention (cdc) reports an estimated 2.8 million trauma patients hospitalized in the united states. in addition, 791,000 older patients are treated in emergency departments for fall injuries each year. 3 gleaning from the trauma literature, these data suggest an increased likelihood of engaging in covid-19 orthopaedic patients in our hospitals. thousands of healthcare providers (hcp) have been infected with covid-19, despite their adherence to infection control measures. 4 approximately 14% of spain's confirmed cases are in medical professionals, per the spanish minister of health. despite the current definitions for diagnosing symptomatic covid-19 patients, the transmission from an asymptomatic carrier has been documented between 25% and 50%. 5 it is necessary for the orthopaedic community to be prepared for this global pandemic emergency. this is an occupational hazard not only to orthopaedic surgeons and other health-care providers but also to the families and neighbors of exposed healthcare providers. there is still no definitive consensus of the pandemics' behavior, covid-19 mode of transmission, diagnostic criteria, and management protocols. preparation for a pandemic involves considering the increasing levels of protection and infection control and how they should be implemented during different phases of the pandemic. in the or setting, these measures include the following: modification of healthcare infrastructure and processes, educating staff and patients, implementing infection control strategies, and administrative and clinical measures. the surgical management of traumatic injuries requires a complex environment with multiple stakeholders including surgeons, anesthesiologists, nurses, or attendants, and medical staff; it can be a real challenge to align the perspectives and concerns of all parties the primary aim of this article is to help define the covid-19 crisis and discuss effective management strategies. this article provides a brief summary of the current situation and understanding of the pandemic, diagnostic criteria, and attempts to forecast the extent and prognosis. finally, recommending precautions and preventive actions to reduce the occupational risk in treating clinically suspected/confirmed covid-19 surgical patients. the cdc and world health organization instituted guidelines for routine infection prevention measures after the worldwide spread of the sars-cov-2 virus. hcp are recommended to wear a simple surgical mask and perform regular hand washing when contacting low-risk individuals to protect against contamination. hcps in high-risk areas should adhere to infection prevention and control practices, which includes the appropriate use of engineering controls (negative pressure rooms), administrative controls, and personal protective equipment (ppe) (to minimize the risk of transmissibility and cross-infection, the cdc has recommended airborne, droplet, and contact precautions. this includes the mandatory use of ppe which includes gowns, gloves, face masks, and either n-95, p100, or ffp2 respirators with a face shield/googles or powered air-purifying respirator (papr) to minimize the risk of transmissibility and cross-infection. 6 per cdc recommendations, a clinically suspected/ confirmed covid-19 patient should wear a cloth face covering, over nose, and mouth and a surgical mask should be reserved for hcp and first responders. 6 unfortunately, these ppe recommendations for both providers and patients will fail to prevent transmission if frequent surfaces decontamination, enhanced aq : 4 hand hygiene, and avoiding self-contamination are not carefully considered. providers must focus on meticulous hand hygiene and disinfecting personal items, such as stethoscopes, phones, id tags, laptops, dictation devices, etc. a route to minimize exposure and contact between triage to induction room, or, and then to recovery rooms should be frequently cleaned and disinfected. it is recommended for an environmental services worker to increase the flowchart demonstrating the the recommended use of personal protective equipment for different activities at various settings managing suspected/clinically coronavirus disease 2019 patients. frequency to disinfect the most contaminated and most touched surfaces, such as the elevator buttons, door handles, light switches, grab rails, and etc. a recent study examined the most contaminated objects and ppe in the hospitals of wuhan, china. of the samples collected from hcp using ppe (hand sanitizer dispensers, gloves, and protective eyewear/full-face shield), 12.9% were positive for sars-cov-2 rna. the highest rates of contamination were found on hand sanitizer dispensers, gloves, goggles/face-shields at a rate of 20.3%, 15.4%, and 1.7%, respectively. 7 face masks and respirators; which to use?the cdc had recommended that hcps closely interacting with clinically suspected/confirmed covid-19 patients should wear n-95 respirators, along with gowns, gloves, and protec-tive eyewear. with the current global demand and shortage of ppe, the supply chain of specialized respirators cannot meet demand but the looser fitting surgical face masks might be an acceptable alternative. 6 notably, most respirators (eg, n-95) require training to properly fit them around the maxillofacial region to ensure appropriate fitting. our recommendations for using face masks and respirators varies depending on the setting and activity ( ½t1 table 1 of note, the regular surgical helmet cannot replace the need of respirator while operating on suspected/ confirmed covid-19 patients.donning eye protection equipment is recommended because the inoculation of the conjunctival mucous membrane is a mode of transmission. 8, 9 our recommendations for using protective eyewear are the following:• prioritize eye protection equipment for certain selected surgical procedures, ie, during aerosol-generating procedures (splashes, sprays, etc) and where there is prolonged face-to-face or close contact with a suspected or confirmed covid-19 patients. • full-face shield (if available) or goggles can be issued to each provider. • consider using safety goggles with extensions to cover the sides of eyes. • consider using disposable prescription eyewear shields (for those who wear prescribed glasses) • during supply shortage, use eye protection equipment beyond the manufacturer-designated expiration date.• during supply shortage, follow and adhere to the manufacturer instructions for reuse and disinfection. if these instructions are not provided, consider the cdc recommendations. 10• association of the advancement of medical instrumentation (aami) ratings are based on the level of fluid protection in the critical zone or chest region of the surgical gown. the aami level should be checked on the packaging because they may come in several different designs, materials, and colors. • nonsterile, disposable, or reusable-aami level-ii gowns (frequently seen as disposable isolation gowns) are appropriate for use by pro-viders during routine covid-19 patient care. • surgical gowns aami-level-iii (typically those found in operating rooms) or coveralls should be prioritized for surgical and aerosolized blood-generating procedures. table 1 provides our recommendation in this regard based on different settings and activities.• double gloves are recommended when handling covid-19 patients as an extra precaution to minimize contaminating ors items, equipment, and surfaces. the outer pair should be pulled off before touching equipment or surfaces in other areas of or. 11• surgical cap should be used per routine protocols. covid-19 is presumed to spread directly via infectious respiratory droplets and close contact (because sars-cov-2 cannot survive without a carrier). 12 however, these transmission modes do not explain all cases. recent data have shown that covid-19 might survive and be transmitted indirectly from virus contamination of common surfaces and objects after virus aerosolization in a confined space with by infected individuals. 12 the incubation period for covid-19 is approximately 4 days, and studies suggest that it may range anywhere from 2 to 14 days. [13] [14] [15] a recent study investigating sars-cov-2 from clinical specimens found that rna virus detected in blood samples from confirmed covid-19 patients (3 of 307; 1%). 16 huang et al 17 reported that 15% of patients with laboratory confirmed covid-19 had viral rna in their plasma. the implications of these findings are still unclear, and there are no reported cases of transfusiontransmitted coronaviruses through april 5, 2020. however, continued vigilance is essential. despite studies detecting viral rna in the serum or plasma of confirmed/suspected covid-19 patients, blood transmission and infectivity are still not fully understood. because there is little evidence and vague guidelines for blood transfusion in the current setting, it is recommended to recuse anyone with symptoms or signs of respiratory illness from blood donation. 18 the us fda has suggested to retrieve and quarantine any blood products collected in the 28 days before, or after, either covid-19 disease onset or possible exposure to individuals who are covid-19 positive. 18 theoretically, viremia in patients with asymptomatic or confirmed covid-19 patients could pose a risk of transmissibility to the orthopaedic team during aerosolized blood-generating procedures. 19 the use of high-speed drills, bone saws, reamers, electrocautery, and ultrasonic scalpels generate significant amounts of aerosols, increasing the risk of viral contamination of the environment. 20 a recent canadian study described lowfidelity simulation training to evolve the modified ppe used for aerosolgenerating procedures of suspected/ confirmed covid-19 patients and assess the sites of contamination 21 the spread of the aerosolized respiratory secretions and contamination sites were visualized with a commercial powder product and ultraviolet light. they demonstrated a significant amount of contamination on the provider's neck, base of the wrist, and their lower pants and shoes. these sites, however, are probably not associated with a direct method of transmission for sars-cov-2. however, there are definite sources of self-contamination during ppe doffing. in addition, the disposable aami level-iii fluid-resistant, surgical gowns or coveralls are recommended because they detected no contamination of scrubs beneath the surgical gown compared with reusable surgical gowns (aami, level-ii). the aami, level-ii gowns were permeable to aerosolized secretions. the recommended ppe for performing respiratory aerosol or aerosolized blood-generating procedures for suspected/confirmed covid-19 patients (table 1) :• papr is preferred for long operations (if available)• fitted, niosh-certified n-95 mask, with the following:• eye protection; goggles (covered sides of eyes) or full-face shields (if available) respirator and change it between encounters. reuse of protective eyewears, such as full-face shields and goggles, will be allowed if these are individually assigned to each member and regularly get disinfected. reuse practice is permitted for a single person use (no-sharing). reuse and reprocessing of the n-95 mask guidelines have been released by the cdc and include the use of ultraviolet light processing, hydrogen peroxide in either liquid or vaporized state, and moist heating decontamination. 24 these guidelines should be reviewed at length before attempting reprocessing of equipment to prevent potentially catastrophic error. extended use refers to the practice of using the same respirators for repeated close contact encounters with multiple patients, without doffing it between the encounters. this practice might be preferred over reuse, assuming this would reduce the risk of self-contamination through frequent donning and doffing of the same equipment. these practices vary between institutions especially for using n-95 masks. theoretically, the hcp could extend this and tolerate wearing n-95 masks for up to 8 to 12 hours. 25, 26 however, most providers usually take breaks during shifts for lunch/toilets. therefore, extended use beyond 4 hours might be impractical in most settings, 27 although limited reuse practice could be adopted with negative or low-risk patients. 28 within crisis situations and high-risk environments, especially at crowded triage and ed, rigor in following the designed and recommended measures for all hcp and patients is crucial. 29 (1) ask patients to wear a cloth face covering (a scarf or bandana) or face mask on the patient (regardless of the covid-19 test results) at arrival, promoting cough etiquette, and providing tissues and for hand hygiene. the main principles of the staff segregation, physical restructure, and the designed workflow should focus on reducing exposure and contamination, ensuring adherence to ppe, and subsequent decontamination. ideally, two types of hospital segregation should be done. locationbased segregation of orthopaedic staff reduces the potential risk of cross-infection. orthopaedic surgeons, for example, should not be performing screening examinations on the general public because of the risk of exposure. geographic segregation within the or complex limits the or traffic, decreases the exposure, and minimizes the contamination zone. 30 with the rapid increase in the number of covid-19 patients, orthopaedic staff should be segregated into those who are treating suspected/confirmed covid-19 patients and those who are treating noninfective patients when possible is not. this however may not be possible in smaller hospital systems and practices. besides screening and isolation of high-risk, confirmed covid-19 patients, strict and frequent screening of the segregated or staff is mandatory. members of the segregated or exposed staff should immediately report any signs of illness and must be taken off duty immediately. in addition, all contact events between patients and staff must be recorded so that contact lation, open airway suction as much as possible. (5) regional anesthesia is recommended over general anesthesia (when using regional anesthesia, patients must always wear surgical masks). it is a system-saving, necessary act to plan and restructure our surgical care pathways and protocol during covid-19 pandemic to protect our community and patients and conserve our valuable resources. the restructure should mainly focus on developing a reasonable plan for operating on emergent and urgent cases. dedicating a covid-19 pre-, intra-, and post-operating spaces and training the administrative and surgical staff on the appropriate use of ppe and covid-19 care pathways to the best of a hospital's ability minimizes exposure and contamination.(1) if there is suspected covid-19 diagnosis, the surgical planning should be re-evaluated immediately.(2) prepare and set up a separate, isolated or with separate ventilation system (in case of confirmed covid-19 case).(3) dedicated ors should have a separate atmospheric air inlet and outlet exhaust system. recent studies highlighted the necessity to isolate and operate on suspected/ confirmed covid-19 patients within negative pressure or/ isolation room to disseminate the viral load. 21, 22, 28, 32 however, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system in most of the us operating rooms is designed to provide positive pressure. considering the current poorly controlled situation, adding a portable, selfcontained high efficiency particulate air filtration system to the hospital heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems would economically create a negative pressure that meets the osha and cdc tb guidelines. 34 (4) when possible, entry to the or must be only through the anesthetic induction room. (5) all or doors should be well sealed once the patient is transferred in (except one door). 38 ; to schedule followup, [39] [40] [41] [42] for routine monitoring, [43] [44] [45] and management of recovery issues as needed. [46] [47] [48] in addition, the use of telemedicine-based services for surgical wound care has proven to be feasible and safe in the early postoperative evaluation. 49, 50 both time and cost savings contribute toward high patient satisfaction. 39 a randomized controlled trial demonstrated that there was no significant difference in patient satisfaction between telemedicine and face-to-face follow-up visits in an orthopaedic trauma cohort. 41 another study after total joint arthroplasty showed that telemedicine significantly reduce the cycle "appointment" time with an average skype follow-up call per patient that was 2.71 minutes shorter than face-to-face visits. 42 research showed that for every 23 miles away from clinic, there is 111% probability that a patient will more likely prefer using telemedicine for their postoperative follow-up. 48 surgeons form different specialties have expressed their satisfaction after using these telemedicine modalities to deliver postoperative care. 44, 48, 50, 51 notably, telemedicine revealed high levels of provider-perceived quality of medical history (82%) and therapeutic management (85%), compared with traditional face-to-face visits (72%) and (86%), respectively. 52,53 preparation, practice, and following telemedicine start-up checklists would be useful to ensure effective implementation of telemedicine. 54 , 55 the current focus should be directed in evolving more secured modalities to protect patient's confidentiality and keep their medical records away from any anticipated breach.the current infectious risk on healthcare personnel would have negative consequences, if they are not adequately prepared, trained, or equipped to mitigate the risk. orthopaedic educators should educate their fellows, residents, students, and ancillary teams in preventing exposure to and the spreading of covid-19. the care teams must learn how to protect themselves during a pandemic. refresher training regarding the standard use of ppe is a necessity in this global pandemic. a recent study at the university of illinois chicago 56 assessed the ppe doffing practices of healthcare workers. the study demonstrated that 90% of observed ppe doffing was incorrect regarding the doffing sequence, doffing technique, or use of appropriate ppe. 56 another survey showed that 14.9% of healthcare personnel did not receive previous training for appropriate ppe doffing practices. 57 training and education might flatten the curve of crossinfection and self-contamination. training and education of the surgical staff should be continually emphasized. it is imperative that all staff be taught the proper sequential methods of donning and doffing of ppe and mask-fitting techniques to minimize the risk of self-contamination. frequent audits of infection control must be conducted. a trained observer should be assigned for each emergent operation to identify the weaknesses and implement the necessary steps.simulation-based training might be required to improve the team communication during medical crisis 58 to establish competencies in ppe donning and doffing practices and workflow in induction, operating, and recovery rooms. simulation can mimic different clinical scenarios to integrate knowledge to practice, evaluate the providers' performances, and build up self-and team-confidence for real-life cases. lockhart et al 21 demonstrated that simulation was a powerful tool to test and adapt ppe as compared to baseline recommendations alone. using simulation-based training could be an effective method to replicate highly contiguous covid-19 cases in a safe, yet challenging, situation without jeopardizing the team safety.covid-19 is a major and sudden public health crisis, followed by a series of emergency response measures for community and healthcare services. the uncertainty of understanding the pandemic behavior and the definitive ways for its prevention cause psychological pressures on both the public and hcps. the public panic and fear of getting infected can increase the burden and use of healthcare services. the surgeons should be fully aware of the psychological pressure on the patients and their families. the knowledge, counseling, education, and support may mitigate the psychological pressure in fighting the pandemic.apart from the fact that this pandemic certainly involves many important health, economic, and community ramifications, it also requires several initiatives to mandate what measures are most appropriate to prepare for mitigating the occupational risks. these initiatives include understanding the different aspects in disease and transmission control in the ongoing pandemic. strict adherence to cdc and world health organization evidence-based guidelines for ppe and environmental hygiene enhances the safety and improves the mitigation of infection in emergent orthopaedic practice. nevertheless, we think that these recommended measures might optimize the healthcare services provided to confirmed covid-19 patients and should reduce the risk of occupational transmission to other patients and healthcare professionals.global supply chains have suddenly become a new buzzword in public consciousness. the novel coronavirus global pandemic of 2020 has focused attention on supply chain shortages of personal protective equipment (ppe) and the testing kits used in the treatment and diagnosis of mushrooming numbers of covid-19 patients around the world. the rapid shutdown of the united states (u.s.) economy led to domestic demand shocks that generated startling disruptions in the availability of everyday commodities from fresh vegetables, eggs, and milk (yaffe-bellany & corkery, 2020; reiley, 2020; evich, 2020) and meat (mclean, 2020; estes, 2020) to toilet paper (oremus, 2020), with the culprit allegedly being the lack of responsiveness of hyper-efficient but rigid modern supply chains (o’leary, 2020: o’neil, 2020; shih, 2020). at the macro-level, the coronavirus pandemic also symbolizes a more systemic malaise: the rise of protectionism and economic nationalism has replaced decades of expansive trade and foreign investment regimes; the multilateral architecture of the postwar bretton woods system is crumbling; and some question whether we have arrived at the end of globalization (buruma, 2016; farrell & newman, 2020).while global supply chains emerge as a protagonist in many of these scenarios, the drivers and policy implications of supply chain disruptions during the pandemic are often unclear. in large part, this is because supply chain dynamics vary considerably, not just by industry but also by the characteristics of specific products, the strategies of the companies that make them, and the distribution channels involved (cattaneo, gereffi, & staritz, 2010; staritz, gereffi, & cattaneo, 2011). in addition, the policy drivers of supply chains are different in importing versus exporting economies, advanced industrial versus developing nations, and the home and host countries of the large multinational enterprises (mnes) that typically lead and orchestrate global industries (taglioni & winkler, 2016; stolzenburg, taglioni, & winkler, 2019; horner & alford, 2019).the covid-19 pandemic has rapidly become one of the most significant disruptive events in modern times. it is simultaneously a public health crisis of unparalleled magnitude, scope, and speed that has circled the globe in a span of several months since the novel coronavirus outbreak in wuhan, china, was officially confirmed in early january, 2020 (medical news today, 2020). there were over 12.8 million cases of covid-19 and 567,000 reported deaths as of july 11, 2020.1 the impact on the global economy has been equally draconian. covid-19 has shuttered most of the world’s major economies for months, as national governments have sought to weather the global pandemic with its disastrous and escalating toll on global trade and production, skyrocketing spikes in unemployment,2 and a soaring public debt due to massive stimulus packages designed to shore up moribund economies and stave off economic collapse.3obviously, no single country can be expected to efficiently produce all of the goods needed to fight the covid-19 pandemic. however, there are growing national security concerns related to acute shortages of medical supplies and other products in high demand to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus. a key question related to international business and public policy is whether these current shortages in covid-19 medical products are due to structural flaws or rigidities in their supply chains, as numerous critics have alleged, and whether and how supply chains could be made more resilient or “antifragile” to confront new threats (farrell & newman, 2020; o’leary, 2020; o’neil, 2020; shih, 2020; financial times, 2020; avishai, 2020). more specifically, were the international trading system and global organization of production for covid-19 goods skewed to favor the interests of a small set of countries and firms that were the primary beneficiaries of globalized supply chains for these medical products? is economic protectionism and the reshoring of production for essential medical supplies a likely and desirable consequence for future pandemics or major disruptions in the global economy?to better comprehend these complex issues, this article will cover four related topics. first, i will briefly outline the global value chain (gvc) research framework, and indicate how its focus on patterns of governance and corporate strategies in global industries provides a key context in which the options and tradeoffs for national policymakers and other stakeholders can be evaluated. second, i will highlight the trade interdependencies for two categories of essential medical goods prior to the onset of the covid-19 pandemic: the ppe used by medical staff in treating coronavirus patients, such as face masks, surgical gloves, and medical gowns; and medical devices, covering more sophisticated equipment like life-saving mechanical ventilators, patient monitors, and x-ray machines. third, i will zero in on the case of face masks and n95 respirators in the u.s., in which well-publicized shortages raise critical questions about the contentious interplay between policymakers in the current u.s. administration of president donald trump and company strategies of leading american manufacturers that created prolonged supply shortages and distribution bottlenecks that greatly elevated the health risks for medical personnel and patients alike. fourth and finally, i will discuss some implications of the ppe case for more resilient supply chains and post-crisis policymaking in the future.during the 1990s–2010s, an extensive literature has emerged that chronicles the growth of the global economy in terms of the decisions of major u.s. and european companies to move production offshore and establish cross-border production networks. known by various labels, global commodity chains (gereffi & korzeniewicz, 1994; bair, 2009), global production networks (henderson, dicken, hess, coe, & yeung, 2002; coe & yeung, 2015), and gvcs (gereffi & kaplinsky, 2001; gereffi, 2018, 2019), a distinguishing feature of these studies is that they offer a network-centered perspective on the global economy that views different types of mnes as “lead firms” that orchestrate complex, multi-tiered global supply chains. these global networks leveraged the advantages of lower costs, superior scale, and spatial flexibility by combining a variety of factors: proximity to natural resources; access to large pools of low-cost and well-trained labor; the increasing speed and sophistication of global logistics providers; and the innovation, design, and marketing prowess of mne lead firms in a diverse array of agricultural, manufacturing, and service sectors (see dicken, 2015; low & pasadilla, 2016; ponte, gereffi, & raj-reichert, 2019).the gvc approach has spawned a proliferation of review articles that highlight the complementarity of scholarship on gvcs, global strategy, and international business, including the evolving capabilities of mne lead firms and domestic suppliers (hernandez & pedersen, 2017; kano, tsang, & yeung, 2020; mcwilliam, kim, mudambi, & nielsen, 2020; de marchi, di maria, golini, & perri, 2020). in effect, gvcs link the macro-level of international trade, investment, and finance with the meso-level of national and regional economies, and the micro-level of local suppliers, communities, and workers. the gvc framework includes several critical features relevant to our analysis of the supply chains for covid-19 goods:global industries have governance structures the strategies of gvc lead firms set the performance requirements (e.g., price, quality, standards, delivery schedule) for globally dispersed tiers of suppliers. a core insight of the early gvc literature was the contrast between “producer-driven” chains, whose lead firms were multinational manufacturers in relatively technology- and capital-intensive industries, such as automobiles, computers, and pharmaceuticals, and “buyer-driven” chains, whose lead firms were retailers (such as jc penney, walmart, and carrefour), branded merchandisers (e.g., nike, adidas, liz claiborne, or disney), and supermarkets (e.g., tesco and kroger) (gereffi, 1994). subsequently, a more elaborate fivefold governance typology was introduced that included hierarchies (vertically integrated firms whose affiliates are bound by equity ties) and competitive markets as endpoints, along with three types of recurrent production networks – captive, relational, and modular – with varied levels of explicit coordination between lead firms and their suppliers (gereffi, humphrey, & sturgeon, 2005; sturgeon, 2009).global supply chains have specialized divisions of labor different locations make specific components and final products, which increases the efficiency of the chain. however, disruptions or substandard products at one location can jeopardize the entire chain if sourcing options are not diversified (sturgeon, van biesebroeck, & gereffi, 2008; buckley & strange, 2015; sun & grimes, 2018).the geography of supply chains can vary over time this is based on multiple factors (e.g., country conditions, company strategies, technology shifts, or government policies), but regional and global sourcing patterns coexist and are often complimentary in many industries (gereffi, 1999; dicken, 2015; whittaker, sturgeon, okita, & zhu, 2020; gereffi & wu, 2020).value is distributed unevenly across supply chains relatively high-value activities4 are increasingly located in specialized components within the production process, and in pre-production (e.g., research and development, design) and post-production (e.g., marketing, brand, and finance) services in value chains. this is sometimes referred to as the “smile curve of value creation” (mudambi, 2008; rehnberg & ponte, 2018; fernandez-stark & gereffi, 2019).state policies can exert conflicting pressures on lead firms as well as suppliers in value chains while the expansion of international production networks and export-oriented industrialization for developing economies was promoted by advanced industrial states and global financial institutions like the world bank and the international monetary fund from the 1980s through the early 2000s, a series of events including the global recession of 2008–2009, the u.s.–china trade war, resurgent economic nationalism, and the novel coronavirus health crisis of 2020 have magnified the prospects for policy conflicts in the current era (wade, 2018; horner & alford, 2019; mayer & gereffi, 2019).together, these propositions constitute interacting dimensions and building blocks of the holistic, multi-level, and actor-oriented gvc framework that can be used to assess opportunities for development and upgrading for both countries and firms linked to global industries (gereffi, 2018; ponte, gereffi, & raj-reichert, 2019). the next section of this article draws on this approach to examine the extent of globalization and the nature of lead firms in several of the medical supply industries associated with the covid-19 pandemic.based on the broad gvc framework, we can make a few preliminary assessments to characterize the status of medical supply trade prior to the outbreak of the covid-19 pandemic in 2020. typically, medical supplies are producer-driven value chains involved in business-to-business transactions between their lead firms or top suppliers and institutional clients, such as hospitals, healthcare distributors, and government agencies. however, company strategies within this producer-driven governance structure show meaningful variations, reflecting the characteristics of the industry segments or niches in which the lead firms operate.in the medical devices segment, global trade is led by large vertically integrated mnes headquartered in advanced industrial economies with worldwide production facilities. although a number of major medical-device export industries are situated in relatively large, newly industrialized, global manufacturing hubs (such as mexico, china, and the republic of korea), as well as smaller, more specialized locations (such as ireland, costa rica, singapore, and new zealand),5 the main suppliers in these settings are usually subsidiaries of mne lead firms from the innovative centers of medical device production, such as the u.s., germany, switzerland, the netherlands, and the united kingdom (oecd, 2020b).in the less technologically sophisticated ppe segment of medical supplies, by contrast, there is more external contracting by third-party suppliers, even though regulatory oversight and certification are required for all factories that sell medical devices to major markets6 (bamber, fernandez-stark, & taglioni, 2020). thus, there is more scope in ppe than medical devices for supplier-centered (rather than lead-firm centric) company strategies,7 which expands the role of external contractors and large developing economy suppliers for ppe items like face masks, medical gowns, and surgical gloves (see bamber, fernandez-stark, & taglioni, 2020: fig. 3).in general, booming international demand has driven the globalization of medical supplies and devices in recent decades. among the many medical products that industry experts have identified as critical in the fight against covid-19, the u.s. imported us$22 billion of these goods from the world in 2019, before the outbreak of covid-19.8 the u.s. imported about $5 billion (26%) of these products from china, which is the leading supplier of numerous items, including ppe, protective goggles, thermometers, and medical headwear. however, depending on the product, the main foreign supplier for the american market is often not china. the european union is the primary source of ct (computed tomography) systems, hand sanitizers, patient monitors, x-ray equipment, and breathing masks. other leading exporters for specific products include: mexico (medical protective clothing, catheters); malaysia (sterile gloves); singapore (ventilators, oxygen masks); south korea (ultrasound systems); and canada (oxygen concentrators) (bown, 2020: fig. 3).the top exporters of covid-19 goods are quite varied at the global level (see figure 1). a look at the overall trade structure of covid-19 products reveals that the top five global exporters, which together account for 50% of trade, are germany (15%), the u.s. (11%), switzerland (9%), china (8%), and ireland (7%). the u.s. represents 18% of global imports for covid-19 products, followed by germany at just under 9% of the total. while the u.s. and germany tended to specialize in the production of medical devices, china and malaysia are the most specialized in ppe goods (oecd, 2020b). thus, trade interdependencies rather than pronounced asymmetries characterized the exchange of covid-19 products prior to the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic in 2020.between 2008 and 2018, global trade in ppe and medical devices has more than doubled in value (bamber, fernandez-stark, & taglioni, 2020). the driver was a large increase in demand, resulting from a rapidly aging population in both rich and middle-income countries, increased expenditure on healthcare in the developing world, and low tariffs that resulted in a plentiful supply of low-priced and high-quality goods. while exports of medical goods from the advanced industrial economies increased by 45% since 2008, the “non-traditional” exporters grew twice as fast (100%) (see figures 2 and 3).notwithstanding these pre-covid-19 growth trends in the ppe and medical device gvcs, it seems obvious that the outbreak and global spread of the coronavirus pandemic in the first half of 2020, and the dramatic surge in demand as the number of infected patients soared, were bound to create severe shortages of covid-19-related products in the countries hardest hit by the virus. the diversity of established exporters for medical supplies meant that trade was in principle an option to help meet burgeoning demand. however, the trade war initiated by president trump against china in early 2018 imposed an additional cost due to the tariffs (bown, 2020), and the more serious and widespread problem of export controls emerged in the cascade of nearly 80 countries that introduced export prohibitions or temporary restrictions for covid-19 products by the end of april, 2020 (wto, 2020).thus, the arena for action for many countries shifted from the international domain to domestic terrain to find some combination of national production plus imports required to confront the urgent shortfalls of covid-19 products. to explore how supply chains responded to the major disruption posed by the coronavirus pandemic, i focus in the next section on u.s. efforts to deal with the shortages of a specific ppe product, face masks, and, in particular, the n95 respirator. my central research question concerns the interplay of policy by the federal government under the current u.s. administration and the private sector response, and whether there is evidence that vulnerabilities in the face mask gvc were a primary cause for the supply difficulties unleashed by the covid-19 pandemic.surgical masks and n95 respirators are both used to prevent the spread of respiratory infections. they provide different levels of protection based on the effectiveness of their filtering. surgical masks are loose-fitting and designed to trap sprays and droplets from coughing and sneezing, while n95 respirators fit more tightly and can also protect from far smaller airborne particles such as those associated with a virus. both surgical masks and n95 respirators are disposable, which explains their high and recurrent demand.9under normal circumstances, masks are basic products and relatively cheap.10 however, the manufacturing process involves several types of inputs and is relatively sophisticated, which accounts for their different filtering properties as well as the limited number of companies that specialize in the higher-quality masks globally (see oecd, 2020a for fuller descriptions). the basic input for surgical masks is polypropylene, a polymer derived from petroleum oil and one of the most commonly produced plastics in the world. polypropylene is “melt-blown” in order to obtain fibers of a small diameter in a random pattern that can trap small particles.11 multiple layers of non-woven and textile fabrics are then assembled through ultrasonic welding into a minimum of three layers.12 n95 respirators have a similar production process, with a couple of extra steps for added protection, involving higher-tech machines and increased production costs. after the assembly stage, testing is required to guarantee the quality of the masks, which must be sterilized before packing and shipping.the main bottleneck in the face mask value chain in terms of inputs has been the non-woven fabric manufactured with polypropylene (oecd, 2020a: 4). production of this non-woven fabric is quite widespread because it is used in baby diapers, feminine hygiene products, and disposable wipes, as well as in the automotive and construction industries. however, the melt-blown non-woven is a specialized fabric, made by a limited number of companies worldwide due to the high capital investment required for heavy machinery, such as hoppers, extruders, and melt-spinning systems. for this reason, it has been difficult to quickly increase the supply of face masks during the covid-19 crisis or to find companies that can switch to this production process within a reasonable time and without substantial new investment.china was the main producer of surgical masks at the start of the crisis, accounting for approximately one-half of world production (oecd, 2020a: 5–6). because china was the epicenter of the initial covid-19 outbreak, however, its production was insufficient to meet its own demand related to the pandemic, and china imported a huge quantity of up to 2 billion masks during the crisis. although china increased its mask production tenfold in just 2 months (january–march, 2020), it was estimated that global demand for surgical masks might be ten times higher than world production capacity prior to the covid-19 crisis (oecd, 2020a). in this context, u.s. efforts to guarantee an adequate supply of surgical and n95 masks faced an uphill battle when covid-19 infections began their precipitous rise in the u.s. in march, 2020.the u.s. was hit hard by covid-19 in mid-march, 2020, about 3 months after it first appeared in china. although the first reported u.s. case of the new coronavirus was detected in mid-january, 2020, the trump administration minimized the seriousness of the outbreak for a full 2 months until social distancing began to be introduced in mid-march. for an exponential pandemic like covid-19, even small differences in timing could impact many lives. according to disease modelers at columbia university, if the u.s. had begun imposing social distancing measures just one week earlier than it did in mid-march, about 36,000 fewer people would have died in the coronavirus outbreak, and had stay-at-home measures been in place on march 1, 2020, 2 weeks earlier than most people started staying home, 83% of u.s. deaths could have been avoided (glanz & robertson, 2020; pei, kandula, & shaman, 2020).there were multiple missteps by the current u.s. administration that slowed down its response to the covid-19 pandemic in the critical weeks before president trump issued his first direct social distancing advisories on march 16. in a detailed documentary of u.s. government decision-making related to the covid-19 pandemic (frontline, 2020), it is reported that president trump’s first briefing on covid-19 by alex azar, secretary of the department of health and human services (hhs), occurred on january 18, several weeks after troubling initial signals about the pandemic emerged from china. on january 29, white house economic advisor peter navarro wrote trump a lengthy memo warning that there was a risk of a massive loss of life that could be caused by the pandemic, and, the following day, restrictions were imposed on some flights to the u.s. from china in an effort to quell the spread of the virus.although hhs secretary azar announced on january 28 that the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) had developed a rapid diagnostic test for detection of the novel coronavirus, by february 8, it was discovered that the cdc test kits for covid-19 were contaminated. this disastrous news meant that lack of u.s. testing capacity would become a major obstacle that hindered subsequent u.s. efforts to limit the exponential spread of the disease. this testing failure, along with other controversies, cost cdc its leadership role in directing the u.s. response to covid-19.13once the u.s. government started to take covid-19 seriously, it conducted estimates in march 2020 of how many n95 respirators – which block 95% of very small particles – would be needed monthly to protect u.s. healthcare workers to fight the pandemic. the results indicated that 290 million n95 masks would be required each month, whereas projected supply by the two leading u.s. producers of the masks, 3m and honeywell, together with smaller suppliers like moldex-metrix and prestige ameritech, would generate only 80 million masks on a monthly basis, far below the target amount (see figure 4). this shortfall of nearly three-quarters of the required total would have to come from the output of existing firms or new entrants into this sector, as well as imports that were exceptionally difficult to find because of export controls imposed by virtually all ppe-producing nations (wto, 2020).the top u.s. face mask producer by far is 3m, a minnesota-based conglomerate that makes over 60,000 different products and has 96,000 employees around the world (3m, 2019; derensis, 2020). while all n95 masks filter at least 95% of airborne particles, respirators are produced for both industrial (mainly construction) and medical use. prior to the onset of the covid-19 pandemic, only 5 million of the 35 million n95 masks that 3m produced a month were going to u.s. healthcare workers (whalen, helderman, & hamburger, 2020).3m’s major n95 production facilities are located in the u.s. and china. in early 2020, 3m scaled up n95 supply in its factories in south dakota and nebraska, as well as its respirator production site in china, to run all of its global respirator plants 24 hours per day, seven days per week, in anticipation of higher demand from the covid-19 virus. by early may, 3m brought its u.s. production of n95 masks to 95 million units per month,14 and doubled its global output of respirators since january, 2020 to 1.1 billion per year (400 million in the u.s.). the company expects to double its current capacity again to 2 billion respirators around the world by the end of 2020 (whooley, 2020; newmarker, 2020).apparently spurred by fox news host tucker carlson’s segment on 3m that criticized the company for allegedly putting consumers in other countries before healthcare workers and local governments in the u.s. (derensis, 2020), president trump issued an executive order on april 2 that invoked the defense production act (dpa) of 1950 to require 3m to cease its export of n95 masks. the u.s. government asserted that, due to the coronavirus pandemic, 3m must give priority to the american market, and the federal emergency management agency (fema) was authorized to obtain as many n95 masks as it needed from the company.3m pushed back. it countered by saying that cutting off exports of u.s.-made respirators to foreign countries could actually worsen the u.s. situation by inviting retaliation from trade partners on whom the u.s. relies for imports of varied forms of ppe. this sentiment was echoed by canadian prime minister, justin trudeau, and other canadian political leaders, who cautioned that their country’s relationship with the u.s. is a “two-way street” that involves flows of both material inputs and healthcare workers from canada that support the provision of the u.s. medical complex (cecco and borger, 2020; whalen, 2020; whalen, morris et al., 2020).peter navarro, the white house supply chain coordinator, was tasked with procuring face masks, ventilators, and other ppe products from american firms in the fight against the coronavirus. navarro, a staunch china critic, advocated use of the dpa as a weapon against u.s. companies seen as too reluctant to expand ppe and ventilator production in the u.s., such as general motors and 3m. “when patriotic volunteerism or the invisible hand of the market isn’t working,” said navarro, “you may need the visible foot of the dpa” (swanson, 2020). the question is whether navarro’s aggressive tactics will help the u.s. respond to its current crisis and strengthen american industry, or whether the disruption of global supply chains will cut the u.s. off from needed medicines and other supplies.on april 6, 2020, 3m announced plans to import 166.5 million additional respirators over the next three months, primarily from its manufacturing facility in china, to support healthcare workers in the u.s. (3m, 2020b). this plan allowed 3m to continue sending u.s.-produced n95 respirators to canada and latin america, where 3m is the primary source of supply.however, this agreement did not resolve an ongoing controversy within the white house about how to harness american mnes to relieve acute shortages of ppe materials as the number of covid-19 cases in the u.s. began their steep exponential ascent. within the medical products industry more generally, there was also debate about the vulnerabilities of their overreliance on a cost-optimizing just-in-time (jit) business model that prioritized foreign-made products in low-cost locations, with a focus on china and declining inventories to minimize operating costs.while the political jockeying between u.s. administration officials and 3m garnered most of the headlines, there are two other significant factors that slowed 3m’s ability to substantially increase its supply of n95 masks to the u.s. market: the jit business model that prevails in the healthcare market and prioritizes lean production and low inventories across the supply chain; and industry demands for liability waivers in shifting from industrial to medical n95 masks to combat the covid-19 pandemic.the steady expansion of globalization in recent decades has encouraged the adoption of lean production and jit supply chains that encourage manufacturers to reduce inventories as much as possible in order to lower operating costs and the amount of cash tied up in inventory. in its 2019 annual report, 3m heralded its reduced inventory in order to more fully implement its “new global operating model” that expanded cash flow by 10% compared to the preceding year, increased operating margins by 22%, and reduced inventory levels by $370 million (3m, 2019: 2). just as manufacturers prefer to carry less inventory to be more competitive, many hospitals have also adopted jit purchasing of items such as n95 masks as a cost-saving mechanism (whalen, helderman & hamburger, 2020).because industrial and medical n95 masks are made according to different specifications, they vary in design and fit, and they are subject to different regulations. thus, the conversion from industrial use to medical masks is not straightforward, as some retooling is required because medical masks contain an extra material that makes them splash-proof, raising long-standing industry concerns about liability lawsuits (whalen, helderman & hamburger, 2020).in 3m’s negotiations with the trump administration in early march for increasing the supply of n95 masks in the u.s., the chief concern raised by 3m chief executive officer, michael roman, was the need for a liability waiver from congress to shield the company from potential lawsuits as it repurposed 3m’s industrial masks for medical use. the liability waiver was included in president trump’s emergency legislation that opened the floodgates to the $2 trillion stimulus package that included funding to produce over 1 million n95 medical masks over the next 18 months (whalen, helderman & hamburger, 2020).viewed in isolation, 3m’s supply response of n95 masks to meet surging u.s. demand for respirators seems woefully inadequate to the 3.29 million confirmed cases of covid-19 and 137,000 reported deaths as of july 11, 2020.15 with numbers continuing to soar. however, prestige ameritech, the last major domestic mask company in the u.s., approached senior administration officials on january 22, 2020, a day after the first case of covid-19 was detected in the u.s., offering to ramp up production of four unused n95 manufacturing lines to make an additional 1.7 million n95 masks per week (davis, 2020). the offer was rejected because the department of health and human services did not have the money to issue contracts at that time, despite orders pouring into prestige from buyers in china and hong kong, and shrinking domestic production of medical masks, as almost 90% of all u.s. mask production had left the country in less than a decade.by may, 2020, fema had issued over $600 million in new contracts for n95 medical masks. the biggest u.s. suppliers, 3m and honeywell, were each awarded contracts for over $170 million for protective gear, and other large orders went to untested third-party firms willing to enter the mask market at prices many times higher than the contracts for established producers. prestige ameritech finally got a $9.5 million contract on april 6 to provide a million n95 masks per month for one year at a unit price of 79 cents per mask (davis, 2020).on balance, the shortage of n95 masks in the u.s. covid-19 pandemic seems more like a case of policy failure than market failure. 3m, the biggest american producer, more than quadrupled its u.s. output of n95 masks in the first half of 2020 to 95 million per month by may, and its global capacity was projected to double from 1.1 billion to 2 billion masks by the end of 2020. honeywell and other u.s. companies were also poised to fill over $400 million in u.s. orders. this is a very significant expansion of u.s. production capacity in less than 6 months.the bigger problem is one of policy failure by the current administration. they did not appreciate the scale and the inevitability of the pandemic problem when the first u.s. cases were reported in january, 2020,16 and additional policy delays, related to lack of testing, bureaucratic in-fighting, and unwillingness to confront the health risks posed by the looming pandemic, wasted valuable time. to further complicate its supply-side policy agenda, the trump administration sought to nullify 3m’s export contracts with overseas customers in canada and latin america, raising deeper sovereignty concerns with u.s. trading partners. the result of these and other u.s. policy shortcomings in confronting the epochal challenge of the coronavirus pandemic is that the u.s. had a record number of new covid-19 cases in a single day on july 10, 2020 with 68,241 diagnoses reported, a startling spike that more than tripled the total in mid-june (20,114 new cases on june 15) (new york times, 2020).our analysis of the impact of covid-19 on medical supplies gvcs reveals the need to view ppe and other medical products from an evolutionary and a strategic perspective. supply chains not only became more global in recent decades but they also became increasingly dependent on key exporting economies like china, along with the jit business model that was optimized to maintain low costs and reduced inventories. while lower inventories may be viewed as an efficient business practice when orders are steady, they make supply chains fragile and brittle in times of crisis. to prevent modern supply chains from snapping, redundancy rather than reshoring is recommended to bolster the robustness and resiliency of supply chains (o’leary, 2020; o’neil, 2020).in the context of the covid-19 pandemic, what do resilient supply chains look like? the search for resiliency encourages mne lead firms to diversify their supply chains in multiple ways in order to retain scale economies, reasonable costs, and innovation opportunities. strategic options could include the following measures: (1) bolster capacity in the home country to address security concerns for products deemed essential17; (2) expand the number of international production sites to avoid overreliance or dependence on one or two locations18; (3) seek large and growing end markets that can be served from an international production network19; and (4) nurture production, research and marketing partnerships with firms in related industries.20while policy interventions during a crisis seek short-run solutions, what is the enduring legacy of the covid-19 crisis likely to be? domestic production for many ppe products will surely increase, but it is not clear which ppe products or components will be prioritized. nor do we know what proportion of total supply of ppe items will come from local production versus imports. while offshore production will continue to be a significant feature for the ppe sector, regional supply chains (or near-sourcing), along with other preferred suppliers, will be an important mechanism for diversifying risk in the future.china in particular remains a critical strategic actor within the ppe supply chain, not merely as a source of relatively low-cost exports but even more importantly because china’s healthcare market is the second largest in the world, estimated at over $1 trillion in 2020 (huang, 2019). u.s. medical products companies will view the china market as critical to their long-term international competitiveness.two additional considerations are relevant in considering post-covid-19 scenarios for medical supplies. first, regulatory policies are crucial for all healthcare supply chains, both in the home market (such as the legal liability concern over n95 masks) and also in the transparency of international supply chains, where informal subcontracting has often compromised quality and lowered confidence in these arrangements. however, gvc studies highlight that regulations for the same products can vary in their stringency or levels of enforcement in large developing economies such as china, which could promote or hinder upgrading among gvc suppliers (kaplinsky, terheggen & tijaja, 2010).second, contingency plans for future crises will be essential. “black swan” events are increasingly likely, but their specific features remain unknown (avishai, 2020). thus, we need to incorporate a broader systemic and strategic perspective based on the principles of robust and resilient supply chains that combine the virtues of global reach and local responsiveness. for example, south korea’s exemplary performance in limiting the spread of the novel coronavirus in 2020 relied on a network of public-private partnerships that had been set up following the country’s difficulties in dealing effectively with the mers (middle east respiratory syndrome) outbreak in 2015, the largest outside the middle east, which involved 185 laboratory-confirmed cases and 38 deaths21 (see comment by u.s. cdc director robert r. redfield, frontline, 2020).overall, covid-19 has revealed a great deal about the inadequacy of current policies and global supply chains to respond to the public health and economic crises unleashed by the pandemic. however, we need to distinguish between actions in the midst of the pandemic itself, and sustainable policies and practices in the post-crisis era. globalization in its expansionary phase in the latter decades of the twentieth century and first decade of the current century has run its course. recent disruptions including the global economic recession of 2008–2009, the digital revolution (unctad, 2017), the waves of economic nationalism and populism since 2016, and the covid-19 pandemic in 2020 all portend a more fragmented, multipolar, and regionally oriented international system. while significant forms of reglobalization are likely to be the most constructive and sustainable responses in the post-crisis era, de-globalization is not a viable long-term vision for the future. statistics as of july 11, 2020 – https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/worldwide-graphs/.world trade volumes in 2020 are expected to fall by as much as 32% (world trade organization estimate), global gross domestic product (gdp) will shrink by − 4.2%, a difference of 7 percentage points compared to pre-crisis expectations (international monetary fund estimate), and unemployment rates are skyrocketing to unprecedented levels, with working hours decreasing by around 12% in the hardest hit regions, such as the americas, europe and central asia (unido, 2020).the u.s. congressional budget office has projected new deficits of about $5.8 trillion for 2020 and 2021, with total debt reaching 108% of gdp by the end of the latter year (samuelson, 2020).this is typically measured in terms of value added in country input–output tables. on company balance sheets, value could be linked to profitability of specific goods or services, or, from a labor perspective, this can be reflected in relative wages or skill levels associated with different tasks or activities along the value chain (sturgeon, 2019; havice & pickles, 2019).see detailed gvc case studies of the role of mne subsidiaries in the export-oriented medical devices sector in costa rica (gereffi, frederick & bamber, 2019) and ireland (ryan, buciuni, andersson, & giblin, 2020).quality control problems in the ppe segment have been reported in china due to subcontracting from unauthorized or unregistered factories that ship goods that are contaminated (not sterilized) or of ‘unsuitable’ quality, and thus cannot be used by the client (lapook, 2020; mcgarry, 2020).in the introductory editorial for a special issue of global strategy journal on “global value chains, governance and globalization strategies,” pananond, gereffi, & pedersen (2020) propose a new integrative typology that links the literature on global strategy (both lead-firm and supplier-centric variants) and gvc governance (intra-mne and extra-mne networks) in terms of four main themes: managed cross-border activities, network optimization, bottom–up upgrading, and strategic coevolution.the discussion of covid-19-related medical products in this section does not include pharmaceuticals or vaccines.once used, the outer layer of masks can become covered with germs, and humidity from the mouth alters their filtering properties. thus, masks are considered effective for only a few hours (four hours for surgical masks and up to one day for n95 respirators).before the covid-19 crisis, a box of 100 surgical masks could be bought for less than $4.00 (all figures in u.s. dollars) in the u.s., while, in late february, single masks were reportedly sold for as high as $20. similarly, the price of a box of 20 n95 respirator masks increased from $17 to $70 between end-january and end-february, 2020 (oecd, 2020a: 3).the fibers are also electrically charged to increase their effectiveness (electret treatment).an inner layer in contact with the mouth absorbs moisture, the filter layer is made of melt-blown electret non-woven material, and an outer layer protects against liquid splashes.after top cdc official dr. nancy messonnier issued her dire prediction that it was not a matter of if, but when, u.s. lives would be disrupted by the rapidly advancing pandemic, and the u.s. stock market plummeted by 1,000 points, trump cancelled a key meeting scheduled for february 26 with his core team of public health advisors. secretary azar was removed as head of the white house coronavirus task force and replaced by vice president mike pence (frontline, 2020).some of 3m’s expanded u.s. production capacity for n95 respirators was carried out in partnership with other u.s. firms, such as ford motor company and cummins corporation (3m, 2020a).information as of july 11, 2020, downloaded from https://www.google.com/search?q=confirmed+cases+of+coronavirus+in+usa&oq=confirmed+cases+of+coronavirus+in+us&aqs=chrome.0.0j69i57j0l4.19218j1j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=utf-8.a 2007 presentation by one of the u.s. agencies purchasing material for the strategic national stockpile estimated that, in the event of a pandemic, the u.s. would need 5.3 billion n95 respirator masks, 50 times more than the number in the stockpile (davis, 2020).the gvc approach highlights the need to question whether the final products themselves, or the key components or inputs in final products (such as the non-woven filters in n95 masks or the active ingredients in pharmaceutical products), should receive priority as “essential” items in discussions of reshoring (huang, 2020; mckenna, 2020; mullin, 2020).offshore production networks have different geographies. nearshoring, or the regionalization of supply chains, is often considered to have security advantages compared to optimized supply chains in distant locations (shih, 2020).in the medical supplies industry, most of the mnes have production locations in china because of its large domestic demand as well as its low production costs (bamber, fernandez-stark, & taglioni, 2020; huang, 2019). other large economies like india and mexico can have similar double advantages as both supply base and market.in the case of ventilators, which is a more technology-intensive item than face masks, many firm-to-firm partnerships have emerged during covid-19. for example, virgin orbit, an aerospace technology firm, developed a simple way to “mechanize” normal ventilators with an easily produced pump; uk vacuum supplier, dyson, designed a brand-new ventilator in just 10 days to supply the uk’s national health service, with motors made in singapore; and the mercedes-benz formula 1 team partnered with university college london for mass-produced ventilators using an open-source design (bamber, fernandez-stark, & taglioni, 2020).see https://www.who.int/westernpacific/emergencies/2015-mers-outbreak. the modern world is fast-evolving, interconnected and highly mobile, making risk governance based on the application of harmonised biorisk mitigation measures a significant challenge. after the two zoonotic coronavirus outbreaks (the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus [sars-cov] from 2002 to 2003 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus in 2012 [mers-cov] ), another coronavirus has crossed species to infect human populations, for the third time in the 21st century (perlman 2020) . this virus, provisionally named 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov, further referred to as sars-cov-2), was identified in wuhan, china, in early january 2020 after cell culture and isolation of the viral particle (zhu et al., 2020; lee et al., 2020) . as for sars-cov and mers-cov, the primary reservoir of the covid-19 is probably the bat, based on sequence similarity with bat coronaviruses. presumably, the intermediate animal hosts of 2019-ncov should be among the wildlife species sold at the huanan seafood wholesale market (ye et al., 2020) . despite public health risk mitigation measures and regulation efforts by many countries, regions and sectors, the current covid-19 outbreak reminds the world about our vulnerability to natural and man-made chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (cbrn) hazards and on the importance of mitigation actions 1 .emerging biological hazards may include pathogens in new settings due to climate change influencing the spread of vector-borne diseases arising from the melting arctic ice (sutherstet al., 2004) . other examples are pathogens with zoonotic potential arising from intensive or inappropriate farming (such as avian or swine flu, mers) or spill-over of pathogens from wildlife due to the continuous expansion of human territory (such as sars, ebola) both bringing humans and potential animal vectors in closer contact with each other (mills, et al.,2010) . these new agents may cause significant threats to human health, if they display high infectivity with potentially high morbidity or even lethality.on january 30 2020, a panel of experts of the world health organisation (who) declared the outbreak of sars-cov2, causing the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) and on march 11 2020, the ongoing covid-19 outbreak was upscaled by the who to its 6 th and highest alert scale as a pandemic (who, 2020) .for many years the risk of emerging infectious diseases with pandemic potential was declared a major threat to global health security and addressed by many stakeholders around the world; namely who, global health security initiative (ghsi) 2001, nuclear threat initiative (nti) who have been very active recently in the bio field, the european parliament, various national or regional centre's of disease control, etc. (mccloskey et al., 2014) . the degree to which countries translated these warnings and recommendations on prevention, preparedness and response capacity varies. in many countries, priorities were given to other domains and investments into appropriate and effective personal protective equipment (ppe) stocks in healthcare facilities and other first responder institutions were left behind (papp et al., 2020) . according to these authors, there is also a long lasting and ongoing trend in our societies to undermine scientific facts in the domain of public health and healthcare by non-evidence based opinions or purely economic considerations. one recent example is the discussion about the safety of the vaccine against the 2009 swine flu outbreak when a great deal of mistrust and unfounded theories heavily influenced people's willingness to be vaccinated (cohen and enserink 2009; seale et al., 2011) . for example in scandinavia, great scepticism towards vaccines undermined global vaccination campaigns (e.g. the mumps, measles, rubella vaccine for children) 2 . due to our increasingly connected world, especially in the last decade, a lot of misinformation spreads through social media and is accessible to all, leading to the politicisation of science (deming, 2005; jasanoff, 2005; davies, 2019) and the organisation of ignorance (frickel & vincent, 2007; knowles, 2014; wieland, 2017) . this adds complexity to the interface between policy, science and practice and underlines the importance of knowledge management and consistent sharing of best practice in the domain of risk mitigation (daszak et al., 2020) .the challenge to achieve sharing of best practices for risk mitigation during the current covid-19 pandemic is high (koonin, 2020) . it requires mechanisms that build upon knowing how to evaluate, plan, implement and maintain risk mitigation measures, along with appropriately deciding who to involve (renn, 2008; nucci et al., 2017) , making decisions about the chain of command, and channelling communication. communication and information sharing foster democratic learning across governments and sectors, amongst varied stakeholders (decision-makers, scientists, practitioners and citizens), and between different levels of society (international, national, regional and local) (tompkins et al. 2008) . these mechanisms are especially important when they are able to bring together different regions of the world in discussing and preparing for the different phases of a pandemic, quickly understanding lessons learned and applying them in the regions that are going through the earlier steps of the process. an excellent example of an existing mechanism is the european union's chemical biological radiological and nuclear risk mitigation centres of excellence initiative (eu cbrn coe), which was launched in 2010 to strengthen and structure the institutional capacity and country mechanisms outside the european union with regard to prevention, preparedness and response of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear risks. this initiative addresses risks of criminal origin (e.g. the sarin attack on the japanese subway; ), accidentally created (e.g. bhopal, broughton, 2005 or naturally occurring (e.g. swine flu outbreak, covid-19 pandemic). the eu cbrn coe is led, financed and implemented by the european commission, in close coordination with the european external action service (eeas) and with the support of the united nations interregional crime and justice research institute (unicri) and other international organisations and local experts. the eu cbrn coe is active in 61 countries in eight regions, each region hosting a regional secretariat, and each country with a national focal point and a cbrn national team (see figure 1 ). figure 1. the countries that join the initiative work together in eight regions, headed up by a secretariat at regional level.through activities led by the eu cbrn coe initiative, many countries have elaborated cbrn national action plans, notably against biological threats, creating awareness and mechanisms 3 to structure prevention, preparedness and response during disasters. these plans include the establishment of a chain of command, the identification of national stakeholders, decision-making procedures, enhanced inter-agency communication, stockpiles of ppes, medicines, drills, communication procedures, etc. over the last ten years, 25 projects (out of a total of 82 to date) have focused on capacity building in the domains of biosafety and biosecurity including the identification of risk mitigation measures for biological disasters 4 . with the help of the eu cbrn coe network, the project outcomes are being activated for quick response to the spread of the virus, by quickly compiling the experiences and by keeping in touch through the regional secretariats using virtual meeting tools. other initiatives could take the same approach, disseminating risk mitigation actions such as the ones compiled in the present paper.by studying the literature, media and national information channels, in light of the current pandemic, we have collated and clustered the risk mitigation measures taken around the globe first in the effort to contain and since march 11 2020 to mitigate the risks of covid-19 by limiting the spread of sars-cov-2. the objective is to make this clustering globally available and to harmonise its terminology so that governments and sectors gain valuable time to put adequate measures in place. furthermore, the intention of this paper is to highlight the importance of building trust, by improving effective communication processes with cross-country and cross-sectoral information sharing, enhancing the learning process (edelman trust barometer, 2020) , and in turn enhancing risk governance mechanisms.three adult patients with severe pneumonia were admitted to a hospital in wuhan on december 27 2019, two of whom were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market (zhu et al., 2020) . patients 1 and 3 recovered and were discharged from the hospital on january 16 2020. patient 2 died on january 9 2020. evidence for the presence of sars-cov-2 was found by the identification in bronchoalveolar-lavage fluid in the three patients by whole-genome sequencing, direct pcr, and culture (zhu et al., 2020) . before the end of december 2019, still few people knew that this new virus existed.as the infection spread within the city of wuhan local health workers alarmed local authorities and the outbreak got international attention via media coverage. in early january local risk mitigation measures were implemented including the closure of the huanan seafood wholesale market. at that time for the rest of the world, especially outside asia, business continued as usual and any risk perception was considered minimal. on january 12 2020 china shared the genetic sequence of sars-cov-2 5 and on january 13 2020 the first case was reported outside china: a patient in thailand reported to have visited the huanan seafood wholesale market 6 . due to the absence of a cure or a vaccine, controlling the infection to prevent the spread of covid-19 was correctly seen as the only intervention that could be used . consequent risk mitigation measures were soon after announced in wuhan (holiday extension, city lockdown, quarantine requirements) (lin et al., 2020) and in neighbouring cities and regions. other areas and countries such as hong kong, taiwan, south korea and mongolia followed with almost daily announcements of ever more strict risk mitigation measures to limit the spread. these comprised of travel restrictions, isolation of travellers coming from the wuhan region, closure of schools and universities and the prescription of hygienic measures (see the timeline of the events in figure 2 ). on january 30 2020 the who emergency committee convened for a second time under the ihr2005 rules (world health organisation, 2008) and declared the outbreak as fulfilling the criteria for being a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) 7 . at this time, related discussions started in european countries but still dramatic measures such as locking down entire cities, regions or countries was not considered (kervorkian et al., 2020) . concern grew but no real changes occurred, since the perception of the risk was still low and individual and group behaviour was not affected. this status started to change when two regions in italy (veneto and lombardy) faced a rapid growth in the number of infected people, forcing the italian authorities to lockdown the most affected villages first, then the entire northern part of the country and finally the entire country. other countries followed, albeit with a one to two week delay. at the time of writing, the italian health care system is still fighting the crisis and remains on the brink of collapse experiencing innumerable numbers of hospitalised patients, a scarcity of intensive care beds, medical staff (over 60 doctors in italy have died 8 ), ppes, ventilators and medicines. although in different degrees, other countries are also experiencing similar challenges, including spain and the united states 9 .looking at what seems to be the critical points in reaching an 'out-of-control' situation in italy, we note that while many italian first responders did their utmost to contain the virus, many citizens in italy did not comply with restrictions at first, and it took some time and multiple efforts of the authorities to communicate to the population why compliance with the restrictions was important. it is believed that one of the critical moments of spread was the champions league football match played in the san siro stadium in milan on february 19 2020 where about 40000 football fans from bergamo -which became the hotspot in the northern region of italy in the following weeks -attended and afterwards filled up the bars and restaurants around the stadium 10 . most strikingly, while the northern regions already had many restrictions being most importantly self-quarantine, social/physical distancing, hygienic measures and a lock down of the northern region, the weekend of march 7-8 is believed to have caused the collapse of the respective regional health system in the weeks thereafter, by coinciding with the celebration of the international women's day. following italy, other european countries were experiencing rapidly increasing numbers of covid-19 patients in the time after the spring break. it is believed that many people became infected in alpine ski resorts during the spring break spreading the virus upon their return. consequently, as another mitigation measure european ski resorts were shut down 11 .many countries followed italy implementing risk mitigation measures starting from advisory, to recommendable and finally enforceable measures. interestingly though, and similarly to the experience in italy, the process of risk perception and the translation to compliance and trust in taking risk mitigation measures also took time in other countries (edelman trust barometer, 2020) , at the likely cost of additional spread and contamination. as health is a national responsibility in the eu (not regulated by the european union), many countries have applied different levels of risk mitigation measures and followed different communication strategies. these ranged from the acceptance of a propagation in view of promoting group immunity (mainly in the united kingdom, the netherlands and sweden 12,13 ) to strategies to fully protecting all individuals, mainly to prevent overwhelming the healthcare systems but also in the interest of awaiting the results from ongoing medical trials on treatments and studies about individual and group immunity (kwok et al., 2020) . in an attempt to understand these fundamental differences, the authors believe that this is related to the differences of the societal structure as seen in northern regions in europe and many parts of the us (northern structure) versus the southern european, arab, asian and latin world (southern structure). the northern structure is based on elderly people living in retirement homes (similar to parts of the us) and elderly living alone. the southern structure is based on large(r) families living under the same roof and across multiple generations. because inside retirement homes disease can rapidly spread due to the higher risk group, leading to segmented, high mortality numbers 14 , retirement homes were locked down and the assumption may have been made that the elderly living alone may stand a better chance of not contracting the disease at all.risk mitigation is an interdisciplinary decision-making process based on information from risk and exposure assessment (bruinen de bruin, 2007) . it entails consideration of political, socioeconomic, epidemiological, (mental) health and engineering data to compile regulatory options and select the appropriate regulatory, societal, sector or company response to covid-19. at the time of writing many countries have taken risk mitigation measures and are trying to prepare for the future by looking at countries that are ahead in the course of the pandemic and learning from their experiences (wu and mcgoogan, 2020) .to better understand the underlying differences and to harmonise terminology, the risk mitigation measures were clustered into various categories. the categorisation along with the timeline of events are illustrated in figure 2 .12 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-52135814 13 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-52076293 14 https://nos.nl/artikel/2329504-kerkdienst-in-verpleeghuis-lijkt-coronahaard-nooit-gedacht-aan-heftige-gevolgen.htmlreviewing the risk mitigation measures implemented by numerous countries the measures were clustered according to the following categories:1. mobility restrictions. these aim to limit the movement of people in order to contain or to slow down the spread of the virus. it reduces the number of people who can be infected by both symptomatic and non-symptomatic uncontained cases (gostic et al., 2020; hellewell, 2020) .restrictions comprise active zoning, closing/limiting public transportation, air traffic restrictions or even temporary closure, limiting use of private cars, bicycles, and outdoor activities such as walking (some countries only allowed walking outside with a dog) and running, particularly in groups of more than two people; 2. socio-economic restrictions. these target social and economic activities where people gather for educational, recreational, sportive, or work-related purposes. restrictions comprise the closure or limiting of schools/nurseries/child-care and homes for the elderly, closure of museums, swimming pools, bars and restaurants, indoor and outdoor sport facilities and hotels. suspension of retail trade, save for essential goods (including food, medicines and their supply chains) with banking, financial and insurance services also belonging to this cluster. additional examples are the promotion/obligation of teleworking, limiting/cancellation of production in factories; 3. physical distancing; these measures have also been referred to as social distancing. in fact, physical distancing is regarded as a more appropriate term to avoid social isolation especially of fragile groups such as the elderly, given that with a proper distance (currently defined between 1.5-2m) it is still possible to be social; it also embraces virtual social connections.other examples entail the prohibition of groups larger than 2-3 persons, closing public outdoor spaces (parks, benches, beaches, etc.) and imposing regulations in terms of entrances and number of people present per square meter, required distance between humans/occupants in indoor spaces comprising offices, meeting places and commercial spaces; 4. hygiene measures; these aim to limit the risk of spreading the virus and direct or indirect contamination of others. recommendations comprise washing hands for at least 20 seconds, sneezing in elbow, avoiding touching surfaces, contactless payments (avoid exchanging money), wearing ppes such as masks, eye and hand protections, household waste disposal instructions preventing contact with contaminated infectious materials by waste collectors and waste processing operators, worker protection in the places where physical distancing is not feasible (e.g. placement of protective glass in supermarkets between cashier and customer), precautionary and sickness driven quarantine (family vs. individual), targeted symptomatic screening upon arrival or entrance such as obliged temperature check or (large scale) testing; 5. communication; this cluster is, in the authors view, the most essential part of risk mitigation measures since it drives the public understanding, trust, acceptance and compliance with the measures. especially in societies where large-scale disasters were absent for decades, as is the case in many countries since wwii, where mistrust in authorities prevail and/or where individual freedom became the norm, above caring for the group, the communication of risk mitigation measures during a major crisis situation adds significant challenges. in march 2020 a who 'whatsapp' group was set up, providing information and risk mitigation instructions related to categories 1-4. countries also launched national communication measures structured in news and information websites/platforms jointly combatting fake news, aiming to encourage awareness, understanding and compliance towards restrictions; 6. international support mechanisms; as the world is fighting the same threat, and many countries are limited in their capacity and resources, the importance of acting internationally is acknowledged, as exemplified by the following actions: countries, sectors and companies increased global production and international exchange of ppe's, raw materials for pharmaceuticals, pharmaceutical formulations, basic medical drugs, and ventilators. existing risk mitigation networks were quickly activated, and new transnational platforms are being set up for knowledge exchange on clinical trials, treatments, lessons learned and publications 15 .at the time of writing, increasing information is being generated about the experiences in mitigating covid-19. although it is difficult to precisely understand the effectiveness of each category of risk mitigation measure the currently available literature has been studied.mobility restrictions. early analysis of the wuhan covid-19 outbreak suggest that the effects of travel limitations are important for national and international agencies dealing with public health response planning. chinazzi et al. (2020) showed that by january 23 2020 the epidemic had already spread to other cities within china and therefore the travel quarantine around wuhan had only modestly delayed the epidemic spread to other areas of china. the wuhan travel ban was initially effective at reducing international case exportations but not to limit the already ongoing spread outside china. most importantly, this study showed that additional travel limitations up to 90% of the traffic has a modest effect unless paired with public health interventions and behavioural changes that achieve a considerable reduction in the disease transmissibility in the communities, as also confirmed during the sars outbreak in singapore (drake et al., 2003) . these findings underline the importance of quick response based on proper early detection and epidemiological risk analysis, in combination with the application of additional risk mitigation measures. in addition, disease experts estimate that each covid-19 patient/carrier infects between two to three others 16 . each risk mitigation measure contributes to a decrease in new infections (anderson et al., 2020) . in order for these restrictions to be effective it is believed that testing, registering number of hospitalisations and deaths in the weeks after the restrictions are key to tracking the effectiveness of the measures. at present, the effectiveness of each measure cannot be quantitatively assessed. however, the authors of this paper believe in the application of the precautionary principle meaning that application of a combination of mitigation measures -even those without current clear scientific evidence such as school closures (anderson et al., 2020) -is the best practice to gain most time in decreasing the rate of new infections (hellewell et al., 2020) .the implementation of socio-economic restrictions occurred gradually within most countries and even up to date there are major differences between countries in terms of the closing down of public places. the most plausible reason is that these restrictions are expected to impose a major impact on the functioning of the current economy and way of life. a recent analysis of smartphone location data by the u.s. search engine giant google showed that visits to shops, parks or railway stations fell steeply in most european countries between february 16 and march 29 2020 as governments sought to slow the explosive spread of the covid-19 disease 17 . reuters reported that in italy and spain, retail and recreational trips were down by 94%. physical presence in workplaces also decreased by over 60% in respective countries. both italy and spain, along with france imposed near lockdown of their states, and, by the time of writing, the restrictions they have imposed are, with a time lag, starting to 'flatten the curve' of new infections at least in some countries (financial times, april 4, 2020) . these latest findings add to the suggestion that the combination of different categories of risk mitigation measures contribute most successfully to the fastest decrease of new infections, given the geographic scale and severity of covid-19.physical distancing. individual behaviour is crucial in controlling the spread of covid-19. in early march 2020 anderson et al. (2020 described that in western democracies personal action, rather than government action, might be the most important issue comprising of early self-isolation (within one day from symptom onset), seeking medical advice remotely unless symptoms are severe, and physical distancing. the same authors described the importance of the application of a combination of mitigation measures such as physical distancing in combination with the ban of mass gatherings, good diagnostic facilities and remotely accessed health advice, together with specialised treatment for people with severe covid-19 infections. a combination of these measures was suggested to lead to a 60% reduction in transmission. at the time of writing, many western democracies also experienced the effects of the lack of awareness of a significant portion of the population leading to non-compliance with the recommended or obligatory restrictions. as a result, in the course of days, governments increasingly implemented a combination of communication strategies (outdoor signs, use of social media, drones informing the public) in combination with enforcement strategies giving increasing fines to groups that were violating the ever more stringent restriction measures. germany niu et al. (2020) reported that transmission by people with mild or no symptoms can undermine the effectiveness of the isolation strategy because of reduced likelihood of isolating all cases and tracing all contacts. the identification and testing of potential cases needs therefore to be as extensive as is permitted by healthcare and diagnostic testing capacity-including the identification, testing, and isolation of suspected cases with no or mild disease (e.g., influenza-like illness). in the fight against covid-19, early control measures such as isolation and contact tracing could gain more power, thanks to modern technology. the authors believe that detection combined with contact tracing should continue to be an important measure to control the outbreak.hygiene measures. wild animals were slaughtered in the wuhan market, increasing the risk of human exposure to blood and to other animal fluids with high risk of being exposed to wild animal viruses. 'wet' markets such as these are poorly viewed by many countries in the world who are now combatting the consequences of the outbreak. however, it should be borne in mind that similar 'wet' markets exist in several other places around the world such as in africa, asia and south america, with cultural habits and behaviour being hard to change. the authors believe the solution lies with the avoidance of mixing wild and domestic animals in indoor and outdoor spaces, and prohibition of onthe-spot slaughtering of animals in markets due to very weak hygienic measures. for many years already, western countries have enforced the systematic use of slaughterhouses with very strict hygienic measures and authority control. in a recent announcement, chinese authorities (temporarily) prohibited these wild life markets as of march 2020 20 the message regarding use, or not, of face masks has been very unclear, also internationally. this lack of clarity has been compounded by the lack of suitable masks, such as those meeting the technical specifications of ffp2 and ffp3, covered by regulation (eu) 2016/425 on personal protective equipment. moreover, surgical masks, which seem effective in clinical settings at reducing the risk of infection for professionals, do not provide adequate protection during aerosol generating procedures (agps). therefore, masks need to be used in combination with other ppe measures 23 (smith et al., 2016; long et al., 2020) . for the ecdc the use of face masks is of highest priority in healthcare workers but also in symptomatic confirmed/suspected cases of covid-19 and those caring for them. instead, who and others health authorities do not recommend the use of face mask for the general public 24 . whether the recommendation by western countries (us, uk, and the majority of eu) that the public should not wear face masks, is or not motivated by the need to preserve limited supplies for professional use in health-care settings is unclear. in parts of asia (china, japan, south korea, singapore) and recently in some eu countries (czech republic and austria), all citizens have been encouraged to wear face masks in public, regardless of whether they have symptoms. austria and italy have joined a small but growing number of european countries making the wearing of face masks outside the home compulsory amid shifting debate over the medical gear's protective utility 25 . authorities started distributing millions of free face masks at the entrances to all supermarkets from april 01 2020 in austria. shoppers will only be permitted inside supermarkets and other open stores, such as pharmacies, if they are wearing masks. italy made the outdoor wearing of masks or scarfs obligatory as of april 04 2020 (ordinanza n.521 26 ). according to research on the sars epidemic, face masks (surgical and ffp2/n95) were an effective intervention for reducing the contraction and spread of the virus (jefferson et al., 2011) . as evidence suggests that nearly half of sars-cov-2 transmissions occur before the infected person becomes symptomatic, a consistent and proper use of face masks by the general population could offer a partial additional benefit to the other essential mitigation measures such as hand hygiene and isolation of infected people. moreover, universal use of face masks could prevent discrimination of individuals who wear masks when unwell because everybody is wearing a mask (feng et al., 2020; leung et al., 2020) . hence, there is some rationale for maskwearing in the general population, even if there is evidence disputing this. however, during a pandemic from a new respiratory virus such as sars-cov-2, in the absence of specific and well-tested pharmaceutical interventions, masks might well play a role in reducing transmission, in particular when physical distancing is not possible. this is probably why in the u.s., the cdc is reportedly contemplating a change in guidance.a recent ec communication (commission recommendation eu 2020 403 13 march 2020 27 ) clarifies many questions including for e.g. those of critical service providers (who will not be able to avail of government supplies destined for health workers), under what conditions they may provide their employees with non-ce labelled masks, assuming they can import their own supply. also at european level, one of the risk mitigation measures taken was the creation of a strategic resceu stockpile of medical equipment such as ventilators and protective masks to help eu countries in the context of the covid-19 pandemic 28 . part of the stockpile will include items such as: i) intensive care medical equipment such as ventilators, ii) personal protective equipment such as reusable masks, iii) vaccines and therapeutics and iv) laboratory supplies. it remains to be seen how quickly the european member states will be able to avail of this stockpile.communication; during the outbreak crisis it is key to have trustworthy and well-coordinated communication channels to create community trust and compliance. hong kong, singapore, japan and south korea are among those that stabilised the cumulative number of cases within two to three weeks after the 100 th case (ft analysis of john hopkins university, csse, march 14 2020). these countries quickly applied a combination of risk mitigation measures such as school closures, strict quarantine and isolation measures and contact tracing. moreover, data studied at the time of march 16, 2020 suggests that a strong community response to the risk mitigation measures communicated by the authorities is key to stabilising the cumulative increase of the spread of covid-19. this demonstrates the importance of citizen awareness, social trust in authorities and well-coordinated risk mitigation communication.international support mechanism; avoiding an uncontrollable world pandemic requires the implementation of a global mechanism, built and empowered to act at an unprecedented speed (niud, y. and xu, f., 2020) . as hellewell et al. (2020) described, the time window of early response is potentially extremely short, signifying that, once the number of initial cases increases to a few tenths (40 cases seems to be a critical number), the probability of failure to control is high, i.e. at 80% even if 80% of contacts are traced and isolated. in this context, global coordination is mandatory and help should be quickly directed to the focal points of viral spread. some effective measures include the pharmaceutical industry, factories, retailers (of medicines, ppe, etc.) are collaborating better and redirecting their production lines to covid-19 related products. for example, high-level fashion brands such as armani, gucci, and others are producing masks and protective garments for healthcare workers, and alcoholic beverage brands are directing their production to disinfectant gel. in addition, solidarity is removing some commercial confidentiality barriers, forming novel supply chains, or easing trade restrictions under certain circumstances, while increasing them on others. for example, the eu introduced a temporary (6 weeks) export ban on certain medical/protective equipment to destinations outside the eu (commission implementing regulation 2020 /402, 14 march 2020 ).the general lack of understanding of this new virus led to confusion and mixed advice from professionals and authorities. the global community (political, medical and international organisations) were taken by complete surprise in its rapid spread from china and establishment of community spread in italy, iran, spain and at present in the us. at the time of writing the world is overwhelmed with covid-19 patients and countries are applying risk mitigation measures at an unprecedented level with almost daily updates. in europe, in the current major hotspots in italy and 28 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_476 29 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ga/txt/?uri=celex:32020r0402) spain, and recently in the us, in new york, hospitals are being overwhelmed and responders are combatting the pandemic by all possible means. since the rules and policies adopted by many countries differ as well as societal and population structure, and healthcare systems, the mitigation measures will likely lead to various results. it will be interesting to see the exact impact of the different strategies but unfortunately it is still too early, and it is not yet possible to give quantitative advice. the intention of this paper is to highlight the importance of building trust, improving effective communication processes with cross-country and cross-sectoral information sharing, enhancing the learning process, and in turn enhancing risk governance mechanisms. the conceptual analysis in this paper aimed to provide a structure in the countless risk mitigation measures taken around the world knowing it is a snapshot in time and lots of effort is currently being undertaken. the authors collated and clustered risk mitigation measures, using a harmonisation of the taxonomical approach, available for countries combatting the covid-19 pandemic and investing in the limitation of the spread of the virus. our work mainly focusses on the limitation of the spread of the sars-cov-2 virus causing covid-19. current knowledge reveals that: the information published on risk mitigation measures and their effectiveness is difficult to find and more and more papers are being published every day;  covid-19 demonstrates the weaknesses of the current systems; the world was insufficiently prepared, scientific warnings were not picked up quickly enough, there were confusing messages and trust building took too much time. specifically, many countries started with processes such as understanding the problem from the beginning and not building upon existing knowledge and best practices of other countries. this lead to similar outcomes such as disbelief, underestimation of the scale and potential danger and losing valuable time in jointly implementing the best risk mitigation practices. besides the differences between countries in terms of cultures or economic prosperity, this pandemic demonstrates the unpreparedness of many health systems lacking mechanisms and materials to adequately respond to a quickly spreading infection, relying on societal and economic improvisation;  it is suggested that countries where the elderly live among the general population, impose more strict restrictive mitigation measures than countries where the elderly are separated from the general population;  several restrictions have proven effective in slowing down the spread of covid-19, but the highest effect is obtained by applying a combination of measures representing different aims. in this regard:o it is recommended for all countries to invest in preventive risk mitigation resources limiting the spread of sars-cov-2 comprising physical distancing measures and hygienic measures; this is particularly important for countries with fewer resources. o it is recommended to impose a combination of mitigation measures limiting the spread by individuals who become ill after being missed by a screening programme. to this end screening programmes need to be improved and applied on a large(r) scale, along with registering the number of hospitalisations and deaths. contact tracing is important even if many countries are now believed to have passed this phase due to too high number of infections. new technologies could be applied in this respect. o it is believed that correctly wearing appropriate face masks is beneficial when physical distancing is not possible to ensure all the time. the spread of small drops containing sars-cov-2 is difficult to predict (think of air currents, convections and air humidity), and it is more likely that individuals will touch their face (mouth/nose) less frequently than without a mask. it seems that countries who have more effectively curtailed an expanding propagation are countries whose population used masks extensively;  a clear and coordinated communication strategy on effective risk mitigation is crucial in building trust with the citizens in a quickly evolving situation, using all possible channels and combatting fake news.  existing global mechanisms need strengthened benefiting from interlinked national health mechanisms. being part of a network of first responders, practitioners or risk mitigation stakeholders is an added value in this scenario; for example, several partner countries of the eu cbrn coe are reporting to have greatly benefited from the structures that were put in place thanks to the initiative and, at least in some countries, this mechanism has been found very useful to mobilise a coordinated response;  citizens' trust related to the degree of risk mitigation measures in place and parties involved in the communication is highly variable across countries. this is expected to influence citizens' behaviour and respective implementation and obedience of the imposed risk mitigation measures. some countries are also creating child-friendly covid 19 communication material such as comics 30 , tv and online broadcasted news 31 . in countries and cultures with a higher degree of trust in science, authorities, and with adequate science based communication, faster changes are expected;  the delay in imposing risk mitigation measures is crucial and can make the difference between a local outbreak with few cases to a pandemic with countless sick and deceased citizens. the window of opportunity for full containment is believed to be limited to a situation with a very low number of infected people (maximum 40 cases);  proper early detection based on early warnings would lower the intervention time. such a mechanism should be based on a response time of hours, rather than days.healthcare workers are at the frontline when treating infectious disease cases and at high risk of acquiring influenza and other respiratory infections [1] [2] [3] . several outbreaks of new infectious diseases have occurred in recent decades, such as the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002-2003 [4] , influenza pandemic (h1n1) in 2009 [5] , middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 [6] and ebola virus diseases in 2014-2016 [7] . many healthcare workers were infected and died during these outbreaks because of a lack of infection control [4, 8, 9, 10] various infection control strategies are used to protect healthcare workers from respiratory and other infections in healthcare settings [11, 12] . these strategies can be broadly classified as administrative control measures, environmental control measures and the use of personal protective equipment (ppe). administrative control measures include developing policies and procedures, implementing triage protocols and providing health education and trainings. environmental control measures includes ensuring proper ventilation, establishing airborne infection isolation and negative pressure rooms, developing systems for cleaning and waste disposal. [13, 14] . ppe is commonly used in healthcare settings as standard or transmission based precaution to protect healthcare workers from infections and to prevent further spread to patients around them [14, 15] .ppe is generally ranked lowest in the infection control hierarchy due to less effectiveness compared to other control measures and high expenditure in the long run. therefore, most infection control guidelines recommend using ppe together with other administrative and environmental control measures. however, ppe is important during the early stage of an outbreak or a pandemic when drugs, a vaccine and other control measures are not available, or access is limited. commonly used ppe to protect from respiratory infectionsare; face masks, respirators, gloves, and goggles or face shields [16] . face masks (or medical masks) and respirators are the most commonly used ppe to protect from influenza and other respiratory infection in healthcare settings. however, these two products are not the same. face masks are not designed for respiratory protection and are used to avoid respiratory droplet and spray of body fluids on the face. they are also used by sick patients to prevent spread of pathogens to others (referred to as "source control"), or by surgeons in the operating theatre to maintain a sterile operating field. face masks are not fit to the face and have [17] . respirators are designed for respiratory protection and are used to protect from respiratory aerosols [18] . a properly fitted respirator provides better protection again respiratory infections than a face mask. gloves are used to protect hands from blood and body fluids, including respiratory secretions. goggles and face shields are used to prevent transfer of respiratory pathogens into the eyes from contaminated hands and other sources. gowns, coveralls, surgical hoods and shoe covers can also be used where procedures on infectious patients generate aerosols or when a new respiratory virus has emerged [18] .there is an ongoing debate about the selection and use of various types of ppe in healthcare settings. this is mainly because of a lack of high quality studies on the use of ppe. most studies are observational and on the use of masks and/or respirators [18] . to date, only five randomized clinical trials have been conducted on use of ppe in hospital settings and all were on face masks/respirators [18] . moreover, most studies on ppe use were conducted in high/middle income countries and currently there are limited data from lowincome countries where the burden of infectious diseases is high. it is therefore important to examine the use of ppe in low resource countries to inform infection control policies.pakistan has a population of about 200 million. as a low-income country, its gross domestic product is low, as is its expenditure on health [19] . the country has one of highest rates of infant and maternal mortality in the south asia region. infectious diseases are still among the main causes of death, particularly in young children. health and surveillance systems are generally weak and limited data are available on infection prevention and control strategies. the aim of this study was to examine the use of ppe for respiratory infections in healthcare settings in pakistan.a systematic review was conducted using the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines.we searched for studies on the electronic databases medline and embase using selected key words. a combination of keywords were used including: 'face mask' or 'mask' or 'medical mask' or 'surgical mask' or 'cloth mask' or 'respirator' or 'gloves' or 'gowns' or 'coverall' or 'surgical cap/hood' or 'shoe/boot covers' or 'goggles' or 'face shield' or 'eye protection' and ' respiratory infection' or 'respiratory tract infection' or 'respiratory diseases', 'outbreaks' or 'infectious disease' or 'influenza' or 'pandemic influenza' or 'flu' or 'tuberculosis' or 'pneumonia' and 'pakistan' or 'punjab' or 'sindh' or 'balochistan' or 'khyber pakhtunkhwa'.we used an open date strategy up to december 2017. we anticipated that studies published in local journals might not be indexed on the medline or embase, therefore, an additional search was made on google scholar using the same keywords. we set a limit of 20 results per page on google scholar and first three pages were reviewed for each keyword search. after the initial search; we reviewed titles and abstracts and selected studies for full text review (fig. 1) .clinical, epidemiological and laboratory-based studies conducted in any part of pakistan and published in english were included in the review. the focus of this systematic review was on the use of ppe for prevention of respiratory infections. therefore, we only included those studies which examined the use of facemask and/or respirator in healthcare settings, with or without other ppe. we only included those studies where ppe was discussed for respiratory infections. studies where ppe was examined for general infection control were also included, given respiratory protective equipment (face masks and/or respirators) was mentioned. we excluded studies on the use of ppe only for bloodborne infections. conference abstracts and poster presentations were also excluded.a total of 137 studies were found in the initial search. after reviewing titles and abstracts, 46 studies were selected for full text review. finally, 13 articles were included in this review (table 1 ) [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] . we only found observational/cross-sectional studies on the use of ppe for infectious diseases in healthcare settings in pakistan. in all studies data were collected through questionnaires or interviews. no clinical trials or laboratory-based studies on the use of ppe in such settings were found. seven studies examined the use of ppe in hospital [20] [21] [22] [23] 25] and among those, two examined the ppe perceptions among medical students [24] or pharmacy students [32] . two studies were conducted in the laboratory settings [26, 27] while, four in dental settings [28] [29] [30] [31] two studies focused on the use of ppe for influenza [24, 32] , two were for tuberculosis [20, 25] and nine studies were on multiple respiratory diseases, including influenza [21, 22] or general infections [23, [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . only two studies examined the use of ppe alone [21, 22] , while other studies examined other infection control practices as well [20, [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] .guidelines and standard operating procedures on ppe do not exist in most of the hospitals [23] or laboratories [26, 27] in pakistan. two studies examined the guidelines and current practices on the use of face masks/respirators for influenza, tuberculosis and sars in pakistan [21, 22] . recommendations on the use of masks were reported to be inconsistent and different types of product were recommended and used in various healthcare settings [21, 22] . face masks were the most commonly used ppe to protect from respiratory infections in most hospitals in pakistan. medical masks were generally used to protect from influenza, tuberculosis and other respiratory infections, while the use of respirators was limited to high-risk situations [21, 22] . in a cross-sectional survey among final-year pharmacy students in seven universities of karachi, about 60% of 443 participants highlighted the need to cover the nose or mouth to protect from influenza and about 57% highlighted the use of face masks, gloves and other ppe [32] . laboratory coat and gloves were the most commonly used ppe in the laboratories in pakistan while face masks and eye covers were rarely used [26, 27] . a survey of dentists working in various settings (dental colleges, hospitals and private clinics) showed that face masks and gloves were also commonly used ppe [29] .the use of ppe was also reported to be low among health workers. according to a hospital-based survey, face masks are not provided to patients with tuberculosis and respirators are not provided to the healthcare workers [23] . another survey showed that 25% of participants used ppe for patients with suspected tuberculosis and 56% used ppe for patients with confirmed tuberculosis [25] . a study in a ward for patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis reported that 65% of the healthcare workers used n95 respirators and 58% were provided with a mask [20] . a study on 253 biosafety level (bsl) 2 laboratory workers showed that ppe was not used by about half of the staff (46.2%) [27] . a countrywide survey showed that almost one third (31.9%) of bsl-2 laboratory workers did not routinely use ppe [26] . both gloves and laboratory coats were used by only 26.7% of the personnel, while a laboratory coat or gloves alone were used by 30.4% and 8.1%, respectively. less than 1% of all the respondents across pakistan reported using eye covers [26] . in a survey of medical students during pandemic (h1n1) 2009, 75% said that they would use a face mask to protect from infection. students with less risk perception were more hesitant to use face masks [24] . the use of face masks was common in dental practice and according to various surveys, 68-100% of dentists wear masks during dental procedures [28] [29] [30] [31] . across all the studies in dental settings, more than 90% also used gloves. among the ppe, face masks were considered the most bothersome to use by wearers.reuse of ppe was also reported in many studies, mainly because of unavailability of ppe and lack of training. gowns are shared among the healthcare workers in hospital many times [23] . two surveys in dental clinics showed that more than half of the dentist reuse masks during routine work [28, 29] . the availability of ppe was generally low in all healthcare settings [21, 22, 28] and varied according to the type [23] ; gloves and masks were available while gowns and n95 respirators were not available in several wards [23] . a shortage of ppe was also reported during sars and pandemic (h1n1) 2009 [21, 22] . a lack of training was a common issue reported and most healthcare workers were not trained in the use of ppe.most of the studies (11/13) discussed other infection control practices as well, in addition to the use of ppe. other non-standard infection control practices included reuse of syringes, improper waste disposal, a lack of hand hygiene practices, non-isolation of infectious cases and low influenza vaccination among healthcare workers.we reviewed the use of ppe in various healthcare settings in pakistan. a lack of guidelines and standard operating procedures, inconsistent policies and practices, low compliance, and non-availability and reuse of ppe were the main issues highlighted in this study. evidence is lacking on the use of ppe in hospitals and other healthcare settings in pakistan and most studies are of low quality. clinical studies should be conducted to examine the effectiveness of ppe and improve the compliance. reuse of ppe may increase the risk of self-contamination to the wearer and this practice should be discontinued. there is a need to improve the availability of ppe and healthcare workers should be trained. ppe is generally considered lowest in the infection control hierarchy and is generally recommended in combination with other control measures. other infection control practices in such settings should also be examined.different types of ppe are used by healthcare workers in pakistan, which reflects a lack of standard policies and guidelines. the different policies and practices may be because of the different recommendations by the world health organization (who) and the united states (us) centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) [33, 34] . debate continues about the selection and use ppe for different infections, for example, face masks versus respirators, gowns versus coveralls, face shields versus goggles [7, 18, 34, 35] . selection of ppe mainly depends on mode of transmission, however, several individual and organizational factors also contribute the selection and use of ppe, such as risk perception, presence of adverse events, pre-existing medical illness, availability and cost [7] . respiratory infections are generally transmitted through contact, droplet and/or airborne routes. gloves should be used to protect from infections transmitted through contact (e.g. respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus), face masks should be used for droplet infections (e.g. influenza and coronavirus) and a respirator should be used to protect form airborne infection (e.g. tuberculosis and measles). however, infection transmission is rarely by only one route and most infections are transmitted by more than one route [36] . for example, influenza and sars primarily transmit through droplet and contact routes, but airborne transmission has also been reported [37, 38] . similarly, ebola primarily transmits through direct contact with blood and body fluids [39] , but animal studies have shown that airborne transmission is also possible [7] . the risk of transmission further increases during aerosol-generating and other high-risk procedures [40, 41] . moreover, uncertainty exists about how pathogens transmit during outbreaks and pandemics [14, 34, 42, 43] . therefore, superior ppe should be used where the mode of transmission is uncertain, the case-fatality rate is high and pharmaceutical interventions are not available [7] . infection control guidelines in pakistan need to be updated urgently to reflect these recommendations. given that mers cov is circulating in the eastern mediterranean region (emr), policies and practices on the use of ppe in other countries of the region should also be examined.our study also reported low availability of ppe in hospital, dental and laboratory settings in pakistan. the availability of ppe is a challenge, not only in low-resource counties, but also in highincome countries, particularly during outbreaks and pandemics when the use of ppe greatly increases [46, 47] . this may result in non-standard practices such as reuse and extended use of ppe. shortages of ppe were even reported in many high-income countries during the 2009 influenza h1n1 pandemic and staff had to use various alternatives [46] [47] [48] . the availability of ppe is important to ensure proper use and compliance. low use of ppe among laboratory workers in pakistan may be due to non-availability and a lack of resources. for example, ppe use was relatively higher in laboratory workers in punjab, which is an affluent province, than other provinces [26] . moreover ppe use was reported more in the private sector in pakistan than the public sector which has fewer resources [27] . proper use of ppe depends on several factors such as availability, knowledge, training, risk perception and comfort [7, 44, 45] .this study showed the compliance with the use of ppe was generally low among healthcare workers and was mainly due to unavailability of ppe, discomfort and a lack of training. while the use ppe depends on many factors, a greater perception of risk was positively associated with compliance [24] . continuous use of face masks and respirators may have psychological and physiological effects on the wearer and result in more adverse events [49] [50] [51] . compliance with the use of face masks has been shown to be based on the nature of the disease, infectiousness of patients and the performance of high-risk procedures [52] . previous studies have tested the precede (predisposing, reinforcing and enabling) framework to examine healthcare workers' compliance with universal precautions [53] . the results showed that reinforcing factors, such as availability of ppe and less job hindrance, and enabling factors, such as safety climate and regular feedback, were significant predictors of compliance with ppe [53] . in addition, the health belief model [54] was also used to examine the compliance and use of face mask during the sars outbreak [55, 56] . perceived susceptibility (vulnerability to acquiring sars and close contact with case), perceived benefits (that face masks can prevent infection) and cues to action (someone asked them to use face masks) were significant predictors of protective behaviour and use of face masks [55] .our study showed that most healthcare workers were not trained on the use of ppe in pakistan. the risk of infection can be reduced with proper training and availability of policies and standard operating procedures [57] . however, regular monitoring is also required to make sure that healthcare workers are using ppe according to the protocols. a study in the us reported many deviations from the protocols even though all healthcare workers were trained [15] . this may result in self-contamination to the wearers and the spread of infection to others [58] . training programmes should be arranged for newly recruited staff and then annual refresher courses should be provided.our study had some limitations. the initial search was made on medline and embase but very few studies were retrieved because many papers are not indexed on these databases. therefore, we also searched google scholar but we only reviewed the first 3 pages after each search so some studies could have been missed. however, we checked the references lists of the relevant studies and could not find any other studies. our search was up to 2017 and studies in 2018 were not included. we only considered ppe in this study and did not examine other infection control practices. the use of ppe is generally recommended with other administrative and environmental control measures.the selection and use of ppe vary according to the type of healthcare worker and working environment. face masks and gloves were the most commonly used ppe to protect from respiratory and other infections. overall, compliance with the use of ppe was low, and non-availability and reuse of ppe were reported. most studies were observational and large-scale prospective studies are needed to collect more evidence about the use of ppe in healthcare settings in pakistan.no funding sources.aac tested the filtration of mask samples by 3 min in another study; 3m products were not used in this study. wk declares none.as this was a systematic review of published data, ethics approval was not required.aac devised the structure and topic areas for this review and made the initial search. wk and aac reviewed titles and abstracts and selected studies for full text review. aac prepared the first draft of manuscript and both authors contributed equally to the final manuscript.healthcare workers are at the frontline when treating infectious disease cases and at high risk of acquiring influenza and other respiratory infections [1] [2] [3] . several outbreaks of new infectious diseases have occurred in recent decades, such as the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002-2003 [4] , influenza pandemic (h1n1) in 2009 [5] , middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 [6] and ebola virus diseases in 2014-2016 [7] . many healthcare workers were infected and died during these outbreaks because of a lack of infection control [4, 8, 9, 10] various infection control strategies are used to protect healthcare workers from respiratory and other infections in healthcare settings [11, 12] . these strategies can be broadly classified as administrative control measures, environmental control measures and the use of personal protective equipment (ppe). administrative control measures include developing policies and procedures, implementing triage protocols and providing health education and trainings. environmental control measures includes ensuring proper ventilation, establishing airborne infection isolation and negative pressure rooms, developing systems for cleaning and waste disposal. [13, 14] . ppe is commonly used in healthcare settings as standard or transmission based precaution to protect healthcare workers from infections and to prevent further spread to patients around them [14, 15] .ppe is generally ranked lowest in the infection control hierarchy due to less effectiveness compared to other control measures and high expenditure in the long run. therefore, most infection control guidelines recommend using ppe together with other administrative and environmental control measures. however, ppe is important during the early stage of an outbreak or a pandemic when drugs, a vaccine and other control measures are not available, or access is limited. commonly used ppe to protect from respiratory infectionsare; face masks, respirators, gloves, and goggles or face shields [16] . face masks (or medical masks) and respirators are the most commonly used ppe to protect from influenza and other respiratory infection in healthcare settings. however, these two products are not the same. face masks are not designed for respiratory protection and are used to avoid respiratory droplet and spray of body fluids on the face. they are also used by sick patients to prevent spread of pathogens to others (referred to as "source control"), or by surgeons in the operating theatre to maintain a sterile operating field. face masks are not fit to the face and have varying filtration capacities [17] . respirators ratory protection and are used to protect from respiratory aerosols [18] . a properly fitted respirator provides better protection again respiratory infections than a face mask. gloves are used to protect hands from blood and body fluids, including respiratory secretions. goggles and face shields are used to prevent transfer of respiratory pathogens into the eyes from contaminated hands and other sources. gowns, coveralls, surgical hoods and shoe covers can also be used where procedures on infectious patients generate aerosols or when a new respiratory virus has emerged [18] .there is an ongoing debate about the selection and use of various types of ppe in healthcare settings. this is mainly because of a lack of high quality studies on the use of ppe. most studies are observational and on the use of masks and/or respirators [18] . to date, only five randomized clinical trials have been conducted on use of ppe in hospital settings and all were on face masks/respirators [18] . moreover, most studies on ppe use were conducted in high/middle income countries and currently there are limited data from lowincome countries where the burden of infectious diseases is high. it is therefore important to examine the use of ppe in low resource countries to inform infection control policies.pakistan has a population of about 200 million. as a low-income country, its gross domestic product is low, as is its expenditure on health [19] . the country has one of highest rates of infant and maternal mortality in the south asia region. infectious diseases are still among the main causes of death, particularly in young children. health and surveillance systems are generally weak and limited data are available on infection prevention and control strategies. the aim of this study was to examine the use of ppe for respiratory infections in healthcare settings in pakistan.a systematic review was conducted using the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines.we searched for studies on the electronic databases medline and embase using selected key words. a combination of keywords were used including: 'face mask' or 'mask' or 'medical mask' or 'surgical mask' or 'cloth mask' or 'respirator' or 'gloves' or 'gowns' or 'coverall' or 'surgical cap/hood' or 'shoe/boot covers' or 'goggles' or 'face shield' or 'eye protection' and ' respiratory infection' or 'respiratory tract infection' or 'respiratory diseases', 'outbreaks' or 'infectious disease' or 'influenza' or 'pandemic influenza' or 'flu' or 'tuberculosis' or 'pneumonia' and 'pakistan' or 'punjab' or 'sindh' or 'balochistan' or 'khyber pakhtunkhwa'.we used an open date strategy up to december 2017. we anticipated that studies published in local journals might not be indexed on the medline or embase, therefore, an additional search was made on google scholar using the same keywords. we set a limit of 20 results per page on google scholar and first three pages were reviewed for each keyword search. after the initial search; we reviewed titles and abstracts and selected studies for full text review (fig. 1) .clinical, epidemiological and laboratory-based studies conducted in any part of pakistan and published in english were included in the review. the focus of this systematic review was on the use of ppe for prevention of respiratory infections. therefore, we only included those studies which examined the use of facemask and/or respirator in healthcare settings, with or without other ppe. we only included those studies where ppe was discussed for respiratory infections. studies where ppe was examined for general infection control were also included, given respiratory protective equipment (face masks and/or respirators) was mentioned. we excluded studies on the use of ppe only for bloodborne infections. conference abstracts and poster presentations were also excluded.a total of 137 studies were found in the initial search. after reviewing titles and abstracts, 46 studies were selected for full text review. finally, 13 articles were included in this review (table 1 ) [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] . we only found observational/cross-sectional studies on the use of ppe for infectious diseases in healthcare settings in pakistan. in all studies data were collected through questionnaires or interviews. no clinical trials or laboratory-based studies on the use of ppe in such settings were found. seven studies examined the use of ppe in hospital [20] [21] [22] [23] 25] and among those, two examined the ppe perceptions among medical students [24] or pharmacy students [32] . two studies were conducted in the laboratory settings [26, 27] while, four in dental settings [28] [29] [30] [31] two studies focused on the use of ppe for influenza [24, 32] , two were for tuberculosis [20, 25] and nine studies were on multiple respiratory diseases, including influenza [21, 22] or general infections [23, [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . only two studies examined the use of ppe alone [21, 22] , while other studies examined other infection control practices as well [20, [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] .guidelines and standard operating procedures on ppe do not exist in most of the hospitals [23] or laboratories [26, 27] in pakistan. two studies examined the guidelines and current practices on the use of face masks/respirators for influenza, tuberculosis and sars in pakistan [21, 22] . recommendations on the use of masks were reported to be inconsistent and different types of product were recommended and used in various healthcare settings [21, 22] . face masks were the most commonly used ppe to protect from respiratory infections in most hospitals in pakistan. medical masks were generally used to protect from influenza, tuberculosis and other respiratory infections, while the use of respirators was limited to high-risk situations [21, 22] . in a cross-sectional survey among final-year pharmacy students in seven universities of karachi, about 60% of 443 participants highlighted the need to cover the nose or mouth to protect from influenza and about 57% highlighted the use of face masks, gloves and other ppe [32] . laboratory coat and gloves were the most commonly used ppe in the laboratories in pakistan while face masks and eye covers were rarely used [26, 27] . a survey of dentists working in various settings (dental colleges, hospitals and private clinics) showed that face masks and gloves were also commonly used ppe [29] .the use of ppe was also reported to be low among health workers. according to a hospital-based survey, face masks are not provided to patients with tuberculosis and respirators are not provided to the healthcare workers [23] . another survey showed that 25% of participants used ppe for patients with suspected tuberculosis and 56% used ppe for patients with confirmed tuberculosis [25] . a study in a ward for patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis reported that 65% of the healthcare workers used n95 respirators and 58% were provided with a mask [20] . a study on 253 biosafety level (bsl) 2 laboratory workers showed that ppe was not used by about half of the staff (46.2%) [27] . a countrywide survey showed that almost one third (31.9%) of bsl-2 laboratory workers did not routinely use ppe [26] . both gloves and laboratory coats were used by only 26.7% of the personnel, while a laboratory coat or gloves alone were used by 30.4% and 8.1%, respectively. less than 1% of all the respondents across pakistan reported using eye covers [26] . in a survey of medical students during pandemic (h1n1) 2009, 75% said that they would use a face mask to protect from infection. students with less risk perception were more hesitant to use face masks [24] . the use of face masks was common in dental practice and according to various surveys, 68-100% of dentists wear masks during dental procedures [28] [29] [30] [31] . across all the studies in dental settings, more than 90% also used gloves. among the ppe, face masks were considered the most bothersome to use by wearers.reuse of ppe was also reported in many studies, mainly because of unavailability of ppe and lack of training. gowns are shared among the healthcare workers in hospital many times [23] . two surveys in dental clinics showed that more than half of the dentist reuse masks during routine work [28, 29] . the availability of ppe was generally low in all healthcare settings [21, 22, 28] and varied according to the type [23] ; gloves and masks were available while gowns and n95 respirators were not available in several wards [23] . a shortage of ppe was also reported during sars and pandemic (h1n1) 2009 [21, 22] . a lack of training was a common issue reported and most healthcare workers were not trained in the use of ppe.most of the studies (11/13) discussed other infection control practices as well, in addition to the use of ppe. other non-standard infection control practices included reuse of syringes, improper waste disposal, a lack of hand hygiene practices, non-isolation of infectious cases and low influenza vaccination among healthcare workers.we reviewed the use of ppe in various healthcare settings in pakistan. a lack of guidelines and standard operating procedures, inconsistent policies and practices, low compliance, and non-availability and reuse of ppe were the main issues highlighted in this study. evidence is lacking on the use of ppe in hospitals and other healthcare settings in pakistan and most studies are of low quality. clinical studies should be conducted to examine the effectiveness of ppe and improve the compliance. reuse of ppe may increase the risk of self-contamination to the wearer and this practice should be discontinued. there is a need to improve the availability of ppe and healthcare workers should be trained. ppe is generally considered lowest in the infection control hierarchy and is generally recommended in combination with other control measures. other infection control practices in such settings should also be examined.different types of ppe are used by healthcare workers in pakistan, which reflects a lack of standard policies and guidelines. the different policies and practices may be because of the different recommendations by the world health organization (who) and the united states (us) centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) [33, 34] . debate continues about the selection and use ppe for different infections, for example, face masks versus respirators, gowns versus coveralls, face shields versus goggles [7, 18, 34, 35] . selection of ppe mainly depends on mode of transmission, however, several individual and organizational factors also contribute the selection and use of ppe, such as risk perception, presence of adverse events, pre-existing medical illness, availability and cost [7] . respiratory infections are generally transmitted through contact, droplet and/or airborne routes. gloves should be used to protect from infections transmitted through contact (e.g. respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus), face masks should be used for droplet infections (e.g. influenza and coronavirus) and a respirator should be used to protect form airborne infection (e.g. tuberculosis and measles). however, infection transmission is rarely by only one route and most infections are transmitted by more than one route [36] . for example, influenza and sars primarily transmit through droplet and contact routes, but airborne transmission has also been reported [37, 38] . similarly, ebola primarily transmits through direct contact with blood and body fluids [39] , but animal studies have shown that airborne transmission is also possible [7] . the risk of transmission further increases during aerosol-generating and other high-risk procedures [40, 41] . moreover, uncertainty exists about how pathogens transmit during outbreaks and pandemics [14, 34, 42, 43] . therefore, superior ppe should be used where the mode of transmission is uncertain, the case-fatality rate is high and pharmaceutical interventions are not available [7] . infection control guidelines in pakistan need to be updated urgently to reflect these recommendations. given that mers cov is circulating in the eastern mediterranean region (emr), policies and practices on the use of ppe in other countries of the region should also be examined.our study also reported low availability of ppe in hospital, dental and laboratory settings in pakistan. the availability of ppe is a challenge, not only in low-resource counties, but also in highincome countries, particularly during outbreaks and pandemics when the use of ppe greatly increases [46, 47] . this may result in non-standard practices such as reuse and extended use of ppe. shortages of ppe were even reported in many high-income countries during the 2009 influenza h1n1 pandemic and staff had to use various alternatives [46] [47] [48] . the availability of ppe is important to ensure proper use and compliance. low use of ppe among laboratory workers in pakistan may be due to non-availability and a lack of resources. for example, ppe use was relatively higher in laboratory workers in punjab, which is an affluent province, than other provinces [26] . moreover ppe use was reported more in the private sector in pakistan than the public sector which has fewer resources [27] . proper use of ppe depends on several factors such as availability, knowledge, training, risk perception and comfort [7, 44, 45] .this study showed the compliance with the use of ppe was generally low among healthcare workers and was mainly due to unavailability of ppe, discomfort and a lack of training. while the use ppe depends on many factors, a greater perception of risk was positively associated with compliance [24] . continuous use of face masks and respirators may have psychological and physiological effects on the wearer and result in more adverse events [49] [50] [51] . compliance with the use of face masks has been shown to be based on the nature of the disease, infectiousness of patients and the performance of high-risk procedures [52] . previous studies have tested the precede (predisposing, reinforcing and enabling) framework to examine healthcare workers' compliance with universal precautions [53] . the results showed that reinforcing factors, such as availability of ppe and less job hindrance, and enabling factors, such as safety climate and regular feedback, were significant predictors of compliance with ppe [53] . in addition, the health belief model [54] was also used to examine the compliance and use of face mask during the sars outbreak [55, 56] . perceived susceptibility (vulnerability to acquiring sars and close contact with case), perceived benefits (that face masks can prevent infection) and cues to action (someone asked them to use face masks) were significant predictors of protective behaviour and use of face masks [55] .our study showed that most healthcare workers were not trained on the use of ppe in pakistan. the risk of infection can be reduced with proper training and availability of policies and standard operating procedures [57] . however, regular monitoring is also required to make sure that healthcare workers are using ppe according to the protocols. a study in the us reported many deviations from the protocols even though all healthcare workers were trained [15] . this may result in self-contamination to the wearers and the spread of infection to others [58] . training programmes should be arranged for newly recruited staff and then annual refresher courses should be provided.our study had some limitations. the initial search was made on medline and embase but very few studies were retrieved because many papers are not indexed on these databases. therefore, we also searched google scholar but we only reviewed the first 3 pages after each search so some studies could have been missed. however, we checked the references lists of the relevant studies and could not find any other studies. our search was up to 2017 and studies in 2018 were not included. we only considered ppe in this study and did not examine other infection control practices. the use of ppe is generally recommended with other administrative and environmental control measures.the selection and use of ppe vary according to the type of healthcare worker and working environment. face masks and gloves were the most commonly used ppe to protect from respiratory and other infections. overall, compliance with the use of ppe was low, and non-availability and reuse of ppe were reported. most studies were observational and large-scale prospective studies are needed to collect more evidence about the use of ppe in healthcare settings in pakistan.no funding sources.aac tested the filtration of mask samples by 3 min in another study; 3m products were not used in this study. wk declares none.as this was a systematic review of published data, ethics approval was not required.aac devised the structure and topic areas for this review and made the initial search. wk and aac reviewed titles and abstracts and selected studies for full text review. aac prepared the first draft of manuscript and both authors contributed equally to the final manuscript.the epicentre of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak in north america was toronto in canada. the outbreak brought the healthcare system of the city to a standstill for 4 weeks. health authorities placed 8000 people in quarantine. two hundred and sixty-seven people with suspected or probable sars were admitted to 17 different hospitals. twenty-one deaths have occurred at the time of writing. over half of those infected have been frontline healthcare workers, including three anaesthetists and one intensivist. 1 as specialists in airway management, anaesthetists are routinely exposed to patients' respiratory secretions and are at high risk of contracting sars from infected patients. this editorial provides suggestions on how to minimize this risk by improved infection control.sars is a highly infectious disease probably transmitted by a novel coronavirus via contact or droplet spread with substantial morbidity and mortality. it is an enveloped rna virus and is therefore sensitive to disinfection measures. however, it can live in the environment for up to 24 h. 2 it can affect otherwise healthy people causing fever (in 100% of cases), malaise, myalgia, and respiratory symptoms ranging from a dry cough to respiratory failure requiring arti®cial ventilation. 3±5 current guidelines address important issues pertinent to anaesthetic practice in the face of this highly infectious respiratory disease. 6 7 in order to suggest optimal methods of protection against known or suspected sars patients, the details of current recommendations are scrutinized.routine hand washing between cases was routinely performed by only 50% of anaesthetists in uk and north american studies. 8 9 hand-mediated transmission is the major contributing factor to cross infection. 10 effective hand decontamination prior to every episode of patient contact will result in signi®cant reduction in the carriage of potential pathogens and decrease the incidence of preventable infection. 11 alcohol denatures proteins and has good activity against enveloped viruses such as coronaviruses. alcohol-based hand rubs containing at least 60% ethyl alcohol have been widely endorsed as an effective and ef®cient method of hand hygiene practice. 12±14 frequent hand washing is the single most important hygiene measure in protection against cross infection and must be actively enforced. alcohol-glycerol-based hand wash gels are now located on every anaesthetic machine in every operating room and on every work surface within the hospitals of the university health network in toronto. it is essential to wash hands before touching your face or eyes, as this seems to have contributed signi®cantly to the spread of sars.a survey of uk consultant anaesthetists revealed only 14.5% of the respondents routinely wore gloves. 8 ninetyeight per cent of anaesthetists' contact with patients' blood could be prevented by routine use of gloves. 15 guidelines emphasize the requirement for routine glove wearing. 6 7 blood contamination of surgeons' hands decreases from 13 to 2% with the use of double gloves. 16 a recent cochrane database systematic review advocates double gloving to reduce surgical cross infection. 17 health canada advises double gloving when attending a suspected sars patient. hands must be washed after degloving.only 35.2% of uk anaesthetists routinely wear facemasks compared with 75.3% of north american anesthesiologists. 8 9 facemasks have two functions. the ®rst is patient protection by reducing the risk of iatrogenic infection. standard surgical facemasks do reduce the volume of bacterial organisms falling to a surgical site, 18 19 but the cochrane database review on disposable surgical facemasks in surgery remains equivocal. 20 the second is selfprotection by reducing the risk of nosocomial infection. for this purpose, standard surgical masks are inadequate because they may have up to a 50% leak, and are not suf®ciently tight ®tting to prevent entraining of room air and`i aerosols. some of the anaesthetists who contracted sars, early in the outbreak, were only wearing standard surgical facemasks when they intubated infected patients.as a result of the transmission of sars to healthcare workers, n95 (or equivalent) masks are currently mandatory in toronto for all medical personnel. they ful®l the ®ltering ef®ciency criteria of the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) n95 standard by protecting against droplet and airborne transmission of 95% of particles greater than 0.3 microns in size. 21 these masks will offer a high degree of protection against the contact and droplet spread of the coronavirus. the n95 masks should be ®t tested using an appropriate`®t test kit' according to the manufacturer's instructions. 22 the pcm 2000 tuberculosis masks meet the n95 ®ltration criteria and ®t the majority of wearers adequately. they do not require routine ®t testing. n95 masks can be worn continuously for 8 h whereas pcm 2000 masks can only be worn continuously for 4 h. all of these masks are uncomfortable and increase the work of breathing; staff compliance therefore requires motivation and encouragement. masks must not be touched or taken down and then re-used as this greatly increases the risk of contamination.theatre caps may reduce the risk of staff potentially contaminating their hands by touching their hair. the nature of the novel coronavirus is such that mucous membrane and eye spread is likely and therefore disposable¯uid-resistant long sleeved gowns, goggles and disposable full-face shields are recommended for frontline medical staff at risk of exposure to sars. hand washing is essential after touching or removing the above items.early in the outbreak, three anaesthetists intubated patients with respiratory failure of unknown cause wearing traditional respiratory and contact precautions. they subsequently contracted sars. with the bene®t of hindsight we can conclude that standard surgical facemasks, gowns and gloves offer inadequate protection. one intensivist contracted sars after a very prolonged and dif®cult intubation in a patient with¯orid pulmonary oedema, despite wearing an n95 mask and goggles. as a result of these disturbing events, we adopted additional precautionary measures from our experience of patients with tuberculosis.any known or suspected sars patient must be regarded as ultra high risk and the attending anaesthetist should wear an n95 mask, goggles, face shield, double gown, double gloves, and protective overshoes. removal and disposal of these items without contaminating oneself is critical. the use of a powered respirator by the anaesthetist and assistant is strongly advised for high-risk aerosol generating airway procedures in suspected sars patients.we have several years experience of staff using the 3m airmateô (3m occupational health and environmental safety division, 3m center, building 0235±02-w-70, st paul, mn, 55144±1000, usa) powered air purifying respirator (papr) in the bronchoscopy suite when managing patients with suspected tuberculosis. the airmateô consists of a belt-mounted motor-driven fan, high ef®ciency particulate air (hepa) ®lter and a rechargeable battery pack. room air is drawn into the ®lter and delivered under positive pressure to a 3m r-series tyvekâ head cover via a snap-in hose connector that is sewn into the back of the hood. decontaminated air is then circulated from the top of the head cover, down over the user's face and, together with exhaled air, exits through holes on the bottom of the faceseal. the airmateô provides 98±100% protection at 0.3±15 microns, and has a¯ow rate of 180 litres min ±1 . 23 the major advantage offered by the airmateô is that it completely covers the head, thus eliminating the risk of respiratory, ocular or skin contamination. an n95 mask and goggles are worn underneath the respirator to provide maximal protection.this is an extremely high-risk procedure as it may result in signi®cant exposure to a particularly high viral load. the following guidelines were developed in our institution to minimize the risk to the anaesthetist when intubating a suspected sars patient. the guidelines should be followed if there is a high index of suspicion that a patient may have sars.1. plan ahead. it takes 5 min to fully apply all barrier precautions.2. apply n95 mask, goggles, disposable protective footwear, gown and gloves. put on the belt-mounted airmateô and attach the respirator tubing and tyvekâ head cover. then apply extra gown and gloves. all staff assisting to follow same precautions. if a powered respirator is unavailable, then apply n95 mask, goggles, disposable theatre cap, and a disposable full-face shield.3. most experienced anaesthetist available to perform intubation.4. standard monitoring, i.v. access, instruments, drugs, ventilator and suction checked.5. avoid awake ®breoptic intubation unless speci®c indication. atomized local anaesthetic will aerosolize the virus.6. plan for rapid sequence induction (rsi) and ensure skilled assistant able to perform cricoid pressure. rsi may need to be modi®ed if patient has very high a±a gradient and is unable to tolerate 30 s of apnoea, or has a contraindication to succinylcholine. if manual ventilation is anticipated, small tidal volumes should be applied. 7. five minutes of preoxygenation with oxygen 100% and rsi in order to avoid manual ventilation of patient's lungs and potential aerosolization of virus from airways. ensure high ef®ciency hydrophobic ®lter interposed between facemask and breathing circuit or between facemask and laerdal bag.8. intubate and con®rm correct position of tracheal tube. 9. institute mechanical ventilation and stabilize patient. all airway equipment to be sealed in double zip-locked plastic bag and removed for decontamination and disinfection. 10 . assistant should then wipe down the tyvekâ head cover with disinfectant (accelerated hydrogen peroxide is most effective) after exiting the negative-pressure atmosphere. the protective barrier clothing is then removed paying close attention to avoid self-contamination. the outer gloves are used to remove the outer gown and protective overshoes. the outer gloves are then discarded and the inner gloves remove the disinfected head cover and the inner gown. the inner gloves are then removed. the head cover is discarded, the airmateô tubing is pasteurized and the belt pack wiped down with disinfectant. the n95 mask and goggles are only removed after leaving the room.11. after removing protective equipment, avoid touching hair or face before washing hands.a dedicated operating room is required for known or suspected sars patients. warning signs should be posted on the entrance to the operating room and only essential staff should be present. the door to the operating room should remain closed for the duration of the case to prevent potential contamination of the corridor. in a suspected sars case, the breathing circuit and soda lime should all be disposable. a disposable high ef®ciency bacterial/viral hydrophobic ®lter must be placed on the expiratory circuit of the ventilator. the patient should be induced and recovered in the operating room itself. high-risk procedures or the use of power tools in an open procedure warrants the use of a powered respirator by all medical staff. anaesthetists are instructed to wear barrier protection as described above.strong consideration should be given to the use of prophylactic antiemetics in sars patients undergoing anaesthesia to reduce the risk of vomiting with subsequent contamination and viral spread. care must be taken not to contaminate surfaces with the used oropharyngeal suction, which should be secured in its own holder on the drip stand.meticulous aseptic practice must be emphasized with attention paid to items such as stethoscopes and patients' charts. single-use disposable pens are supplied separately for each case and must not be removed from the operating room. telephones should be used in hands-free mode and cleaned after use. all airway adjuncts should be removed before transfer of the patient. they should be placed in a secure receptacle directly after use and be removed for decontamination. the anaesthetic machine is presumed infectious and must be decontaminated.most operating rooms are under positive pressure with up to 20 room air exchanges per hour. any viral load should therefore decrease quickly. however, because the coronavirus can live outside the body on inanimate surfaces for up to 24 h, the entire operating room should be disinfected after a case involving a suspected sars patient.attending a patient with suspected sars requires full precautions. the patient should be in strict isolation in a negative-pressure room. if patients require supplemental oxygen, then nasal catheters should be applied and covered by a surgical facemask. venturi-type masks should be avoided, as they will disseminate droplet spread if the patient coughs. 24 continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) and forms of non-invasive ventilation including bi-level positive airway pressure (bipap) and high frequency ventilation must be similarly avoided as they increase the viral load in the room. procedures in suspected sars patients that induce coughing, such as nebulization of medications, chest physiotherapy, bronchoscopy, gastroscopy, and airway suctioning increase the risk of aerosolizing the virus. 22 25 using spacer devices instead of nebulizers and closed suctioning systems help to reduce this risk. the ventilators of sars patients must have high ef®ciency bacterial/viral hydrophobic ®lters placed on the expiratory circuit. transportation of an intubated sars patient with a tracheal tube and a laerdal bag requires a similar ®lter between the tube and the bag to avoid contaminating the atmosphere. strict adherence to the infection control precautions detailed above should prevent further transmission of sars to anaesthetists and other medical staff.the toronto sars outbreak has emphasized that we cannot be complacent about infection control. our current infection control practices may have been adequate in the past, but they have been exposed as entirely inadequate in the presence of the highly infectious sars virus. anaesthetists must be rigorous about the application of standard precautions in every day practice. in the presence of a known or suspected sars patient, full droplet and contact precautions must be applied. for additional safety, until the exact nature of transmission of the coronavirus is elucidated, airborne precautions should be taken with high-risk procedures.sars should serve as a new red¯ag, marking our need to change the way we practice infection control and ultimately directing us toward the evolution of àwuhan, the capital of hubei province in china, reported an outbreak of atypical pneumonia caused by a new coronavirus detected on december 31, 2019, which was named 2019 coronavirus disease . [1] [2] [3] [4] cases have surfaced in other chinese cities, as well as other countries and regions. 5-7 the number of cases in wuhan and other cities in china is on the rise. since february 20, authorities have reported more than 70,000 confirmed cases and 2,122 deaths across all chinese provinces. more than 26 countries or regions have reported confirmed cases. 8 with the number of confirmed cases increasing, the implementation of corresponding outbreak control policies began on january 23. by following these procedures, most cities have been controlled, except wuhan; however, there have been outbreaks in countries outside china. 9 some articles have reported the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 in wuhan 10-13 , but other cities have rarely been reported. clinical manifestations do not vary widely, but the epidemiology may be different from region to region. we analyzed the epidemiology of 213 covid-19 patients admitted to the first people's hospital of jingmen, which admitted all the confirmed patients within the municipal districts (not including county or county-level cities) of jingmen, a city of hubei about 250 miles away from wuhan.patients: for this retrospective study, we recruited patients in the first people's hospital of jingmen from january 12 to february 14, 2020. all the confirmed covid-19 patients at our hospital were study was approved by the first people's hospital of jingmen ethics committee. the patients' written informed consent was obtained before data was collected.procedures: epidemiological data was collected from patients' medical records. if more information was needed, we communicated with attending health care providers, patients, and their families. throat-swab specimens from the upper respiratory tract were obtained for real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction(rt-pcr). the wuhan institute of virology provided the rt-pcr detection reagents.outcomes: we described epidemiological data and observed the impact of control measures on the epidemic.statistical analysis: statistical analysis was performed with spss 19.0. continuous variables were described using mean, median,interquartile range (iqr) values and categorical variables were described as frequency rates and percentages.this research received no externa funding.the 213 patients were aged 2-88 years old with 51.1% of the sample being men. the median age of the patients was 48 years( iqr, 35-58.5, figure 1 ) . including 33 patients in the intensive care unit (icu), the median age of the patients was 66 years(iqr, 57-76), ranging from 33-82 years old, with 22 (66.7%) being men and 19 (57.5%) patients having chronic diseases, including hypertension, diabetes, heart failure, stroke, and renal insufficiency. by the end of january 14, seven (3.27%) patients had died (four patients with renal failure and three had been on dialysis for years), and five of them were men. the average age of the patients who died was 60, with a range from 45-73 years old. the covid-19 patients were divided into three groups:1. wuhan group (88 cases): patients with a history of exposure to wuhan. sixty-one worked or lived in wuhan, 22 had short-term exposure by staying in wuhan for about two days, and five patients only visited a wuhan railway station or airport for about two hours. these people were free to move around until january 23, and many subsequent cases of infection were caused by the wuhan group. 2. family group (56 cases): patients who had not been to wuhan within 20 days since the illness started and were infected by acquaintances, mainly family members and other relatives, friends, and colleagues. some of them only had brief contact with infected people, such as talking or eating together.3. stranger group (69 cases): patients who had not been to wuhan within 20 days since the illness started and had been infected by strangers. the first patient was a bus driver, infected from his passengers, who began to cough and have a fever on january 4. one female patient, who had never been to wuhan, was a sales clerk in a shopping center. twenty-three patients were infected in hospital; twelve had uremia and were on dialysis in two hospitals. eight medical staff in the non-infected ward were infected by confirmed patients. these staff worked in the gastroenterology department, intensive care unit, emergency department, joint surgery all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20031393 doi: medrxiv preprint department, and dialysis room. seven of them became ill between january 21 and 25, one became ill on january 29.the number of confirmed patients was analyzed according to the date of symptom onset, asymptomatic patients used the date of admission instead (figure 2 ) . the number peaked on january 21 followed by a gradual decline, most patients had a history of exposure to wuhan before january 25, the number of locally infected cases peaked on january 26. the last patient from wuhan began to have symptoms of coughing and fever on february 8, subsequent to having left wuhan on january 22. the incubation period is more than 17 days. most of the patients after february 8, 2020 were family members of confirmed patients. all admitted patients after february 9, 2020 were family members of confirmed patients.covid-19 is a newly discovered and named single-strand, positive-sense rna coronavirus that may cause respiratory disease. 14 however, older males and those with comorbid conditions are more likely to have more severe symptoms and potentially die. this is consistent with a previous descriptive study of patients in jingyintan hospital which was responsible for the treatment of serious cases in wuhan. 10 no antiviral treatment for covid-19 infection has been proven to be effective so far. 21 the best way to fight the virus is to block its spread. in order to cope with the outbreak of covid-19, the government of jingmen has implemented several preventative measures since january 23 residents were also ordered to wear masks in public areas.the benefits from these measures were that the number of confirmed patients peaked on january 21 followed by a gradual decline, however, most patients were infected from wuhan before january 25, these patients could not be controlled, the number of locally infected cases peaked on january 26, three days after the early preventive policies. infections from strangers were the most dangerous and the hardest to control, since no one knew they were infected before onset, including the individuals infected. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20031393 doi: medrxiv preprint these people were disappeared 15 days after the control measures, indicating most of them were infected before the control measures were implemented. the last few cases were family members of confirmed patients, which were hard to prevent when living in a home with an infected individual. studies indicate the basic reproductive number of covid-19 was estimated to be 2.2 (95% ci, 1.4 to 3.9). the epidemic doubled in size every 7.4 days without control measures. 22 if measures were not taken in time, the consequences would be unimaginable. to date, some close contacts are still in quarantine and some may become ill in the next few days, however, the situation is under control.these control measures, along with the professional handling of suspected cases and close contacts, were very effective. two things were important for disease prevention: avoiding close contact with people whenever possible and wearing masks when contact is required. covid-19 is apparently more contagious than sars and, without protection, people can be easily infected by close contact. however, some close contact is inevitable, such as buying necessities and seeing doctors. covid-19 is transmitted by saliva droplets, contact, and other transmission routes such as aerosols, 23 .24 which can be prevented by wearing masks.more than ten patients were in the non-infectious ward before the diagnosis. these patients were spread across seven departments, and only eight medical staffs were infected. moreover, most of them were infected before january 20, when many doctors did not wear masks. three patients were in the respiratory department before diagnosis. none of the respiratory medical staff had been infected and they had been wearing masks all the time. so far, the majority of departments in non-infected areas do not have protective clothing，masks are the only protective equipment.although masks prevent most infections, they are not always available. one citizen was infected only because she had been to the supermarket a few times and, because she could not buy a new mask, had been wearing the same mask all the time for several days without disinfection. we tried to steam sterilize disposable surgical masks, and there was no obvious damage to the masks. of course, professional tests are needed to determine whether the steam disinfection will reduce the protective effect of the masks. if a mask must be used more than once, steam sterilization should be considered.since the infection time of most patients could not be determined, we did not analyze the incubation period. it was reported that the incubation period was 4-7 days. 25 based on the sars experience, the maximum incubation period is currently considered to be no more than 14 days, but one case in our study was significantly longer at 17 days. a recent study reported the longest incubation period to be 24 days. 11 authorities reported in guangdong province that a man became ill after 27 days, leading to more than 100 people being quarantined. the maximum incubation period is unclear. considering the highly infectious nature of the covid-19, quarantining people from the affected areas for a month should be considered.the asymptomatic case is a challenge to disease control, and 1.2% of cases are asymptomatic in china. 20 three asymptomatic cases were diagnosed during screening because they were close contacts and had been hospitalized for more than half a month without symptoms. the pneumonia lesions of these three cases were unilateral and limited to a small area (figure 4 ). if they were infected by strangers, they will not be found until some people around them being infected and diagnosed. the other challenge to all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20031393 doi: medrxiv preprint disease control is how to judge if a confirmed patient did not have infectivity after treatment. at present, nucleic acid detection is mainly relied on, but sometimes this test is not reliable for excluding diseases.one mild case was discharged after three negative nucleic acid tests on different days in a week but then, after two weeks of isolation, the nucleic acid test became positive. another 4 cases reported in china, however,no one infected from them so far.there were three limitations in this study. first, only 213 patients diagnosed with covid-19 were included. second, the unconfirmed suspected cases in the early stages were excluded in the analyses.some patients were discharged as suspected patients after one negative nucleic acid test. many patients had a second or third check before being diagnosed. third, most of the data were from patients' medical records, with the potential of a few of them not being accurate enough.in conclusion, all people are susceptible to covid-19, and older males and those with comorbid conditions are more likely to become severe cases. even though covid-19 is highly contagious, control measures have proven to be very effective.the study was designed by qg and zd; fx, jw,jw and qg collected the epidemiological and clinical data and processed statistical data.qijun gao drafted the manuscript. yh contributed to critical revision of the reportand.we declare no competing interests all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20031393 doi: medrxiv preprint all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20031393 doi: medrxiv preprint author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20031393 doi: medrxiv preprintcoronavirus disease was first reported in wuhan, china (wuhan municipal health commission, 2019). as of june 30, 2020, the number of confirmed cases exceeded 10.1 million with over 0.5 million mortalities; in particular, in the united states, the number of confirmed cases has all exceeded 2 million, accounting for approximately 25% of total confirmed cases in the globe. the proportions of confirmed cases in chile (14.8‰), peru (9.2‰), united states (7.7‰), brazil (6.4‰), and spain (5.3‰) have all exceeded 5‰. with the increasing number of covid-19 cases globally, countries have utilized precautionary measures against this pandemic. main transmission routes of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) include droplet and contact transmissions. airborne transmission may be possible in specific circumstances and settings in which aerosol generating procedures (agp) are performed (world health organization, 2020b) . the aerosol deposition on the surface and subsequent resuspension could also be a potential transmission route. additionally, sars-cov-2 could remain viable in aerosols for 3 hours and has shown to be viable on various surfaces for a period of time: plastic (72 h), stainless steel (48 h), copper (4 h), and cardboard (24 h) surfaces (van doremalen et al., 2020) .sars-cov-2 can spread quickly in relatively confined spaces, such as nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons. for examples, over 200 infections were reported in a women's prison in wuhan, china, the epicenter of the outbreak, 100 m from a local hospital for pulmonary diseases (yang, 2020) . as of april 12, 2020, a total of 306 inmates and 218 staffs in a prison were tested positive for the covid-19 in cook county, the united states (cook county sheriff's office, 2020). in arkansas, 51 of 280 confirmed covid-19 cases were found in nursing homes (thv11 digital, 2020) . in louisiana, at least 61 nursing homes have confirmed covid-19 cases, totally 261 nursing home residents have tested positive for the virus with 60 deaths (wbrz, 2020). these are reinforcing evidence that people over the age of 65 are at a higher risk of developing life-threatening complications due to covid-19. looking at the transmission characteristics of sars-cov-2, the most efficient protection measures are mask use and hand hygiene, according to previous studies on influenza virus and coronavirus (aiello et al., 2010; jefferson et al., 2011; leung et al., 2020) . in the globe, it is estimated that 8 million children (browne, 2017) and 10.74 million inmates (walmsley, 2018) live in orphanages and prisons, respectively. it was estimated that there are approximately 703 million persons aged 65 years or over in the globe and 2% of them are living in the nursing home (lloyd-sherlock et al., 2020; united nations, 2019) . elderly people, children, and inmates in these facilities are people either with limited mobility or deprived of liberty. they live in close proximity with others thus close contact is unavoidable. although entrance to these facilities is strictly limited, which could protect them from outside infectious agents, inadequate prevention and control measures taken inside may still exacerbate covid-19 transmissions from within. the purpose of this study is to illustrate the rationale of prevention and control measures in nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons and provide suggestions for general measures, health management, personal protection measures, and prevention measures in specific facilities.environmental pollution j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / e n v p o l the elderly in nursing homes are vulnerable populations who are at a higher risk of infection and adverse outcome because they usually live in close proximity to others (world health organization, 2020a). covid-19 has an increased mortality in older people and in those with chronic diseases or immunosuppression. in italy, the mean age of patients dying for covid-2019 infection was 78.5, which was 15 years higher as compared with the national sample diagnosed with covid-2019 infection (covid-19 surveillance group, 2020) . the lack of knowledge and proper care may make them more vulnerable. therefore, to protect residents, employees, and visitors, prevention and control measures should be taken in nursing homes to prevent sars-cov-2 from entering the facility and spreading inside and outside the facility.the covid-19 outbreak has led to a level of heightened vigilance in the community which involves the extra responsibility of caring for children in need of protection and those who cannot be cared for by their biological parents as an orphanage. although the confirmed covid-19 cases in children account for a relatively small proportion at this point, there is evidence that children are also susceptible to covid-19 infection (kelvin and halperin, 2020) . pneumonia is a leading cause of mortality in children, and distinct immunological responses to viral infections might exist in children which can cause severe damage to vital organs (campbell and nair, 2015) . recent study suggests that children with covid-19 are at risk for a multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (mis-c) with cardiovascular manifestations (beroukhim and friedman, 2020) . in addition, children in orphanages live in congregated and relatively confined environment with limited health protection awareness. thus, the importance to promote the welfare, protection, and care for children and staffs within the orphanage facility could never be overemphasized.inmates in prisons and other custodial settings live in close proximity with each other under poor ventilation conditions, thus the risk level of person-to-person transmission through droplet and aerosol transmissions are higher (kamarulzaman et al., 2016) . in addition, inmates generally have a higher number of co-morbid conditions and are in worse health conditions. this is made worse by general poorer hygiene and weaker immune defense due to stress and poorer nutrition (who regional office for europe, 2020). infections can be transmitted between prisoners, staffs, and visitors, between prisons through transfers and staff cross-deployment, to and from the community. many scholars have appealed for revision of prison guidelines on infection control because most prisoners will eventually be released back into their communities and may further spread infectious diseases (moazen et al., 2019) . moreover, during covid-19 pandemic, the covid-19 clusters in this setting have the potential to overwhelm prison health-care services (kinner et al., 2020) .in order to timely respond to covid-19 pandemic for nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons, it is recommended to enhance risk control, strengthen daily prevention and control measures such as personnel protection, environmental cleaning, and disinfection.the nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons should establish the prevention and control system and develop emergency plans during covid-19 pandemic. the establishment of health monitoring is helpful in early detection of covid-19 cases, especially those with mild symptoms (heymann and shindo, 2020) . close management should be adopted during the covid-19 pandemic, and personnel in and out, especially visits, should be reduced. since as high as 60% of all infections were converted from cases with mild symptom or asymptotic cases, admission health screening should be carried out to mitigate asymptomatic transmission (qiu, 2020) . it is also suggested to set isolation observation area in each facility for people who develop symptoms. in particular, people who are new to nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons should be isolated for at least 14 days. similarly, children or the elderly who leave or relocate from facilities, as well as people who are released from prisons should be isolated for 14 days. for facilities providing shuttles for workers, measurement of body temperature should be carried out before getting on. people with suspected symptoms of fever, cough, sneezing should not be allowed to enter these facilities. since the control of covid-19 needs at least a couple of months, the preparation of sufficient protection products (masks, disinfectants, gloves, etc.) is highly recommended. meanwhile, distribution priority of medical supplies should be given to healthcare workers providing care services (e.g. front-line healthcare workers, nursing staff in institutions, and healthcare personnel in private clinics); personnel who provide essential services and who are required to have contact with the public at work (e.g. those providing public transport, emergency services and immigration services); and marginalized and vulnerable groups in the society (e.g. unaccompanied children, elderly people without family support, and disabled persons). health education should also be carried out to increase the protection awareness via training, posters, videos, etc. during the covid-19 pandemic, nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons should provide psychological consulting services to the elderly, children, inmates, and workers to mitigate probable negative emotions such as anxiety and panic under the stress.ventilation is one of the most effective measures to significantly reduce the exposure to infectious diseases (zhai, 2020) . therefore, the ventilation during covid-19 should be strengthened. under the prerequisite of thermal comfort, natural ventilation is preferred. it is recommended to open the window 2 or more times a day with duration of 0.5 h. for facilities using air conditioners for ventilation and indoor temperature adjustment, it is suggested to regularly clean and disinfect the air inlet and outlet of the air conditioner using chlorine containing disinfectant with available chlorine content of 500mg/l and strengthen the cleaning and disinfection of the condensate pan and cooling water of the fan coil unit. the operation of hand washing facilities should be maintained regularly. also, the wastes should be classified before disposal and the disinfection frequency of waste containers could be increased. spraying or wiping disinfections using chlorine containing disinfectant with available chlorine content of 500 mg/l are recommended. in addition, since sars-cov-2 may spread through contaminated waste surfaces and aerosols from wastewater systems, it is necessary to assess disease prevalence and spread by monitoring the viral rna in wastewater for early warning of covid-19 outbreaks (nghiem et al., 2020) .indoor and outdoor environment of facilities should be kept clean and hygienic, daily cleaning and disinfection measures should be recorded. the floor could be kept clean using chlorine containing disinfectant with available chlorine content of 250e500 mg/l. vomitus could be covered and disinfected using disposal water absorbing materials and adequate disinfectant or effective disinfection towel. after removal of vomitus, the object surface should be disinfected using quaternary ammonium salt disinfectant or chlorine containing disinfectant.the restroom should be kept clean and dry, in addition, ideal ventilation and disinfection frequency should be adjusted according to actual situation. the sink, shower, and other drainage pipes should be frequently checked to ensure the effect of water seal of u-shaped pipe and sewer. the surface of public table, sink, door handle, and other objects should be disinfected using chlorine containing disinfectant with available chlorine content of 500 mg/l. after then, wipe the surface with clean water 30 minutes after spraying or wiping disinfection. gatherings (leisure activity, having meal, workout, etc.) should be reduced and the personnel density should be well controlled (bedford et al., 2020) . the dining room in use as well as used kitchen utensils should be disinfected after each meal. food debris must be removed before the disinfection of tableware because the presence of organic matters would weaken the disinfection performance. it is recommended to disinfect the kitchen utensils via boiling or steam for 15 min, disinfection cabinet, or soaking in chlorine containing disinfectant with available chlorine content of 250 mg/l, and wash completely after disinfect.in congregated places, people are encouraged to correctly wear the mask and enhance hand hygiene simultaneously. to stop the spread of sars-cov-2, it is recommended to avoid large gatherings, direct contact with public facilities or public objects, and maintain a distance of at least 3 feet from other people (fiorino et al., 2020) . avoid touching face with hands or gloves to minimize spread of sars-cov-2 and other pathogens. when cough or sneezing, people are suggested to cover their mouth and nose using the napkin or elbow, and wash hands completely using soap or liquid soap after throwing the used napkin into the dustbin. when communicating with others, direct contact without mask should be avoided. under the condition of sufficient protection products supply, people could consider to use hand sanitizer and keep hands clean all the time. in orphanages, specific masks or face shield should be prepared for children because the use of adult masks might lead to air leak and expose them to infection. the care givers should also rationally guide children to wear the mask or face shield in certain scenarios, such as before eating, before and after playing, after sneezing, etc. the protection of infants is indirect because they are not required to wear the mask, thus the personal protection of care givers must be strengthened.once covid-19 case is found in a nursing home, the confirmed case and suspected case (if any) should be immediately isolated from others. before entering the isolation area, cases should change their clothes throughout. the healthcare workers should adopt proper personal protection measures. unnecessary personnel in and out should be forbidden in isolation area. strict disinfection should be carried out for isolation area and contaminated objects as shown in table 1 .personnel with abnormal body temperature, cough, fatigue, diarrhea, sore throat, or with potential exposure to sars-cov-2 should be isolated in temporary isolation area. confirmed and suspected covid-19 cases should be sent to designated hospitals for further treatment. the orphanage facility must report the situation to relevant government departments and local cdcs in time.in addition, orphanages should also conduct investigations on close contacts under the guidance of local health departments, a 14-day isolation should also be required for close contacts. children and staffs who get back from hospital should be isolated for at least 14 days. at the same time, the orphanages need to be thoroughly disinfected, and the personal belongings should be handled properly. all clothes, bedding, sheets, and other textiles should be kept clean and washed regularly. if disinfection treatment is required, steam or boiling for 30 minutes are recommended. it is also feasible to soak with chlorine-containing disinfectants with available chlorine content of 500 mg/l for 30 minutes, followed by routine cleaning (world health organization, 2020c). restrooms, bathrooms, and laundries in orphanages should be disinfected on a daily basis with chlorine-containing disinfectants with available chlorine content of 500 mg/l, then rinsed under running water.if a covid-19 case was found in a prison, it is suggested to immediately organize screening for all inmates and staffs. people with abnormal symptoms (fever, cough, diarrhea etc.) should be recorded and examined via computed tomography (ct). close contacts could be evacuated to other custodial facilities without cases in order to block the transmission routes and reduce the risk of cross infection. isolation requirements should be strictly implemented and health monitoring should be enhanced to these close contacts. the prison should be divided into case area, isolation area, isolation observation area, and general area. it is also recommended to distribute disposable masks to inmates and staffs, and guide the use and disposal of the mask. the ventilation, regular disinfection, and personal protection measures should be strengthened, and unnecessary personnel in and out should be avoided. it is recommended to provide sufficient soap or liquid soap in order to strengthen hand hygiene. moreover, if the hand hygiene product supply is limited, 75% alcohol hand sanitizer could also be utilized to clean hands. terminal disinfection must be provided for the places where covid-19 cases lived or stayed for relatively long time. if a covid-19 cluster was found in a prison, in addition to prevention measures mentioned above, partition management is also recommended. cases with severe and moderate symptoms should be arranged in case area. cases with mild symptoms, those who with positive results of pharyngeal swab viral nucleic acid detection but do not have obvious clinical symptoms (such as fever, fatigue, pneumonia, etc.), should be arranged in isolation area. suspected cases, close contacts, and other people with symptoms of fever, cough, diarrhea, etc. should be arranged in isolation observation area. the rest could stay in general area. from the perspective of security, the partition management for prison staffs and inmates should be separated. healthcare area of other diseases should be strictly separated with case area, isolation area, isolation observation area, and general area to avoid cross infection. if the prison has limited isolation and medical conditions, it is recommended to transfer confirmed cases and suspected cases to covid-19 designated hospitals and strengthen the custody during the treatment.the elderly in nursing homes, children in orphanages, and inmates in prisons are marginalized and vulnerable groups in the society. however, they live in congregated and relatively confined environment due to specific management, which significantly increase their risks exposed to covid-19. therefore, it is crucial to strictly implement routine cleaning and disinfection measures and publicize health protection knowledge to improve the awareness. the best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to the pathogens which requires all to work together and comply with the rules (fig. 1) . inter-/intra-national cooperation should be encouraged. each country should establish nationwide prevention and control strategies, and health departments should provide technical support to nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons. facilities should have sufficient management oversight of practice previously proposed on a daily basis and arrangements in place to ensure proper scrutiny of the well-being of the elderly, children, and inmates. apart from these, everyone should stay informed and vigilant, and update information from health departments or other official channels in a timely way. on the other hand, social activities and interactions are reduced dramatically during the covid-19 pandemic, and people in these facilities become much more socially isolated which might cause more psychological harm. therefore, close attention must be paid to their mental health, especially those who are isolated. moreover, the health monitoring of people in these facilities should be further improved at national scale. it is recommended to establish an access for nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons in order to directly report outbreak information to the health department.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.this work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china [grant number 81903377]. the authors would like to acknowledge all health-care workers involved in the diagnosis and treatment of patients and staffs involved nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons during the pandemic in the globe. we thank ms. dan ye, ms. yan liao, mr. xu yan, mr. yujing zhang and many other staff members at the china cdc for their contributions. the present perspective has not been subjected to the peer and policy review from china cdc, and therefore does not necessarily reflect the views of the china cdc and no official endorsement should be inferred.in order to timely response to covid-19 pandemic for nursing homes, orphanages, and 116 prisons, it is recommended to enhance risk control, strengthen daily prevention and 117 control measures such as personnel protection, environmental cleaning, and disinfection. personnel with abnormal body temperature, cough, fatigue, diarrhea, sore throat, or with 217 potential exposure to sars-cov-2 should be isolated in temporary isolation area. the elderly in nursing homes, children in orphanages, and inmates in prisons are 264 marginalized and vulnerable groups in the society. however, they live in congregated and 265 relatively confined environment due to specific management, which significantly increase 266 their risks exposed to covid-19. therefore, it is crucial to strictly implement routine 267 cleaning and disinfection measures and publicize health protection knowledge to improve 268 the awareness. the best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to the pathogens 269 which requires all to work together and comply with the rules (figure 1 ). inter-/intra- the outbreak caused by betacoronavirus sars-cov-2 that emerged in december 2019 in china and later spread to other countries has forced the world health organization to first declare a public health emergency of international concern at the end of january and then to announce a pandemic of covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) on march 11, 2020 [1] [2] [3] . the first cases in north america, oceania, and europe were reported in january 2020, while the spread of covid-19 to africa and south america was confirmed in february 2020 [4] . with epidemiological updates reported by different authorities daily, the outbreak has received enormous attention from the worldwide mass media [2] . however unavoidable, this has triggered an unintended backlash of public fear and panic, which in selected countries has preceded the emergence of the first confirmed covid-19 cases [5, 6] . considering that the majority of affected individuals, including those with fatal outcomes, are of asian origin, one could, sadly, expect an increase in asia-phobic reactions [7] . in the past, the epidemic of infectious diseases has also been associated with the backlash of discrimination and xenophobia, and this was also seen during the sars outbreak in 2003 [8] [9] [10] .there is no doubt that the surgical masks, which have recently been in short supply in china, have become one of the symbols of the current outbreak. wearing them has become very common in asia, particularly following the sars outbreak in 2002, and this practice has also crossed over into immigrant asian populations [11] . apart from preventing the spread of disease, they are worn for unrelated reasons such as to guard against air pollution and allergens, or as a social firewall [11] . however, the association between sars-cov-2 and the use of face masks may also be a potential source of public misassumption that any asian individual wearing them constitutes a threat of covid-19.to identify whether individuals of asian origin may experience any prejudice related to sars-cov-2, we have conducted an anonymous online survey of asian medicine students at poznan university of medical sciences in poland. the study, conducted before the first covid-19 case was identified in poland, explored the place and nature of such prejudice/xenophobic events, and determined the level at which they have affected the surveyed subjects. according to the central statistical office in poland, approximately 13,000 individuals of asian origin study in poland [12] , and therefore, the experiences of prejudice reported here may represent a part of the much wider problem on the national level.the study was conducted in february 2020 before the first case of covid-19 was confirmed in poland on march 4, 2020. to explore whether asian medical students in poland may face any prejudice/xenophobia related to an outbreak of covid-19, an anonymous, online survey based on a self-designed, structured questionnaire was conducted ( table 1) . as previously indicated, research that is based on an online questionnaire creates the opportunity to swiftly reach specific groups of individuals and ensures the safety of surveyed individuals under pandemic conditions, which is a recommended approach [13] [14] [15] . the anonymity of the study assured the elimination of embarrassment often seen in subjects experiencing discrimination and stigma [16] . the selected group included asian students at poznan university of medical sciences in poland who were directly invited to complete the survey via an e-mail message. all surveyed students were living in the city of poznań (greater poland voivodeship). table 1 . the structure of the questionnaire used in this study to measure covid-19 related prejudice in the group of asian students in poland the survey was completed by eighty-five medical students from asia (mean±sd age wearing the face mask was relatively common within the studied group, with 43.5% of students declaring that they wear them regularly, particularly in december, january and february ( figure 1 ). the primary reason behind their use was self-protection from catching infections from other people but also to prevent others from infection when the wearers themselves experienced symptoms; protection from air pollutants was also a frequently indicated motivation (figure 1 ). in poland, seasonal influenza and the lowest air quality peak a lower percentage of asian students also reported prejudice at restaurants (12.9%) andduring shopping (21.2%). this was mostly manifested by people staring at them, pointing with a finger and asking them if they carry coronavirus. some were also asked to leave restaurants due to other customers' complaints or felt some public pressure in the form of discouragement from touching products available in the market. the most frequently selected score on a likert scale for situations at restaurants and shops was respectively 5 (median; iqr: 5; 4-5) and 2 (median; iqr: 3; 2-4).prejudice was also experienced in health service units in which medical students have classes or which they visit as patients. approximately one-fifth of those surveyed (21.2%)reported the terrified reactions of other patients after encountering them, and being asked whether they carry coronavirus. some patients also questioned the supervising medical doctors for allowing asian students to do clinical rounds and some students were also told to remove a face masks when they visit patients to avoid unnecessary tension. moreover, 6 medical staff, namely one nurse, expressed her fear over catching a virus when withdrawing a student's blood for lab tests. these reactions had an obvious negative effect on asian students, since 5 was the most frequently selected score when evaluating them on the likert scale (median; iqr: 3; 2-5).last but not least, nearly one quarter (24.7%) of asian students have faced preconceptions related to covid-19 at the university where they study. the observed reactions included other students stepping away, starring continuously, making xenophobic comments, assuming that wearing a face mask is equal to being positive for sars-cov-2 and opening the doors with a tissue after an asian student has touched the handle. moreover, some lecturers have made some jokes about coronavirus which were not considered funny or have asked students to remove the face masks despite explanations that the mask was due to flu symptoms and for the protection of classmates. again, these situations had a negative effect on most of the surveyed students -a score of 5 was most frequently selected (median; iqr: 4; 3-5).in conclusion, the reactions presented here clearly show that asian students in regions yet unaffected by sars-cov-2 could have already experienced an uncomfortable level of prejudice in the public spaces encompassing transport, gastronomy, shopping, health services and university. such behaviors can particularly affect those individuals of asian origin who are tending to wear face masks. overall, these findings underscore the responsibility of different parties in overcoming and preventing discrimination during outbreaks of infectious diseases. firstly, universities that host asian students and staff from abroad should support their students during the outbreak (and any other future epidemic emerging from asian region) and protect them from harmful misconceptions. this may be achieved by providing reinforcing statements as well as educational campaigns related both to the outbreak and the true reasons behind the use of face masks [17] . the preventive measures, as well as policy development and implementation, should also be undertaken by those involved in the management of international student exchange programs, and by national and international authorities for higher education. to maximally increase output, mass and social media should be employed in undertaken actions [18] . the successful implementation of anti-discriminatory practices requires to follow advice on intercultural communication, also when reporting and visualizing public health risks [19, 20] .coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has struck the world, with over 1 million people confirmed with the virus and 56,985 attributed deaths as of april 5, 2020 [1] . the causative organism is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), which belongs to the betacoronavirus genus [2, 3] . however, compared to previous coronavirus infections such as sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), covid-19 has shown a higher transmission rate and rapid progression over a short duration of time [4, 5] . due to the alarming level of spread and severity of disease, the world health organization (who) has declared covid-19 a pandemic.korea was the one of the earliest countries to experience a large covid-19 outbreak. since the first patient was diagnosed as covid-19 positive on january 20, 2020, 10,237 patients have been diagnosed with the infection through april 5th, 2020 [6] . among them, 14 patients, 8 healthcare workers, and 2 caregivers were diagnosed with covid-19 in a hemodialysis (hd) unit. hd patients receive treatment three times a week in a limited space and are particularly vulnerable to infection due to impaired immunity and environmental susceptibility [7] . our previous experience fighting mers [8] and developing infection control guidelines for hd facilities [9] was useful as we promptly responded to the covid-19 outbreak. this special article introduces our effort to prevent further viral transmission within hd facilities and describes key recommendations for clinical practice.when the first index case was confirmed in korea on january 20, 2020, the joint committee was established immediately to respond to the outbreak and prevent transmission of the disease among hd facilities. the joint committee was comprised of nephrologists from the korean society of nephrology and the korean society of dialysis therapy together with the korea centers for disease control & prevention (kcdc). the committee established and announced the first draft of clinical practice guidelines on january 31, 2020. in addition, the committee delivered policies of the kcdc to regional nephrologists and arranged for patient referral and transfer together with government authorities. owing to the effort of the committee, the nephrologists could reference the manual without frustration when the first case was confirmed in an hd facility on february 19, 2020.the clinical practice guidelines for hd facilities were developed based on 'covid-19 response guidelines' from the kcdc [10] . since the first release on january 31, 2020, the guidelines have been revised twice as case definitions and response guidelines from the kcdc changed. table 1 . key recommendations from covid-19 clinical practice guidelines for hd facilities 1. standard, contact, and droplet precautions should be appropriately performed by all patients and healthcare workers in hemodialysis facilities.the waiting room or resting area should be closed, and surgical masks and hand sanitizer should always be available for patients to use before entering the hd unit. 2. all patients are recommended to check their body temperature and respiratory symptoms before coming to an hd facility. if they have a fever ≥ 37.5°c or respiratory symptoms such as dry cough, sore throat, or shortness of breath, they should not visit the hd unit without notifying healthcare workers. 3. a patient with a suspected or confirmed covid-19 case should be transferred to a healthcare facility with an isolation room and portable dialysis machine. a transportation and management plan should be established in consultation with the public health center and infection control division of the hospital. 4. contacts are defined as hd patients and healthcare workers who have been in contact with a confirmed case. contacts should monitor body temperature and respiratory symptoms every day. those without fever or respiratory symptoms should be subjected to self-quarantine and hd with cohort isolation for 14 days from the last exposure. all transport between home and the hd facility should be provided by the disease prevention authority. 5. inter-hospital transfer is essentially prohibited during an outbreak. if referral to another hospital is inevitable, the attending physician should transfer patients after careful discussion with the regional disease prevention authority and designated hospital. patient transfer should be performed only when there is solid evidence that the patient is not infected.covid-19, coronavirus disease 2019; hd, hemodialysis.www.krcp-ksn.orgthe committee subsequently announced a second amendment of the guidelines on february 20, 2020 and the third amendment on march 10, 2020 (supplementary materials, available online; http://www.ksn.or.kr/ rang_board/list.html?num=1622&code=notice). the key recommendations of the clinical practice guidelines are summarized in table 1 . fig. 1 depicts the flowchart for patient screening and management for covid-19 in hd units.case definitions are from the 'covid-19 response guidelines' of the kcdc, with cases classified as confirmed case, suspected case, patient under investigation, and contacts (table 2) . a confirmed case refers to a person who has tested positive for the covid-19 pathogen irrespective of clinical signs and symptoms. a suspected case refers to a person who develops a fever ≥ 37.5°c or respiratory symptoms within 14 days after contact with a confirmed patient. a patient under investigation refers to a suspected case based on a physician's opinion or one who develops a fever ≥ 37.5°c or respiratory symptoms within 14 days of travelling to a region or country with local transmission of covid-19. lastly, contacts within hd facilities are determined after epidemiological investigation by the central and local government under the guidance of the kcdc and are defined in more detail as one of the following: 1) a patient who received hd treatment at the same time as a confirmed case, 2) a patient who received hd treatment without proper disinfection after hd of a confirmed case, or 3) a patient or healthcare worker who was exposed to a confirmed case within 2 meters.all medical staffs, hd patients, and their caregivers should be educated about personal hygiene, including washing hands, wearing masks, and avoiding unnecessary contact. surgical masks and hand sanitizer should be available at the entrance of the hd unit. healthcare workers, hd patients, and their caregivers should perform standard, contact, and droplet precautions, including hand hygiene and wearing masks. each hd unit should prepare an environment suited to minimize infection hd patients should be classified as confirmed case, suspected case, contact, or patient under investigation according to the history of contact with a confirmed case and covid-19 related symptoms (fever ≥ 37.5°c or respiratory symptoms such as cough, sore throat, or shortness of breath). patients should only be released from quarantine if all related symptoms improve and a covid-19 test is negative. transmission, such as keeping proper distance between beds. the waiting room or resting area should be closed and each hd patient should come in at a reserved time to minimize patient-to-patient contact. before arrival at the hd unit, all hd patients should be asked about their prior visit to other countries and domestic outbreak regions, any patient contact history, and their clinical symptoms.if a patient is classified as a suspected case or patient under investigation, they should contact the local public health center or kcdc call center (☎area number+120 or ☎1339) and follow the instructions. in addition, if the patient has a fever, cough, or shortness of breath, they should call first and let the healthcare workers know about their symptoms before they visit the hd unit. all hd patients should enter the hd unit under the permission of the physician only if they do not have suspicious signs or symptoms of covid-19. it is most important that suspected or confirmed covid-19 patients do not enter the hd unit. each hd unit should also prevent secondary transmission of infection by restricting caregivers or visitors in the hd unit.lastly, inter-hospital transfer should be essentially prohibited during the outbreak unless the transfer of the patient to the other institution has no risk of infection transmission. if a confirmed or suspected case should be transferred to another hospital, the hd unit should consult in advance with the regional public health center and the hospital that will receive the patient.when a suspected case visits the hd unit, the patient should wear a surgical mask and be isolated temporarily until a decision can be made about their care. if the hd unit has the capacity of performing dialysis therapy in a negative-pressure isolation room with a portable dialysis machine, the hd unit may perform isolation dialysis therapy until the patient is released from quarantine. however, if the hd unit cannot accommodate isolation dialysis, as is most often the case, the patient should be transferred to another hospital with a facility for isolation dialysis. each hd unit should establish a transfer plan in consultation with the regional public health center or the infection control department and should secure a separate route to evacuate the patient from the hd unit. transportation between the hd unit and the referral hospital should be determined by the regional public health center. after transfer of the suspected case, the hd room and other spaces where the patient stayed should be appropriately disinfected immediately.when a patient is confirmed or suspected to have cov-id-19, they should be isolated in a single room with negative pressure. the hd patient should receive hd therapy regularly and separately from other uninfected hd pa- any of the following: ① a person who is suspected of having covid-19 by their physician (e.g., pneumonia of unknown cause) ② a person who develops a fever ≥ 37.5°c or respiratory symptoms such as coughing or difficulty breathing within 14 days of travelling to a country with local transmission b of covid-19 such as china (including hong kong and macau) ③ a person with an epidemiological link to the collective outbreak of covid-19 in korea who develops a fever ≥ 37.5°cor respiratory symptoms such as coughing or difficulty breathing within 14 days contactcontacts are determined by epidemiological investigation and include the following: ① a patient who received hd treatment at the same time as a confirmed case ② a patient who received hd treatment without proper disinfection after hd of a confirmed case ③ a patient or healthcare worker who was exposed to a confirmed case within 2 meters www.krcp-ksn.org tients. therefore, the confirmed/suspected case should receive hd therapy in an isolated room with a portable dialysis machine. healthcare workers who perform the hd therapy should wear personal protective equipment (ppe) that includes a mask (kf94 or n95 respirator mask with a highly efficient filter function), gloves, goggles or facial shield, and gown (level d). healthcare workers should perform hand hygiene before and after contacting the patient and after removing ppe. the dialysis machine should be disinfected after use according to the manufacturer's recommendations. the room should be properly cleaned and disinfected after each dialysis session and should be emptied for a few hours before the next use. all medical waste should be disposed of according to relevant guidelines. the confirmed/suspected case can be released from quarantine if symptoms improve and tests for covid-19 are negative twice with a 24-hour interval.if respiratory symptoms later become aggravated, a confirmatory test can be repeated until symptoms improve.patients under investigation must not enter the hd unit but should contact the local public health center or kcdc call center (☎area number+120 or ☎1339) and visit a screening center to receive a covid-19 test. if such a patient has already visited the hd unit, healthcare workers should secure an evacuation route to ensure the patient does not contact other patients. the patient under investigation should not receive hd therapy until covid-19 test results turn out negative. the patient should receive hd therapy apart from other patients after the test turns negative. if respiratory symptoms improve and tests are negative for twice with a 24-hour interval, the patient can receive hd therapy together with other patients. however, if symptoms persist, the patient should maintain separate hd therapy, even with a twice negative test.asymptomatic contacts who have had contact with a confirmed or suspected case should receive screening tests for covid-19 and be referred to the hd with cohort isolation when the test results are negative. an hd with cohort isolation is a method of dialysis therapy provided to asymptomatic contacts in the affected hos-pital at a different time apart from other patients. if the contact patient develops fever or respiratory symptoms, they are classified as a suspected case and should follow the respective response measures. healthcare workers should wear ppe, including masks (kf94 or n95), gloves, goggles or facial shield, and a disposable waterproof gown. during hd therapy, standard, contact, and droplet precautions should be followed. hd with cohort isolation should be maintained for 14 days from the date of contact. all asymptomatic contacts should receive a covid-19 screening test on the 13th day from the date of contact and may be released from cohort isolation if the tests are negative.the covid-19 pandemic has posed a global health threat, affecting over 1 million people globally with thousands of deaths. patients on hd treatment are more vulnerable to infection due to low immune function and high comorbidities. since they receive routine treatment, usually three times a week, in the same hd unit, all possible measures should be taken to prevent and eradicate infection transmission there. recently, a few guidelines from affected countries have been published [5, [11] [12] [13] . although they describe general principles to prevent viral transmission in hd units, they are too broad for real world application. the main difference in our korean guidelines is the classification by transmission risk and associated recommended strategy. the current guidelines direct clinicians and patients to follow measures of prevention, protection, screening, and isolation, and describe the circumstances for release from quarantine. we hope these guidelines play a key role in the prevention of secondary transmission of covid-19 during this pandemic.covid-19 clinical practice guidelines for hd facilities were developed by a joint committee comprised of members from the korean society of nephrology, the korean society of dialysis therapy, and the korean center for disease control & prevention. we hereby declare that the authors and members of the korean society of nephrology covid-19 task force participated in the develop-ment and amendment of these guidelines but have not received any research grants that could potentially influence their publication.reporting an effective summary and further indications about the measures that should be taken in practice under the light of the italian legislation. at present, the challenge is to produce scientifically sound knowledge, appropriate tools, and effective methodologies, by coordinating the initiatives of different scientific associations, with the final aim to effectively transfer them to employers and workers.keywords: covid-19; occupational health; occupational hygiene; sars-cov-2; workers' health the number of people infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), i.e. the virus causing coronavirus disease , is dramatically increasing worldwide since it was first identified and described in china on 31 december 2019 (who, 2020a) , reaching therefore the size of a public health emergency of international concern (who, 2020b) and then of a pandemic (who, 2020c) . at the time of writing (29 march 2020), the total global number of covid-19 cases has surpassed 570 000 (>26 000 deaths). italy ranks first both in terms of number of covid-19 cases (86 498) and number of deaths (9136) (who, 2020d) . [at the time of reviewing the manuscript (7 april 2020) the total global number of covid-19 cases has surpassed 1 200 000 (>67 000 deaths) and italy ranks third in terms of number of covid-19 cases (128 948) and first for number of deaths (15 889) (who, 2020e).] in italy, the first person-to-person transmission was reported on 21 february 2020; since then, legal measures regarding the covid-19 emergency have been issued by the italian government, civil protection department, health minister, the 'istituto superiore di sanità' (national institute of health) other ministries and regional governments. the list of these legal measures is continuously updated and is available at presidenza del consiglio dei ministri-dipartimento della protezione civile (2020a) and the chronology of the main steps and actions taken by the italian government for the containment of the covid-19 epidemiological emergency is available at presidenza del consiglio dei ministri-dipartimento della protezione civile (2020b). these extraordinary measures initially concerned the interruption of air traffic to and from china, the organization of repatriation flights, quarantines for italian travellers returning from china, and strict controls at international airports' arrival terminals. later, more stringent measures have been applied (including limitation of the mobility of residents, suspension of school activities and public events, closure of commercial and non-essential production activities), initially only in the areas of the first outbreaks, and then progressively to the whole national territory. spina et al. (2020) already documented the response to the covid-19 outbreak of the emergency medical system of the of the area where the outbreak occurred (i.e. metropolitan area of milan, lombardy region, italy); similar measures have been then extended to the whole national territory.as highlighted by semple and cherrie (2020) , such a wide spread of covid-19 has led to anxiety and concern among workers who worry about becoming infected during their work, and/or infecting co-workers, customers and family members as a result. in this regard, despite the many uncertainties about how transmission of respiratory infections like covid-19 occur within workplace settings, to date it is assumed that contagion during work activities can be lower or higher depending on several factors: e.g. the work sector; the need for close contact-less than 1 m-of people known to be or suspected of being infected; or the need for repeated or extended contact with persons known to be or suspected of being infected. of course, the risk of infection at work adds to the risk of being infected outside the occupational context. thus, (i) very high exposure risk jobs are those with high potential for exposure to known or suspected sources of covid-19 during specific medical, post-mortem, or laboratory procedures (e.g. healthcare, laboratory and morgue workers performing aerosolgenerating procedures); (ii) high exposure risk jobs are those with high potential for exposure to known or suspected sources of covid-19 (i.e. healthcare delivery and support staff, medical transport and mortuary workers exposed to known or suspected covid-19 patients); (iii) medium exposure risk jobs include those that require frequent contact with other co-workers, the general public and/or close contact with people who may be infected with sars-cov-2, but who are not known or suspected covid-19 patients (e.g. schools, highpopulation-density work, environments, some highvolume retail settings); (iv) lower exposure risk jobs do not require contact with other co-workers, the general public, and/or frequent close contact with people known to be, or suspected of being, infected with sars-cov-2 (osha, 2020).thus, for work sectors in which a low or medium risk of contagion is defined, all the prevention and protection provisions established with national and regional rules and directives, valid for the general population for the purpose of limiting the spread of the virus (i.e. social distancing, proper hands hygiene, respiratory hygiene, etc.) (who, 2020f) should be applied. further, regular housekeeping practices, including routine cleaning and disinfecting of surfaces, equipment, and other elements of the work environment should be adopted. regular cleaning with neutral detergent, followed by disinfection is recommended, using hospital disinfectants active against viruses, 0.1% sodium hypochlorite solution or a 70% ethanol solution (ecdc, 2020) . for working conditions that foresee a medium risk of contagion (and in particular in cases where the practice of social distancing is not strictly applicable), the use of personal protective equipment (ppe) for the protection of the respiratory tract [such as medical-surgical masks or filter masks at least as protective as a us national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh)-certified n95, european union (eu) standard ffp2, or equivalent] must also be considered.for jobs where an occupational biological risk exists a priori, due to deliberate use of biological agents and/ or because of the presence of biological risk inherent in the type of activity carried out (i.e. those jobs that were classified as of very high or high risk of exposure), it is advisable that the employers-with the support of professionals in the field of occupational hygiene and risk assessment-check whether in their risk assessment procedure, the prevention and protection measures already adopted are sufficiently adequate for the purpose of controlling exposure to sars-cov-2 and its transmission. for these types of work, further control measures are envisaged, which follow the classic hierarchy of containment/isolation of the risk factor, use of engineering measures to favour the proper ventilation of the rooms, the definition of procedural and organizational measures and the use of suitable ppe (e.g. disposable gowns and gloves, eye protection, and respiratory protection) (ecdc, 2020; istituto superiore di sanità, 2020; osha, 2020; who, 2020g,h).concerning the use of respiratory ppe, several references invite a rational use of these resources, also considering their limited availability and the possibility for structures in need of such equipment to be in conditions of shortage and lack of supplies: thus, ppe such as ffp2 or n95 masks (or other analogous ppe with equivalent classification, such as reported in cdc, 2020a) should be used specifically and primarily by healthcare workers involved in aerosol-generating procedures (such as tracheal intubation, non-invasive ventilation, tracheotomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, manual ventilation before intubation, and bronchoscopy), which, as told have been associated with an increased risk of transmission of coronavirus (ecdc, 2020; istituto superiore di sanità, 2020; osha, 2020; who, 2020g,h). regarding the use of this equipment by other categories of workers or by the general population (not occupationally exposed), the general guidelines distributed by authoritative bodies on the behaviour to be followed during the virus emergency should be primarily considered (who, 2020g). the utmost attention in the use and management of medical-surgical masks and respiratory ppe is recommended, also to compensate for any supply problems. in this sense, various indications have been provided for the rational use of these resources in workplaces to meet the needs of masks and ppe in conditions of limited availability, generally by suggesting priority criteria for the allocation of available resources, according to the activities to be carried out, but also suggesting the limited re-use and the extended use of ppe in certain circumstances and ensuring compliance with some rules of good practice (cdc, 2020a,b; ecdc, 2020; who, 2020h). based on the information currently available, we are not aware of recognized efficacy methods that have been adequately studied to safely disinfect or sterilize disposable ppe with a facial filter. numerous studies have been conducted showing that some efficient disinfection methods are able to make infectious agents non-viable for some models of respirators (viscusi et al., 2009 (viscusi et al., , 2011 bergman et al., 2010; fisher et al., 2010 heimbuch et al., 2011 heimbuch et al., , 2014 lindsley et al., 2015; mills et al., 2018) , although the effect of these methods on the level of degradation of the materials that constitute the ppe (and in particular on the filter itself is not known) (bailar et al., 2006) have not been determined. individual ppe manufacturers may provide reliable recommendations on this particular issue. disinfection methods can lead to ppe alterations which can affect the level of protection. these changes may relate to performance (e.g. filtration efficiency) or adaptability (e.g. degradation of laces, nose strap material, strap accessories) or a combination of these (e.g. metal components which, when heated, damage the filter material around to them). finally, it should be noted that recently pilot studies have been carried out to identify treatment methods for ffp2 masks which do not damage the masks' structure, and which make it possible to re-use them under certain conditions. at present, these methodologies have not been sufficiently testedin particular for covid-19-and the results, although interesting, do not lead to generalizable conclusions on a large scale (rivm, 2020) .in italy, concerning the current shortage of medical masks and respiratory protective devices, legislative decree no. 9/2020 (art. 34, paragraph 3,) disposes that 'in relation to the covid-19 emergency, in accordance with the guidelines of the world health organization and in accordance with current scientific evidence, it is allowed to resort to surgical masks, as a suitable device to protect health workers; masks without the ce marking can also be used after evaluation by the istituto superiore di sanità'. further, law n. 18 (17 march 2020) also disposes the extraordinary and derogation validation of the ppe; in particular article 15 of this decree dictates extraordinary provisions for the management of the covid-19 emergency and attributes to inail (the national institute for insurance against accidents at work) the function of extraordinary validation and in derogation of the ppe (the ppe affected by the provision are only those functional to mitigate the risks connected to the current covid-19) (presidenza del consiglio dei ministri-dipartimento della protezione civile, 2020a,b).however, the decision to adopt procedural measures for the rational use of ppe, involving for example prolonged use or limited re-use of ppe for the respiratory tract, should be made on a case-by-case basis by professionals managing the institution's prevention and protection programme (in accordance with the indications provided by the competent authorities), taking into account the known characteristics of the sars-cov-2 and some specific conditions (e.g. number of devices available, rate of use, etc.) of the considered scenario. in any case, all deviations from the standard and consolidated regulatory practice must be taken only as temporary emergency measures.for what has been said, in addition to the scientific research topics already suggested by semple and cherrie (2020) concerning (i) the relevant importance of inhaled exposure compared with surface contamination and hand-to-peri-oral routes in the transmission of covid-19; (ii) the efficiency of different types of ppe in reducing both inhaled and surface transmission; (iii) simple structural and behavioural changes in the workplace to be encouraged to reduce the risk of transmission, we believe it is useful to address the need for professional expertise in the field of occupational hygiene. this is urgently needed, in particular in this emergency context, since the available evidence, as well as the indications that are provided by numerous international bodies, by research groups and by the scientific literature, as well as the legal provisions are constantly and rapidly evolving, it is of fundamental importance to be able to effectively analyse and rationalize all these inputs, to provide very precise and focussed indications to health, safety and environmental managers and prevention operators in workplaces, that would struggle to manage a constantly changing situation. in this regard, not only a constant update of the regulatory situation is needed, but also the formulation and effective distribution to all the stakeholders of operational guidance, to translate general indications into actual operating procedures and implementation tools to be adopted in workplaces, in choosing the most correct protection measures to be adopted to prevent the exposure to the risk of contagion and to protect the health of the workers. the professional expertise of occupational hygienists will also be fundamental in the phase following the current emergency phase, once the limitations in force today will be gradually revoked and commercial and non-essential production activities will start again: at this stage it will still be necessary to guarantee adequate conditions health and safety for workers and the whole public to avoid a new spread of infections.we believe it useful to underline the fundamental role of scientific associations in the field of occupational hygiene and prevention, which must play this fundamental role of guide for prevention professionals. for this reason, the italian association of industrial hygienists (aidii-associazione italiana degli igienisti industriali) published documents containing operational guidelines to provide correct and constantly updated information for: (i) workers employed in essential activities (with low and medium risk of contagion), (ii) health workers and other workers at high or very high risk contagion, and (iii) for the correct use and management of ppe for workers and for the population in general. these documents are based on the systematic review of the scientific literature, but also on national and international regulations, guidelines, technical reports on the practices to be implemented to contain the risk of covid-19 in occupational environments and healthcare facilities. these documents are regularly updated and freely accessible on the website (www.aidii.it) and the social networks of the association and have been distributed to all its members. it is necessary to point out that the documents produced are not intended to replace those produced by authoritative bodies but intend to support them by reporting an effective summary and enhancing them. they recommend measures that are to be taken in light of the italian legislation on the subject to prevent and protect workers' health and provide instructions for specific aspects (such as detailed procedures for correctly wearing and handling ppe). we agree with semple and cherrie (2020) that there is considerable expertise in the occupational hygiene and exposure science and professional communities that can contribute helping employers and workers to contain and delay the spread of covid-19: the challenge is to produce appropriate knowledge, tools, and methodologies, possibly by coordinating the initiatives of different scientific associations, and to effectively transfer them to employers and workers.at present, humanity is threatened by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) pandemic. the risk of severe infection with the virus depends heavily on physical factors of the infected persons and the quality of the medical system. according to a recent study the estimated infection fatality ratio (ifr), averaged over all age-groups including those who don't have symptoms, is between 0.2% -1.6% with an average of 0.66% (verity et al., 2020) . these numbers look small, and the fatality risk may seem acceptable, and therefore the danger is often marginalized. this is surprising considering that the apollo crew, the space shuttle astronauts and the allied soldiers during the 2003 iraq war took a deadly risk of this magnitude. only very few people take such risks voluntarily and with full consciousness. for comparison, the lethal risk of a fatal accident with a commercial aircraft was 1:7700000 in 2008 and even such a small risk is not taken by some people. considering that the ifr of the seasonal flu is about 0.04 -0.1% (centers for disease, 2010) or even much lower (wong et al. 2013 ) the mortality rate of sars-cov-2 appears to be significantly higher than for influenza flu. although the numbers for sars-cov-2 are quite preliminary and the estimates may drop over time (verity et al., 2020 , faust, et al., 2020 it is quite clear that the strategy of herd immunization of the population is not an option, as the number of victims would be far too high. great hopes for coping with the pandemic currently rest on the development of a vaccine. unfortunately, it is completely uncertain when an effective and well-tolerated vaccine will be generally available to contain the pandemic. drugs such as chloroquine, remdesivir, lopinavir and ritonavir are also considered to be great sources of hope in the fight against the coronavirus disease 2019 (grein at al., 2020) . however, even if one of the drugs should prove to be effective, there is no guarantee that the drug can be made available to the world population in sufficient quantities. in addition, it is possible that, despite the use of drugs, going through a severe course of disease can lead to lifelong neuropsychiatric sequelae (troyer et al., 2020 and zandifar & badrfam, 2020) or cause other diseases (ackermann et al., 2020 and varga et al., 2020) .containing the pandemic is therefore the only viable way to quench the spread of the virus. but containing the pandemic is a difficult task as about 44% of sars-cov-2 infections are caused by people with a presymptomatic and asymptomatic course of infection (he et al., 2020) . therefore, due to the absence of symptoms, many people do not know that they are infected and are spreading the virus and these people make it very difficult to trace the transmission chains. furthermore, about 10% of infected people are responsible for 80% of infections (kupferschmidt, 2020 and lloyd-smith et al., 2005) . people who have many social contacts at work or in their private lives and who do not protect themselves and others sufficiently by observing the rules of distance and hygiene, or who consider the risk of the virus to be low, appear to be a serious problem in the actual pandemic. for these reasons, the government must act at various levels to avert great harm to the population. the effectiveness of the containment strategy depends on 1. how societies are able to protect themselves personally against infection through hygiene, social distance and technical aids such as protective masks, glasses, gloves, 2. how well the infrastructure is in place to identify the infection chains and effectively contain the spread, e.g. through mobile data collection, isolation or a lockdown, 3. how well the seriously ill can be treated in hospitals.in view of these prospects, it seems necessary for the time being to prevent the spread of the virus and to treat those infected as well as possible. in order to ensure the latter, the capacities of the health system must not be overloaded. but it is clear that this condition means that the pandemic will last for years without a vaccine. to not overload the medical system, governments are pursuing the concept of containment by means of a lockdown because it proved successful in st. louis during the spanish flu of 1918. this approach is quite effective when the population obeys the rules, but the impact on the state, economy and society is devastating when the lockdown lasts longer than a few weeks. therefore, this concept is not a viable way to contain the pandemic in the long term. consequently, it is necessary to fight the infection where it occurs.understanding the transmission pathways is the key to finding effective measures to block the infection and to reliably protect healthcare workers and the population. contact infection were initially assumed to be the main transmission route of sars-cov-2. today, hygiene measures and the avoidance of shaking hands effectively prevent this path of infection. droplet infection is currently assumed to be the main transmission route over short distances . since this path of infection is via the air, the rules of distance are effective (soper, 1919 and wells et al., 1936) . but it is also known that sars-cov-2 can remain infectious in aerosols for more than 3 hours, at least under laboratory conditions at high humidity (van doremalen et al., 2020 and pyankov et al., 2018) . it is therefore conceivable that infections can also occur under special conditions over long distances, provided that the local virus concentration reaches the minimum infection dose due to poor air exchange in rooms.a significant proportion of the aerosol exhaled by humans has a diameter of less than 10 μm (johnson et al., 2011) when breathing, speaking, singing and coughing. it is also known that the size and number of droplets increases with the volume of the voice (asadi et al. 2019 and loudon & roberts, 1968) and it is known that upper respiratory tract diseases increase the production of aerosol particles (lee et al., 2019) . water droplets of this size evaporate within a few seconds at normal humidity (liu et al. 2014 and rensink 2004) . droplets with a diameter of 10 μm for instance are evaporated after about 1 s at 50% relative humidity and larger droplets sink quickly to the ground and evaporate (marin et al., 2016 . if the viruses are released as "naked" viruses together with the salt after the droplets have evaporated, the spatial concentration decreases rapidly over time, as the viruses no longer move in a correlated manner but quickly separate due to the chaotic turbulent flow motion. the viral load thus decreases rapidly in time and space, making infections over long distances or long periods of time increasingly unlikely. for this reason it is most important to understand the transmission of the virus over short distances.hygiene regulations and social distancing are very effective in blocking short distance infections. during the lockdown, the distance rules can usually be adhered to, but what happens when the actual lockdown is over and the people meet again in a confined space? then additional effective and efficient protection is essential to stabilise infection rates. since the viruses are spread by contact and droplet infection, technical devices are required that effectively intervene in the chain of infection and effectively block infection. an effective protection is the respiratory mask as known since 100 years (soper, 1919) . the sars outbreak in hong kong suggested that the use of simple face masks may have contributed to an overall reduction in the incidence of viral respiratory infections lo et al., 2005) . another study has shown that even a simple surgical mask can effectively reduce sars infection (seto et al., 2003) . these results are supported by recent articles (leung et al., 2020b , howard et al., 2020 .it was surprizing that for months, who, the cdc and many public health professionals in europe advised against wearing face masks unless someone has covid-19 or cares for someone who has covid-19 (feng et al., 2020 and leung et al., 2020a) . this recommendation was based on three allegations. first, it was said that there is no scientific evidence that face masks can protect against droplet / aerosol infections. second, it was argued that the population will not be able to wear the masks properly. third, the statement that people will feel safe when wearing masks and then become careless and take risks was frequently made. at the same time, these experts have stressed that health professionals urgently need face masks to protect themselves effectively. this contradiction has created uncertainty among the population and called into question the credibility of the experts. it is a fact that particle filtration masks are recognized as legal occupational safety equipment and that the wearing of these masks in contaminated areas is required by labor law. there is therefore no doubt that these masks, when used correctly, provide effective protection within the specification range. the effectiveness of simple mouth-and-nose covers and surgical masks is less well accepted. the international council of nurses (icn) estimates that, on average, 7% of all confirmed cases of covid-19 are among healthcare workers (icn, 2020) . this illustrates that surgical masks may not provide the reliable protection against droplet infection, as anticipated. it is therefore very important to distinguish clearly between the different mask types when talking about their protective function. unfortunately, this was not done sufficiently by the virologists and politically responsible persons in the initial phase of the pandemic. also the second argument is questionable. why should the people of western societies not be able to protect themselves as many people in east asian countries have long been doing? many people in east asian countries have already recognized through numerous pandemics that proper masks work effectively. it does not seem right to regard the western population as unteachable or even incapable. the third argument is also false, because the opposite is true according to scientific studies (kimberly et al., 2020 , scott et al., 2007 and ruedl et al., 2012 . if people protect themselves personally, they have dealt with the danger and therefore they benefit from the protection of the safety device and from the less risky behaviour due to insight. the reason why these facts were not appreciated by the experts is due to the attempt to prevent competition for protective masks between medical personnel and the public.in the meantime, the general perception of the protective effect of face masks has become generally accepted. in the usa, the cdc has changed its guidelines and recommended that the public wear fabric face masks. in other countries, too, it is now recommended to protect themselves with suitable masks. however, it is recommended by governments and professionals to wear only simple mouse-and-nose covers that can be manufactured by the people themselves or surgical masks to avoid distribution battles with medical staff for certified and comfortable particle filtration masks. but the big question is, how effectively these homemade mouth-and-nose covers and surgical masks can protect against droplet infection. the answer is highly relevant to guide public behaviour (leung et al., 2020a) . one study suggests that a surgical face mask and masks made of dense cotton fabrics apparently cannot effectively prevent the spread of sars-cov-2 into the environment through the coughing of patients with covid-19 (bae et al., 2020) . another study suggests that any mask, no matter how efficiently it filters or how well it is sealed, has minimal effect unless used in conjunction with other preventive measures such as isolation of infected cases, immunisation, good respiratory etiquette and regular hand hygiene (kwok et al., 2015) . these findings contradict the results in , lo et al., 2005 and seto et al., 2003 . due to the contradiction, it is understandable that experts in the media have expressed the opinion that there is no scientific evidence for the effectiveness of masks and therefore the wearing of masks in public was not recommended for a long time. the fallacy of politicians and virologists, however, was to generalize the results obtained with simple mouth-and-nose covers to all masks without differentiation.in order to clarify whether or to what extent these masks offer effective protection against droplet infection and to understand why research results differ on this simple scientific question, we have carried out these tests. first, we analyse the flow blockage caused by surgical masks when coughing, as this is essential for the protection of others and because coughing is a typical symptom of covid-19. second, we qualify the effectiveness of different filter materials and masks to determine the protection ability against droplets. finally, we prove the effect of gap flows at the edge of surgical and particle filtrating respiratory masks. in contrast to the medical studies cited, we apply engineering research methods of fluid mechanics. the use of this research approach has several reasons: firstly, the detachment of droplets in the lungs and throat and their convective transport through the mouth into the atmosphere until inhalation as well as the deposit and evaporation of droplets is a purely fluid mechanical process. secondly, the effective blocking of the flow with suitable masks is a research subject of fluid mechanics. thirdly, the filtering of particles from an air stream with the aid of suitable materials is also a purely fluid mechanical problem as well as the gap flow. finally, this approach also has the advantage that the results are reproducible in a statistical sense, since the boundary conditions are well defined. we are not studying whether an infection really occurs in a special case, but whether an infection is physically possible in general.in the first sets of the experiments, outlined in section 3.1, the flow field generated by coughing without and with a surgical mask is examined as coughing sets the air strongly in motion and because coughing is a typical symptom of covid-19. to measure the flow field quantitatively in space and time we use particle image velocimetry (piv) (raffel et al., 2018) . for the measurements a 8 m long testing room with a cross section of 2 m × 2 m was seeded with dehs (di-ethyl-hexyl-sebacat) tracer particles with a mean diameter of 1 μm (kähler et al., 2003) . dehs was used as these droplets do not evaporate as quickly as water droplets. the tracer particles provided by a seeding generator (pivtec gmbh, germany) were illuminated in a light-sheet generated with a frequency doubled nd:yag laser (spitlight piv 1000-15, innolas laser gmbh, germany). the light-sheet was oriented normal to the mouth opening and parallel to the symmetry axis of the body and the longitudinal axis of the room. the light scattered by the tracer particles were recorded with back illuminated scientific cmos cameras (pco.edge 5.5, pco ag, germany) equipped with zeiss distagon t* lens with a focal length of 35 mm and 50 mm. the triggering of the system components was achieved with a programmable timing unit (lavision gmbh, germany). the recorded series of images were evaluated with a commercial computer program (davis, lavision gmbh, germany). these quantitative piv measurements allow to determine the area that can be contaminated due to the exhaled air, the velocity of the exhaled droplets and the turbulence properties of the flow.in the second set of experiments, discussed in section 3.2, common household materials currently used by the population and some medical staff to make simple masks at home were tested but also a surgical mask and a ffp3 mask to visualize their filtering properties. the tested materials are given in table 1 . for the investigation, a test set-up was installed which largely fulfilled the officially prescribed test conditions in europe (din en 149). the materials were installed one after the other in a fixed position in front of the inlet of a rectangular flow channel with a cross-section of 0.1 m × 0.1 m, as shown in fig. 1 . the material was held in place with a special clamping device that seals tightly to the duct to avoid leakage flows. to explore the filtering performance of the different materials the movement of small aerosol droplets passing through the media was observed visually in front of and behind the filter material with a digital camera. we only use droplets whose diameter is less than 2 μm, since the removal of the smallest droplets in an air stream is the greatest challenge in mask development. if these droplets can be effectively filtered out effectively, then all droplets larger than 2 μm can also be filtered. the droplets were generated from dehs with an aerosol generator (agf 2.0, palas gmbh). dehs was used again as these droplets are long lasting. consequently, bias errors due to evaporation effects can be neglected. a nd:yag double-pulse laser (evergreen 200, quantel, france) was used to illuminate the droplets. the output beam was fanned out with a few lenses to form a 1 mm thin light-sheet. the light-sheet was located in the middle of the flow channel parallel to the flow direction as indicated in fig. 1 . the scattered light emitted by the illuminated aerosol in the light-sheet plane was recorded with a highly sensitive pco edge 5.5 scmos camera equipped with a zeiss distagon t* lens with a focal length of 50 mm. the triggering of the system components and the data recording was realized again with the software davis from lavision. the flow velocity was driven by the pressure difference between the atmosphere and the flow box. the flow rate through the filter material was adjusted approximately according to the din en 149 test standard (90 liter/minute). the volume flow rate and the movement of the droplets through the filter material was measured optically with high spatial and temporal resolution using piv. to calculate the volume flow rate the average flow velocity within the light-sheet plane in the flow channel was measured and it was assumed that this velocity is homogeneous over the cross section of the channel. this assumption is justified as the filtering materials are homogeneous and the inflow condition is constant across the filtering material. with the know size of the cross section the volume flow rate can be calculated. the pressure drops provided in table 1 are calculated from the measured pressure drops and the volume flow rate. it is assumed that the pressure loss is proportional to the square of the volume flow rate. the pressure drop across the filter material was measured with a testo 480 (testo se & co. kg, germany) pressure transducer with an uncertainty of about 3 pa for the third set of experiments, analysed in section 3.3, simple flow visualizations using smoke were performed in order to demonstrate the effect of the gap around the mask edge. a person exhaled air seeded with tracer particles while wearing surgical and ffp2 masks.in the first series of experiments, one person performed a single severe cough while the piv system was measuring the flow field data. the video in the supplementary material shows the temporal evolution of the process. the results displayed in this subsection show instantaneous velocity fields of various independent timeresolved flow field measurements. color-coded is the magnitude of the local flow velocity and the vectors indicate the direction of the flow movement at a given time step. in areas where the flow movement remains close to zero over the whole recording time (blue colour), no droplets can penetrate as only the flow can move the particles to other areas. large droplets with a diameter of one millimetre or more, such as those produced when sneezing (lok, 2016) , can fly ballistic over long distances, and occasionally ballistic flying droplets are produced when certain sounds are spoken. but sneezing is not a typical covid-10 symptom so that this will not we considered here. the small droplets that are normally produced when breathing, speaking, singing and coughing are immediately slowed down and then move with the flow velocity of the ambient air. it is therefore important to study the air set in motion by exhalation. furthermore, the small droplets are particularly dangerous because they can be inhaled deep into the lungs. figure 2a shows that the spread of the exhaled air forms a cone like shape similar to a free turbulent jet (see video). the flow velocity is reaching values up to 1 m/s near the mouth, but due to the widening of the cone caused by the turbulent mixing and entrainment (reuther et al., 2020) the flow velocity decreases in streamwise direction. the widening of the area in motion reduces the viral load significantly with distance. a single strong cough sets the air in motion over a distance of less than 1.5 m in the experiments. distances of more than 1.5 m can be considered safe according to these results, since no droplets can reach such large distances when accelerated by a single cough. however, if the cough lasts longer, greater distances can be achieved, as shown in fig. 2b . for this reason, it is important to dynamically increase the distance to a person if the coughing stimulus is about to last longer. the results in fig. 2c illustrate how the spread of the airflow from the mouth during coughing is very effectively inhibited by a surgical mask. physically the mask ensures that the directional jet like air movement with high exit velocity from the mouth is converted into an undirected air movement with low velocity behind the mask. this is because the exhaled air increases the pressure inside the mask compared to the atmosphere outside, and the pressure difference creates a flow movement in all directions. this effect is of utmost importance for limiting the virus load in the environment. the results show that even a simple mouth-and-nose cover or a surgical mask can effectively protect other people in the vicinity because the mask prevents the droplets from spreading over a wide area. a simple mask with sufficient flow resistance therefore provides very effective protection for people 1 m 1 m 0.3 m 0.3 m in the surrounding area when infected and wearing the mask. wearing a mask is therefore absolutely useful to protect others according to our quantitative measurements. figure 2d shows the spread of exhaled air when speaking. it can be clearly seen that a greater spread of the exhaled air appears than when coughing with a mask. consequently, wearing a mask during normal face-to-face conversations and of course also when talking on the smartphone in a human environment is extremely useful to stop the transmission of the sars-cov-2 infection via droplets. it must also be taken into account that persons with a presymptomatic or asymptomatic course of infection will infect other persons most likely during face-toface conversations. a mask will therefore make an effective contribution to suppressing this significant path of infection.in this section we want to find out if the material of simple mouth-and-nose covers, surgical masks and ffp3 masks can protect the user from droplet infection, if the surrounding air is contaminated with sars-cov-2. in this case, the mask material must have good filtering properties to stop small droplets that typically occur when speaking, singing and coughing. since large droplets are easily filtered out by simple materials, we focus on small droplets in the range between 0.3 and 2 μm because they are produced in large fractions when speaking, singing and coughing and they can penetrate deep into the lungs. the droplets were distributed approx. 400 mm in front of the filter materials. in order to make the motion of the droplets and the filtering ability of the materials clearly visible an inhomogeneous droplet distribution was generated. the flow direction is from left to right and the flow state of the incoming air is laminar. if the intensity of the scattered light emanating from the droplets is large in front of the filter material (left image) and close to zero behind the filter material (right image), the droplets are almost completely filtered out through the material. if, on the other hand, no significant reduction in intensity can be detected behind the filter material, the filter effect is negligible. the area of the filter mount and the channel edges are not shown in the following images, since no relevant flow and droplet information is visible in these areas. the results presented are qualitative, but intended to be this way to provide readers with visual evidence of the particle penetration through different candidate filter media. a better impression of the filter efficiency is obtained by viewing the second video in the supplementary material.the comparison of the two pictures in fig. 3 (left) shows that almost all droplets pass the tested surgical face mask unhindered. consequently, this mask does not provide serious self protection against droplet infection. only a mixing of the droplet distribution takes place due to the porosity of the filter material. it is fatal that medical personnel are often so poorly protected by these masks. but it is also fatal for patients if clinical staff with a presymptomatic or asymptomatic course of infection uses these masks. even worse than the surgical face masks is the hygiene mask, see fig. 3 (right). this mask is designed for catching larger objects such as hair and spook, but tiny droplets, such as those produced when talking, singing and coughing, cannot be filtered out of the air stream by the hygiene mask. it should also be noted that the flow resistance of the hygiene mask is so low that even the protective mechanism described in subsection 3.1 does not function effectively. figure 4 reveals the effectiveness of particle filtering with toilet paper with 4 layers, paper towel, coffee filters, and microfibre cloth which also offer no serious protection against droplets in this size range. only very large droplets are retained by these materials and therefore these materials are suitable for their intended use, but not as filter material for small droplets. it is therefore strongly discouraged to make masks from these materials with the aim of protecting oneself from infection. furthermore, a very strong fleece was tested, which serves as a protective coating on ironing boards. the material is 4 mm thick, completely opaque and has a pressure drop of about 35 pa. however, a filter effect is not visible, as indicated in fig. 5 (left) . the droplet clouds flow almost unfiltered through the fleece. even several layers of a dense fabric do not have a proper filtering effect on the considered droplet sizes, which escape mainly when breathing, speaking, singing and coughing. good results could only be achieved with the material of a vacuum cleaner bag with fine dust filter properties, see fig. 5 (right) . despite the small droplets used in these tests, almost all droplets are reliably filtered out. consequently, also no larger droplets will be able to pass through the material. according to the manufacturer swirl, the material filters 99.9% of fine dust down to 0.3 μm diameter. this vacuum cleaner bag with fine dust filter therefore has better filtering properties than all tested materials and masks and even an ffp2 protective mask has poorer filtering properties, as it only has to filter out 94% of the fine dust down to 0.6 μm to meet the specifications (uvex, 2020). the material of vacuum cleaner bags with fine dust protection is therefore very well suited as a self-protecting mask if only the filter effect is considered. however, because vacuum cleaner bags are not certified clinical products, they may contain unhealthy ingredients that kill bacteria and harmful fibers that may leak from the bag material. it is therefore uncertain whether this material is suitable in practice as a material for a respirator mask. figure 6 (left) illustrates the filtering capabilities of an ffp3 mask under the test conditions. nearly all droplets are filtered out as expected. therefore, this mask type is very well suited to protect people from an infection by means of aerosols even when the environment is strongly contaminated with infectious droplets. recently, some hospitals in the usa make use of halyard h600 material to protect their employers from aerosol infection. the test result of the material is displayed in fig. 6 (right). it is clearly visible that the filtering capacity of the material is not sufficient to protect people from infection by aerosols if the environment is contaminated with the sars-cov-2. figure 7 shows with different resolution microscopic images of the halyard h600 material. it is composed to fibers but the density might not be sufficient to filter the particles used in our investigation. there are also tiny holes in the pockets visible, which could be the reason why the aerosol passes through the material, as the flow resistance at the holes is low compared to the other parts of the material. the flow tests clearly show that apart from the vacuum cleaner bag and the ffp3 mask, the filter effect of the tested materials is not sufficient to protect against droplet infection reliably if the environment is contaminated with sars-cov-2. even masks routinely used by medical staff in hospitals and doctor's offices have almost no significant filtering effect on the droplet sizes typically produced when breathing, speaking, singing and coughing. the results are therefore in good agreement with the results from (leung et al., 2020b and davies et al., 2013 and kwok et al., 2015 . but why has wearing these masks been shown to provide effective protection against infection with the virus in the sars epidemic, as shown in , lo et al., 2005 and seto et al., 2003 ? because a mask is important not only because of its filtering ability, but to limit the droplet propagation as discussed in section 3.1. so in combination with distances these mask can protect if only a few people are infected in the surrounding. the results in (leung et al., 2020b and bae et al., 2020) are correct, but they do not consider the full performance of masks, but only a partial aspect. therefore, the conclusions in the articles are not universal. the findings in and lo et al., 2005 and seto et al., 2003 are understandable when the full performance of masks in blocking infections is considered.unfortunately, wearing a simple mouth-and-nose cover may be less comfortable than wearing a particle filtering face mask. in effect, this can promote a smear infection. since all these transmissions of infection are possible in daily life, wearing a comfortable mask is essential to block human-to-human transmission by smear and droplet infection. to ensure the best possible protection, a particle filtering mask should be used if the number of infected persons in the environment and the viral load in the room is unknown. at present, social distancing practices and universal masking wearing seem to be the best methods of containing viral pandemic without stricter lockdown policies and without vaccines.some recent studies show that even the simple materials we have tested have some filtering ability (davies et al., 2013 , drewnick, 2020 , konda et al., 2020 and van der sande et al., 2008 , we do not question these results, although the pressure drops in one study is anomalously low (see supporting information in konda et al., 2020) , but we state explicitly that a material that does not have an adequate filtering ability equivalent to an ffp2/n95/kn95 mask cannot be recommended as a filter material for self-protection against droplet infection. statistically speaking, every loss of performance leads to an increase in the number of infected people and thus to an increase in the number of death. it is therefore very dangerous to recommend materials with some filtering properties as possible materials for self-protection masks. but there is another important aspect that will be discussed next.according to the previous section one might argue that a mouth-and-nose cover or surgical mask made of a good filter material would provide good protection against infection when infected people are in the vicinity or the room is contaminated with viruses. but that will not usually be the case. air takes the path of least resistance. as these masks do not seal tightly enough with the face, droplets can flow unhindered past the edge of the mask when inhaled and exhaled and reach the lungs or the environment. if the mask does not fit properly, this will even be the rule. this is illustrated in fig. 8 were a person is exhaling air during an easy exhalation without physical exertion (left), strong breathing during physical exertion (middle) and when coughing (right). the first video in the supplementary material shows the animated sequences. the analysis shows that it is very important do differentiate between mouth-and-nose cover, surgical mask and particle filtering respirator mask because they differ substantial in their fundamental protection properties. face masks can offer three fundamental different kind of protection:1. they effectively prevents a smear infection, as the wearers of the masks no longer perform their habitual grip on the face and thus no longer bring the virus from the hand into the mouth or nose (howard et al., 2020) .2. the flow resistance of the mask greatly limits the spread of viruses in the room. this significantly reduces the risk of infection in the vicinity of an infected person (protection of third parties).3. the inhalation of droplets containing viruses can be prevented by using a tight-fitting mask with particle filtering properties (self-protection).the first fundamental protection mechanism can be reached by all face masks if they fit well and sit comfortably.if not, the user will touch the face even more than usual to correct the fit of the mask. as this can increase the risk of smear infection, a good fit of the mask is very important. the first and second fundamental protection mechanisms are fulfilled by all masks that have sufficient flow resistance. if the mask is worn and a candle can easily be blown out despite the mask, the mask does not fulfil this function and should not be used. all three fundamental protection mechanisms can be only achieved with ffp2/n95/kn95 or better particle filtering respirator mask.typical materials currently used by the public to build masks reduce the risk of smear infection and effectively prevent the widespread spread of viruses in the environment. therefore, the use of these mouse-and-nose covers and surgical masks are very important to prevent smear infection and droplet infection to others if the distance is not too close. as these masks do not have a significant particle-filtering protective effect against droplets that are typically produced when breathing, speaking, singing, coughing and sneezing they should not be used if the environment is contaminated, like in hospitals, even when the distance rules are followed. to achieve effective self-protection in a virus-contaminated environment, masks with particle filtering properties (ffp2/n95/kn95) are absolutely necessary from our point of view. if a large number of infected persons are present and distance rules cannot be achieved, a very good particle filtration mask (ffp3 or better) is strongly recommended.if these general rules are followed and all people use suitable particle-filtering respirators correctly, the transmission of viruses via droplets / aerosols can be effectively prevented. otherwise, these types of masks would never have received certification, nor would they be a core component of the personal protective equipment in hospitals and other environments. therefore, proper face masks can save lives while maintaining social life and securing the economy and the state.but universal masking alone is not enough for two reasons: first, many people are not very good at following rules consistently. therefore, it is advisable to observe the rules of hygiene and distance and to be careful even when wearing a mask. in the event of a car accident, the occupants are also protected by various devices (bumpers, crumple zone, safety belts, airbags, head and legroom, autonomous assistance systems, ...). second, some people are extremely bad at following rules, either because they do not want to or because they simply cannot. these people can become superspreaders. therefore, the early detection of sources of infection and their isolation remains important beside universal masking and the rules of hygiene and distance.the pneumonia caused by the coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19) outbreak in wuhan, china constitutes a public health emergency of international concern. the gastrointestinal symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain and the detection of covid-19 nucleic acid from fecal specimens in a small number of patients suggest the possibility of transmission via the gastrointestinal tract. people of all ages are vulnerable to this virus, including children. digestive endoscopy is an invasive procedure during which children cannot wear masks; therefore, they have higher risks of exposure to covid-19, and the digestive endoscopy center is a relatively high-risk area for covid-19 infection. based on these factors and in combination with related policies and regulations, a prevention and control program for the covid-19 pneumonia in a children's digestive endoscopy center was established to prevent the covid-19 nosocomial infection.prevention program for the covid-19 in a children's digestive endoscopy centerin mid-december 2019, a cluster of pneumonia associated with the coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19) emerged in wuhan, china, and rapidly spread to other areas globally [1] . the world health organization declared the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus a public health emergency of international concern [2] . the confirmed patients are the main source of infection; however, patients in the latent period and asymptomatic patients can be potential sources of infection [1] . people are generally vulnerable, including children [1, [3] [4] [5] [6] . most patients have symptoms of fever, cough, and myalgia or fatigue while a small number of patients have symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain [1, [6] [7] [8] . a minority of patients seek medical care with gastrointestinal symptoms as the first manifestation [5] . the detection of covid-19 nucleic acid from fecal specimens suggests the possibility of transmission via the gastrointestinal tract [1, 5, 9] , although this possibility remains to be further clarified. digestive endoscopy is an invasive procedure during which children cannot wear masks; therefore, they have higher risks of exposure to covid-19, and the digestive endoscopy center is a relatively high-risk area for covid-19 infection. based on the above factors and in combination with related policies, regulations and norms [1, 10] , a prevention and control program for the covid-19 pneumonia in a children's digestive endoscopy center was established to prevent the covid-19 nosocomial infection and provide guidelines for endoscopists [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . after being approved by the director of shenzhen children's hospital, this program was initiated from february 1, 2020. it was also put into practice in shenzhen baoan maternal and child health hospital as suggested by the pediatric committee of shenzhen medical association. the case detection rate and the nosocomial infection rate were used to evaluate the effectiveness of the program.during the covid-19 epidemic, it is recommended that ordinary gastroscopy, colonoscopy, and enteroscopy should be suspended; only endoscopy for emergency diagnosis and treatment is kept in normal operation and is required to proceed as follows: (1) the clinical physician should determine whether the child needs emergency endoscopic diagnosis or treatment. if it is not urgent or the child's condition is stable, it is recommended to make an appointment after the epidemic. when emergency endoscopy is necessary, the physician should rigorously evaluate the child's condition according to the indications for emergency endoscopy and informed the parents of the possible risks. (2) indications for selective, confined and emergency endoscopy are defined as follows: (a) indications for selective endoscopy: common gastrointestinal symptoms such as recurrent abdominal pain, vomiting, abdominal distension and diarrhea; a small amount of hematemesis and hematochezia. the illness is less severe, and the patient's condition is good; (b) indications for confined endoscopy: foreign body in digestive tract (blunt, noncorrosive, nonobstructive); mild gastrointestinal tract bleeding; acute abdominal pain (suspected henoch-schonlein purpura); upper gastrointestinal obstruction; endoscopic feeding tube placement; dilatation of esophageal stenosis; chronic diarrhea (suspected inflammatory bowel disease); chronic pain that is unrelieved after routine treatment; frequent vomiting with unknown causes; (c) indications for emergency endoscopy: button buttery, magnets, sharp or toxic foreign bodies in the digestive tract; gastrointestinal tract obstruction caused by foreign bodies; endoscopic diagnosis and treatment for massive gastrointestinal bleeding; and (d) for special cases, endoscopists' consultation is needed to determine whether digestive endoscopy is necessary. (3) the epidemiological history of the children and their family members is screened: (a) a history of travel or residence in wuhan or surrounding cities, or in other communities where confirmed cases were reported within 14 d; (b) a history of contact with patients with fever or respiratory symptoms who are from wuhan or surrounding cities, or from other communities where confirmed cases were reported within 14 d; (c) cluster onset of disease; and (d) a history of contact with diagnosed patients with covid-19 infection, which refers to positive detection of covid-19 nucleic acid. in the case of any of the above epidemiological history and any two of the following clinical manifestations, the screening procedure should be carried out as suspected casesbased on fever, imaging findings of pneumonia, and normal or reduced white blood cell count or reduced lymphocyte count [1] . (4) emergency endoscopy will be arranged if the patient has a history of the above epidemiology but no fever, no imaging manifestation, or no leukocyte decline or lymphocyte decline. (5) on the day of examination, the staff should take the temperature of all children and their family members who enter the digestive endoscopy center. if the children's temperature exceeds 37.3 °c, they should be immediately sent to the fever clinic for further assessment; if their family member's temperature exceeds 37.3 °c, they should be referred to a designated fever clinic for consultation. if the child's temperature is normal, endoscopy will be arranged directly. (6) children and their family members are required to wear masks before they arrive at the endoscopy center. after confirming that the children and their family members have no fever, epidemiological exposure or any symptoms, the staff of the front desk should ask the parents to sign the informed consent form. (7) the endoscopists should carefully review the documents, including informed consent, chest computed tomographic findings and routine blood results, before beginning endoscopy. (8) anesthesiologists should strictly implement disposable oxygen delivery catheters and oxygen masks and closely monitor vital signs during anesthesia to avoid choking. quarantine measures should be taken to avoid cross-infection in the anesthesia recovery room. and (9) the transport and disinfection protection of children should be supervised by professional nurses.during the epidemic of covid-19 pneumonia, medical personnel should strictly implement standard precautions during endoscopy [11, [18] [19] [20] and enforce preventive measures against the transmission of covid-19 pneumonia to ensure the safety of personnel in digestive endoscopy centers. we suggest the following rules:all staff in the center, including doctors, nurses, anesthesiologists, training staff, technicians, receptionists and health care workers, should report the following on a daily basis: (1) any symptoms of fever, fatigue and cough; and (2) history of contact with a diagnosed or suspected covid-19 pneumonia patient. in the case of any of the above, patients should be immediately sent to the relevant department for investigation or home isolation.if any staff member in the center experiences unprotected contact with a child suspected to have covid-19, medical isolation will be required. this staff member can return to work after the child is excluded for infection; if any staff member in the center happens to have unprotected contact with a child diagnosed with covid-19 infection, the medical isolation period will be at least 14 d.all staff members should take their temperature before and after work every day. in case of any abnormality, they should stop work immediately and receive medical interventions or isolation when necessary.all staff should wash their hands in accordance with the "six-step washing method" for 2 min or disinfect hands using quick-drying hand sanitizer during the working period.correctly using personal protective equipment (1) staff at the front desk and in charge of equipment cleaning and disinfection should adhere to universal protection principles; (2) medical workers who have direct contact with children should take first-level protective measures. they must wear disposable gowns, n95 masks, goggles/face shields, medical protective caps and shoe covers. companion is prohibited from entering the operating room during endoscopy without wearing protective gear; (3) during tracheal intubation, airway care and sputum suction with the possibility of droplets or spray, the staff should wear n95 masks, protective face shields, latex gloves, impermeable isolation clothing, protective clothing and respiratory protective hoods if necessary and replace them quickly in case of contamination; (4) after endoscopy, endoscopists should assign other doctors or training staff to help with the report to avoid contamination of the reporting area and repeatedly taking off and putting on isolation clothes; and (5) the staff will take off the isolation gowns after finishing the relevant work, followed by hand hygiene, and change the mask before entering the rest area to avoid cross infection.during non-working days, the staff should stay at home and avoid gathering with others for meals to reduce the possibility of epidemic transmission.the channel shunt system is implemented in children's digestive endoscopy centers, that is, the medical staff go through the medical channel, and the children and their accompanying family members go through the patient channel. (1) when children enter the center, they must follow the arrangement of the staff, voluntarily cooperate with the temperature measurement, and minimize the number of accompanying family members. the nurses should disinfect the children's hands with quick-drying hand disinfectant and give the children an age-appropriate protective mask before entering the operating area. after endoscopy, the children also need to wear masks. accompanying family members should take the same disinfection precautions as well. children, family members and other accompanying persons are prohibited from entering the operating area of the center without disinfection and protective equipment.(2) the children and their families should provide their personal information truthfully, including any symptoms of fever, fatigue and cough, the result of total white blood cell count and lymphocyte count, the epidemiological history of novel coronavirus pneumonia, and radiographic imaging findings of the lungs. (3) some screening measures, such as chest computed tomography and routine blood tests, are necessary. family members should cooperate with the staff. endoscopy should not be performed if required results are not available. and (4) the children will be hospitalized according to the workflow if necessary (figure 1 ).common children without epidemiological history or related symptoms: (1) at the key stage of epidemic prevention and control, endoscopy should be performed in an isolated room. endoscopists should be protected according to the first-level protection requirements. endoscopy should not be performed without protection; and (2) the number of children waiting in a general waiting area should be minimized. the distance between each waiting child should be more than 1 meter apart. the children and their accompanying family members are instructed to wear masks correctly.children excluded from suspected novel coronavirus infection, in convalescence (released from quarantine for negative virus nucleic acid tests 2 or more times), or in full recovery from covid-19 infection: (1) the indications for digestive endoscopy must be strictly followed; (2) endoscopy should be performed in an isolated room. medical personnel should be protected according to the second-level protection requirements; and (3) it is recommended to perform digestive endoscopy with the child under sober sedation or intravenous anesthesia. (1) the indications for digestive endoscopy should be followed strictly, and the purpose and urgency of endoscopy should be clearly defined. endoscopy is not recommended if it is not an emergency or not for life-saving purposes; (2) endoscopy should not be performed for children with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection in the digestive endoscopy center; and (3) if necessary, endoscopy should be performed in a standard isolation ward for children suspected to have or diagnosed with covid-19 infection. second-level protection measures should be taken during consultation, and third-level protection measures should be taken during endoscopy. protective equipment should be in a mode of "single person for single use" and disposable, and rooms and equipment should be disinfected in a timely manner according to the requirements of infectious diseases.after endoscopy or contact with children's saliva, gastric juice or other secretions, hands should be washed with flowing water or sanitized with fast-drying hand disinfectant immediately, and hand hygiene should be strictly implemented in accordance with hand hygiene requirements of the hand hygiene code for medical personnel (ws/t313.2019) [19] during daily work. wearing gloves is not a substitute for hand hygiene. hand hygiene should be implemented after removing gloves, and not to touch public goods with gloves on. (1) sterilization of all endoscopes and accessories should be conducted strictly in accordance with the technical specifications for disinfection in medical institutions [12] and the technical specifications for cleaning and disinfection of soft endoscopes (ws 507-2016) [13] ; (2) when there is no stain on the surface of the endoscope equipment (processor, endoscope transfer vehicle, treatment vehicle, resection knife, monitor, anesthesia machine, etc.), it should be wiped with 1000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant after endoscopy and rinsed with water 30 min later [11] ; (3) if contaminated by blood, body fluids, secretions and other pollutants from patients with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection, all medical instruments, objects, processor surface and ground should be disinfected using 2000-5000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant and then rinsed with water 30 min later; and (4) staff who are responsible for equipment cleaning and disinfection should wear disposable medical caps, surgical masks, medical isolating eye shields or face shields, medical disposable gowns, and double-layer disposable rubber gloves to cover the sleeves of the gowns.strict terminal disinfection must be implemented after endoscopy. the examining bed should be wiped with 500 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant, gloves should be disposed of after removing the contaminated bedspread, and then, hands should be washed in accordance with the "six-step washing method". (1) air disinfection: air disinfection should be performed twice a day for 2 h each time in accordance with the requirements of "code for management of hospital air purification" if using the air disinfection machine [14] . it should be more than 30 min each time if using ultraviolet disinfection. windows should be opened twice a day for more than 30 min each time to ensure air circulation in the operating room of the center.(2) cleaning and disinfection of object surfaces: the processor table, instrument vehicles, equipment and other objects, as well as resuscitation areas, the front desk, operating areas, cleaning areas, and office areas should be disinfected at least twice a day according to conventional disinfection methods, that is, wiping with chlorine-containing disinfectant with effective chlorine of 1000 mg/l, then wiping with water 30 min later. if stained by children's saliva, body fluids, blood and other pollutants, the surfaces should be disinfected with 2000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant directly. ( 3) the waiting area should be disinfected regularly as required. (4) floor disinfection: the floor should be mopped with 500 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant and then wiped with water 30 min later; this process should be repeated at least twice a day. and (5) disinfection of cleaning tools: items should be soaked in 500 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant for disinfection. rags and dishcloths should be sealed in water-soluble fabric bags and sent to the cleaning and disinfection center for further disinfection.medical waste generated during digestive endoscopy, such as disposable biopsy forceps and gastric juice collectors, should be disposed of and managed in accordance with the regulations on the management of medical waste [15] and the regulations on the management of medical waste in medical and health institutions [16] . wastes from children with suspected or confirmed novel coronavirus pneumonia should be placed in double-layer yellow medical waste bags, tied up, labeled separately, and treated according to the regulations on medical waste management during the novel coronavirus infection epidemic [17] .medical staff in the center should have their work shift reasonably arranged to avoid overwork; and they should pay attention to their health condition and monitor their temperature and respiratory symptoms every day.