since the end of 2019, an increasing number of cases of pneumonia were reported in wuhan, followed by other cities and provinces in china and many other countries [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] , and the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [8] , a new human pathogen, was identified as the cause of wuhan pneumonia. the disease spectrum of sars-cov-2 infection, so-called coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , was known to be diverse in severity, ranging from asymptomatic carriage to mild respiratory tract infection and severe or fatal pneumonia. moreover, sars-cov-2 can be transmitted within the family, in the community, among cruise passengers and in hospitals, and has become a public-health emergency of international concern (pheic), declared by the world health organization (who) on 30 january 2020. as of 28 february 2020, laboratory-confirmed cases of covid-19 have been reported in 56 countries and territories with more than 83 382 cases reported globally; more than 78 832 of these cases were reported from china ( https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/ ).in the view of virologists, human and zoonotic coronaviruses belong to the family coronaviridae in the order nidovirales . currently, there are four genera in the subfamily coronavirinae of the family coronaviridae: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, deltacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus . before the current covid-19 epidemic, there were six recognised human respiratory coronaviruses, including hcov-229e ( alphacoronavirus ), hcov-oc43 ( betacoronavirus ), hcov-nl63 ( alphacoronavirus ) and hku1 ( betacoronavirus ) that often cause mild respiratory tract infection as well as sars-cov and mers-cov that in contrast can lead to severe or even fatal lower respiratory tract disease [9] . the seventh human coronavirus, sars-cov-2, belongs to the genus betacoronavirus , which also contains sars-cov and mers-cov.so far, no drugs, monoclonal antibodies or vaccines have been approved to treat human infections due to coronaviruses. several pre-existing and potential drug candidates, including chloroquine and remdesivir, have been considered [10] [11] [12] . the discovery and marketing of new compounds often require months to years. however, in the face of the global spread of covid-19, effective interventions for severe cases of covid-19 are urgently required. although little is known about sars-cov-2, several insights mayjid: antage [m5g; march 16, 2020; 7:11 ] be gained from its more well-known family member, sars-cov [11] . here we review the literature on an existing but not approved antiviral agent, remdesivir, which exhibits promising in vitro antiviral activity and preliminary clinical experiences in the treatment of covid-19.although sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share only 82% rna sequence identity, their rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) shares 96% sequence identity [11] . therefore, drugs targeting viral rdrp proteins of sars-cov are likely to be effective for sars-cov-2. for the rdrp target in the genus betacoronavirus , there are several potential drugs or compounds, including favipiravir, ribavirin, penciclovir, galidesivir, remdesivir, 6 -fluorinated aristeromycin analogues and acyclovir fleximer analogues [12] . remdesivir (gs-5734), the phosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine c-nucleoside [13] , has a similar structure to tenofovir alafenamide, which is a nucleotide analogue of adenosine 5-monophosphate with antiviral activity against hepatitis b virus and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv). it was developed by gilead science inc. and has not been licensed or approved anywhere so far. moreover, gs-441524 has been recommended for the treatment of cats with feline infectious peritonitis, which is uncommon but fatal and is caused by a feline coronavirus [14] .the chemical formula of remdesivir, with a molecular mass of 602.6, is c 27 h 35 n 6 o 8 p. remdesivir can be effectively metabolised to active nucleoside triphosphate in several human cell lines [15] . an in vitro study has demonstrated that nucleoside triphosphate works as an incorporation competitor with adenosine triphosphate, confuses viral rdrp, acts as a delayed rna chain terminator against ebola virus [15 , 16] , evades proofreading by viral exoribonuclease, and causes a decrease in viral rna production [17] . recently, the antiviral activity of remdesivir was demonstrated at the stage after virus entry into vero e6 cells, supporting its antiviral mechanism as a nucleotide analogue [18] .in 2016, remdesivir (gs-5734) was reported to be active against ebola virus in multiple human cell types, including primary macrophages and human endothelial cells, with low half-maximal effective concentration (ec 50 ) values of 0.06-0.14 μm [15] . in addition, remdesivir was reported to exhibit antiviral activity in vitro against marburg virus [15] , paramyxoviridae (such as parainfluenza type 3 virus, nipah virus, hendra virus, and measles and mumps viruses) and pneumoviridae (such as respiratory syncytial virus) [19] .in primary human airway epithelial cell culture, a biologically relevant in vitro model of pulmonary infection, remdesivir was shown to inhibit sars-cov [half-maximal inhibitory concentration (ic 50 ) = 0.069 μm] and mers-cov (ic 50 = 0.074 μm) replication [20] . in addition, remdesivir was effective against many human and zoonotic coronaviruses, including hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43, hcov-229e, mouse hepatitis virus (mhv) ( betacoronavirus ), sars-cov and related bat coronaviruses wiv1 and shc014 ( betacoronavirus ), mers-cov and related bat coronavirus hku5, and porcine deltacoronavirus ( deltacoronavirus ) [17 , 20 , 21] . a recent study reported the in vitro antiviral activity of remdesivir against the causative aetiological pathogen of wuhan pneumonia, ncov-2019/betacov/wuhan/wiv04/2019. the ec 50 of remdesivir in vero e6 cells was 0.77 μm and the ec 90 was 1.76 μm [18] . therefore, remdesivir is regarded to have 'broad-spectrum' anti-coronavirus activity.even before approval and clinical use, the concern of antiviral resistance against remdesivir has been studied. using mhv as the tested coronavirus, two of three lineages of wild-type mhv in the presence of increased concentrations of gs-441524 were lost after 17 and 20 repeated passages, and only one lineage after 23 passages selected a low-level resistant mutant, conferring a 5.6-fold increase in the ec 50 [17] . two amino acid substitutions (f467l and v553l) were noted in non-structural protein (nsp) 12, the rdrp of mhv, and also resulted in a 6-fold increase in the ec 50 in sars-cov. however, the remdesivir-resistant mhv with f476l and v553l mutations was outcompeted by wild-type mhv in the absence of gs-5734, suggestive of the effect of remdesivir resistance on decreased viral fitness. of note, in the mouse model of sars-cov infection, the remdesivir-resistant sars-cov-infected mice lost less weight and had a more evident decline in pulmonary viral loads by 4 days after infection than wild-type sars-cov-infected mice, indicative of attenuated pathogenicity of remdesivir-resistant sars-cov. the above findings indicate a high genetic barrier for remdesivir to develop resistance a well as decreased fitness and pathogenicity in remdesivir-resistant mutants, and further encourage the therapeutic potential of remdesivir in the treatment of newly emerging covid-19.with the favourable in vitro antiviral activity of remdesivir, it has been further tested in animal models of different viral infections. in a rhesus monkey model of ebola virus disease, daily administration of 10 mg/kg remdesivir for 12 days profoundly suppressed the replication of ebola virus and protected all infected animals against this lethal infection [15] . besides, in a mouse model of sars-cov infection, prophylactic and early therapeutic dosing of remdesivir effectively decreased the viral load in the lungs and improved pulmonary function [20] .according to the previous rhesus monkey model of ebola virus infection, an intravenous (i.v.) 10 mg/kg dose of remdesivir could lead to a lasting level of active triphosphate form in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs), > 10 μm, for at least 24 h [15] , and such data may be valuable in the same animal species with sars-cov-2 infection. although in the animal study the plasma half-life of remdesivir was short (0.39 h), remdesivir was rapidly distributed into pbmcs, converted into its active form within 2 h post-infusion, and had an intracellular half-life of 14 h. in the absence of any human pharmacokinetic information, such data from rhesus monkeys indicate that parenteral daily dosing of remdesivir may achieve sustained intracellular concentrations of nucleotide triphosphate, which are above its ec 90 for sars-cov-2. these in vitro and animal data provide preliminary evidence supporting the clinical potential of remdesivir for human infections caused by contemporary and emerging coronaviruses, including sars-cov-2.early clinical experience of remdesivir therapy in a female nurse from scotland with ebola meningoencephalitis, which was supported by the detection of ebola virus rna in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid, its first use for ebola virus infection in humans, was reported in 2016 [22] . she was successfully treated with highdose corticosteroids and 14 days of remdesivir therapy (once-daily infusion of 150 mg over 2 h for 2 days, and then daily 225 mg for another 12 days). no serious clinical or biochemical events occurred except a transient rise of serum amylase level.in a recently published, randomised controlled clinical trial of four experimental therapeutics for ebola virus disease, a total of 175 patients ever received remdesivir [23] . although remdesivir therapy was not favoured due to the high mortality rate of 53.1% (93/175), no detailed clinical or biochemical side effects associated with remdesivir therapy was ever described; the safety profile ofjid: antage [m5g; march 16, 2020; 7:11 ] remdesivir was not challenged. one patient on remdesivir therapy developed hypotension and cardiac arrest after discontinuation of the loading dose; however, the authors explained that such an adverse event cannot be excluded to be related to underlying ebola virus disease, a potentially fatal infectious disease.the first case of covid-19 in washington, usa, was compassionately treated with i.v. remdesivir for the progression of pneumonia on day 7 of hospitalisation [24] . interestingly, the patient's condition improved and no obvious adverse effects were observed. of note, real-time reverse transcription pcr testing for sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs remained positive at 4 days after the administration of remdesivir, but the authors noted a trend in the decline of viral load in nasopharyngeal swabs [cycle threshold values: illness day 7 (the day of remdesivir administration), 23-24; day 11, 33-34; and day 12, 37-40]. the oropharyngeal swab tested negative for sars-cov-2 one day later. of course, it is too early to conclude the direct antiviral effect of remdesivir on enhanced clearing of viral loads in the respiratory tract, but it indeed suggests a promising therapeutic effect of remdesivir.there are two phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled multicentre clinical trials currently ongoing in china. these trials have been submitted to clinicaltrials.gov on 31 january 2020 and are designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of parenteral remdesivir in hospitalised adults with mild-to-moderate and severe covid-19, i.e. nct04252664 ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ ct2/show/nct04252664 ) and nct04257656 ( https://clinicaltrials. gov/ct2/show/nct04257656 ), respectively. the number of cases planned to be enrolled is 308 and 452, respectively. a 10-day regimen of remdesivir treatment is as follows: 200 mg loading dose on day 1, followed by 100 mg once-daily maintenance doses for 9 days in both studies. the former regimen of remdesivir therapy was used in the randomised clinical trial of ebola virus disease [23] .with an effective reduction of pulmonary viral load in a murine model of sars-cov infection, potent antiviral activity against sars-cov-2, acceptable safety profile of parenteral remdesivir therapy in two case reports, and a randomised trial of ebola virus disease, the clinical use of remdesivir in the cases of covid-19 is are highly anticipated. two randomised clinical trials of parenteral remdesivir therapy in the treatment of covid- 19 in china may open the window for effective antiviral therapy for such an epidemic infectious disease.funding: none.the journey of remdesivir: from ebola to covid-19for over two decades, global health leaders have been cautioning the world about another pandemic comparable in severity and scope to the 1918 influenza epidemic. 1 two major outbreaks afflicted the world in the 20th century, that is, the 1918 influenza epidemic and the ongoing human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) pandemic. 2 the 21st century has already seen a significant number of outbreaks: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002, the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012, and the ebola virus (ebov) in 2014. currently, we are in the midst of an unprecedented pandemic due to sars-cov-2, coronavirus disease 2019 . these outbreaks have posed many challenges: an important one being the public health aspect, but also the lack of effective therapies and vaccines. prevention of complications and supportive treatment are the standard of care for most of these recent viral disease outbreaks. 3 no treatment has been proven effective for the current covid-19 pandemic. the medical community is under immense pressure, and many clinicians are embarking on using experimental treatments based on poorly conducted clinical trials and observational data. 4 randomized controlled trials conducted efficiently and promptly are the only way to find effective therapies.remdesivir (gs-5734) is an investigational broad-spectrum antiviral drug that has demonstrated activity against ribonucleic acid (rna) viruses of several families, including coronaviridae (such as sars-cov, mers-cov, and strains of bat coronaviruses), paramyxoviridae (such as nipah virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and hendra virus), and filoviridae (such as ebov). [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] in this narrative review, we will summarize the studies available to date for remdesivir in the context of viral outbreaks, especially its development as an antiviral agent for ebola and coronaviruses. we searched pubmed for published clinical and preclinical reports assessing remdesivir for ebola virus disease (evd), sars, mers, and covid-19. the search terms used were ('ebola virus', 'severe acute respiratory syndrome', 'sars-cov', 'middle east respiratory syndrome', 'mers-cov', 'covid-19', '2019-ncov', 'sars-cov-2') and ('remdesivir' or 'gs-5734'). the references of the selected papers were reviewed to identify additional pertinent reports. 15 early cases were associated with the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan, hubei province. soon after that, the causative pathogen was identified as a novel betacoronavirus (sars-cov-2), and the disease was ultimately named covid-19. sars-cov-2 has high sequence homology with bat coronaviruses (~87% identical sequences with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21), which supports the hypothesis of bat origin. when compared with sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 has a genetic similarity of 79 and 50%, respectively. 13 the clinical presentation of covid-19 ranges from asymptomatic carriage to severe viral pneumonia causing acute respiratory distress syndrome. fever and gi symptoms are common. at the time of this report, covid-19 has spread across the globe with 2,397,216 confirmed cases and 162,956 deaths according to the who situation report. 16ebola viruses belong to the family filoviridae, a taxonomic group of enveloped, non-segmented, negative-strand rna viruses. there are five different species of ebov that can infect humans, but they differ in their virulence and disease progression, with a case fatality rate ranging from 40% for bundibugyo ebov to 70-90% for zaire ebov. humans infected with ebov initially have non-specific symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, with the hemorrhagic phase occurring in half of the cases. 17 outbreaks of evd have mainly been limited to africa; however, in recent times, a small number for patients have been transferred to hospitals with modern technology in the usa and germany. the mortality rate in africa is often very high compared to patients who have received supportive care in developed countries. there are no approved drugs for the treatment of evd. during the 2014-2016 west african outbreak and subsequent outbreak in the democratic republic of congo (drc), several investigational treatments, such as antibody therapy and remdesivir, were evaluated in clinical trials. 18 in summary, it has been challenging to evaluate investigational drugs in randomized controlled trials during outbreak situations. the initial response to the covid-19 outbreak was to use treatments that were not shown to be effective in properly conducted trials. most studies thus far have lacked adequate controls, are observational, and have a very small number of patients that precludes any meaningful statistics regarding efficacy. here, we review the available studies for the antiviral remdesivir (gilead sciences, inc.) in an attempt to present an impartial review of data available for this drug, with a specific focus on outbreaks of ebov and now sars-cov-2.remdesivir (previously gs-5734; chemical formula c 27 h 35 n 6 o 8 p) is a monophosphoramidate prodrug of a c-adenosine nucleoside analogue ( figure 1 ). [19] [20] [21] remdesivir terminates viral rna synthesis by inhibiting viral rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp). the active form, remdesivir triphosphate, competes with native adenosine triphosphate for chain inclusion, resulting in delayed chain termination. 22 remdesivir displays linear pharmacokinetics and a prolonged intracellular half-life (>35 hours for the active parent triphosphate). remdesivir triphosphate was found to accumulate in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, suggesting a loading dose that could accelerate the achievement of a steady state. 23 these characteristics support the dosing regimen used in clinical studies to date: 200 mg intravenously on the first day, followed by 100 mg intravenously once daily (5-10 days total). detailed information regarding remdesivir metabolism and elimination is unavailable. 23remdesivir exhibits broad in vitro antiviral action against zoonotic and human pathogens from multiple virus families (table 1) . remdesivir's activity has been consistent when tested against members of the filoviridae, paramyxoviridae, pneumoviridae, and coronaviridae. 6 among hcov, remdesivir inhibits three of the (nhp) model of evd. 5 in the nhp evd model, previously healthy rhesus monkeys received an intramuscular inoculation of ebov, which results in death after a clinical course mimicking human evd. nhp was challenged with ebov followed by receipt of various remdesivir dosing regimens. the time from inoculation to remdesivir initiation varied between study groups (as soon as 30 minutes after viral challenge and up to 3 days after viral challenge). lower doses (3 mg/kg daily) demonstrated a measurable antiviral effect with survival rates between 33 and 66%. however, higher doses were most promising, with 6/6 nhp surviving after receiving remdesivir 10 mg/kg daily starting on day 3. this was the first report of a molecule providing post-exposure protection from evd and supported the further evaluation of remdesivir in human evd.a limited number of case reports described the use of remdesivir for evd through emergency compassionate use protocols prior to the completion of formal clinical trials. 27, 28 the first case described endemic strains associated with respiratory illness (hcov-oc43, 229e, and nl63) as well as the less common mers-cov, sars-cov, and novel sars-cov-2. [7] [8] [9] 24 in addition, remdesivir possesses activity against sars-like and mers-like bat coronaviruses (hku3, wiv1, shc014, and hku5). 7 although most preclinical research has been in vitro, remdesivir was also effective in non-human primate (nhp) models of mers, nipah virus infection, and evd. 5, 25, 26 remdesivir is less potent against the flaviviridae, with moderate activity against hepatitis c, dengue, and yellow fever viruses. 6 remdesivir has poor-to-negligible activity against tick-borne flaviviruses (alkhurma hemorrhagic fever, kyasanur forest disease, omsk hemorrhagic fever, tick-borne encephalitis) and west nile, lassa, vesicular stomatitis, rift valley fever, and crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever viruses. 6preclinical dataremdesivir was first identified during a broad screening for compounds with activity against emerging viruses. 19 the original screening program was primarily geared toward identifying candidates that could inhibit rna viruses, namely coronaviridae and flaviviridae. subsequent to the 2013-2016 evd outbreak in west africa, some previously screened compounds were further investigated against ebov. remdesivir was observed to have high potency against ebov across multiple cell lines, with an anti-ebov half maximal effective concentration (ec50) of 0.086 µm in human macrophages. remdesivir was chosen for continued clinical development based upon its potency and a chemical structure amenable to rapid scale-up. 19 the first in vivo efficacy evaluation was completed in an non-human primate issn: 1740-4398 31 the initial clinical efficacy data for remdesivir in covid-19 have centered on the case reports wherein patients received remdesivir through the compassionate use process. all cases described received remdesivir 200 mg intravenously on day 1, followed by 100 mg for up to 9 more days.the first patient diagnosed with covid-19 in the united states was treated with remdesivir. 32 the patient was a 35-year-old man with a limited past medical history and recent travel to wuhan, china. he was admitted to a hospital for airborne isolation and monitoring. remdesivir was initiated on hospital day 7 due to increasing oxygen requirements and ongoing pyrexia. the patient improved the following day, and was mostly asymptomatic at the time the report was published. a more recent report describes the use of remdesivir in a 40-year-old man who was hospitalized with severe covid-19 requiring mechanical ventilation. 33 remdesivir was not started until day 13 of illness. the patient was extubated 72 hours later, and a full recovery was expected at the time of publication. the authors hypothesize that remdesivir may retain a therapeutic effect even when started late in a disease course. a non-peer reviewed manuscript is available that describes the outcomes of the first 12 patients in the united states with covid-19. 34 three patients received remdesivir and all 12 patients clinically recovered. retrospective cohort studies have been published detailing covid-19 outcomes in patients requiring extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) and those with a history of solid organ transplant. 35, 36 in the ecmo cohort, 3/5 survivors received remdesivir and 1/10 non-survivors received remdesivir. in the transplant cohort, only 2/90 patients received remdesivir and their specific outcomes were not reported.grein and colleagues recently reported their experience with the compassionate use of remdesivir for covid-19 in a multicenter open label cohort that enrolled 61 patients (of note, this analysis included previously reported cases). 37 compassionate use approvals were reserved for hospitalized patients with an oxygen saturation of ≤94% on room air or the need for oxygen support. patients were required to have a creatinine clearance (crcl) greater than 30 ml/min and hepatic transaminases less than five times the upper limit of normal. there were no predefined endpoints or enrollment goals. a total of 53 patients were included in the final analysis (8 patients were excluded due to missing or erroneous data). the median age was 64 years and 64% of patients were receiving invasive ventilation at baseline (including 7% receiving ecmo). the median time from symptom onset to remdesivir initiation was 12 days. after starting remdesivir, 36 of 53 patients (68%) the use of remdesivir for ebov meningoencephalitis in a 39-yearold woman who had fully recovered from an episode of evd 9 months earlier. the second case involved an infant diagnosed with evd on her first day of life following birth from an ebov-positive mother. 28 although both patients in these reports survived, it is difficult to make conclusions regarding the role remdesivir played in their recovery as multiple therapies were administered.a randomized multi-intervention trial was later conducted during the evd outbreak in the drc. 18 patients of any age, including pregnant women, were eligible for enrollment if they tested positive for ebov. patients received standard supportive care along with an assignment to one of four treatment arms in a 1:1:1:1 ratio. study treatments included zmapp (a triple monoclonal antibody), mab114 (a single human monoclonal antibody derived from an ebola survivor), regn-eb3 (a mixture of three human immunoglobulin g1 [igg1] monoclonal antibodies), and intravenous remdesivir. remdesivir was administered at a dose of 200 mg on day 1, followed by 100 mg daily for 9-13 days. weight-based doses were used for pediatric patients. the primary outcome was mortality at day 28. nearly 700 patients had been randomized when an interim analysis led to early cessation of the trial. the data and safety monitoring board found higher mortality in the zmapp and remdesivir groups compared to the mab114 and regn-eb3 groups. further, the regn-eb3 group had met a prespecified threshold for efficacy. a total of 673 patients were included in the final analysis. the mean age of enrolled patients was 29 years and 56% of patients were women (6% of whom were pregnant). at day 28, mortality rates were: remdesivir (53.1%), zmapp (49.7%), mab114 (35.1%), and regn-eb3 (33.5%). for remdesivir, 85 and 29% of patients with high-and low-viral loads at baseline died, respectively.in summary, despite potent in vitro activity against ebov and unprecedented success in animal models of evd, the journey of remdesivir for human evd culminated in disappointing results.preclinical dataremdesivir was known to inhibit the replication of coronaviruses prior to the emergence of sars-cov-2. wang and colleagues published the first report affirming that remdesivir, among other existing antivirals, could effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 replication. 29 the investigators evaluated the activity of seven drugs against sars-cov-2 in the non-human vero e6 cells: ribavirin, penciclovir, nitazoxanide, nafamostat, chloroquine, favipiravir, and remdesivir. the ec50 was lowest for remdesivir (0.77 µm), followed by chloroquine (1.13 µm). a simulated molecular docking experiment also predicted remdesivir would bind to sars-cov-2 rdrp with high affinity. 30 recruiting showed improvement based on their level of oxygen support. of those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation, 17/30 (57%) were extubated. three out of four patients (75%) receiving ecmo were able to stop ecmo. seven (13%) patients died. the risk of death was increased in patients who were ≥70 years of age, those with higher serum creatinine, and those requiring invasive ventilation. the authors suggest the 13% mortality rate is noteworthy given previously reported mortality rates of 17-78% in severe covid-19. unfortunately, conclusions regarding the clinical effect of remdesivir are hampered by the lack of a control group and delay in initiation of therapy. additionally, the direct antiviral effect of remdesivir was not assessed with viral load measurements. the sample size was small, and a substantial proportion of patients given remdesivir were eventually excluded from analysis (8/61, 13%).finally, 4 months into the disease, the data from randomized trials are beginning to emerge. one of the first randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study in severe covid-19 was released at the time of manuscript preparation, (nct04257656, table 2 ). 38 wang and colleagues randomized hospitalized patients with severe covid-19 in a 2:1 allocation to remdesivir (n=158) to matching placebo (n=78). 38 remdesivir was given in the dose of 200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg daily on days 2-10. the primary endpoint was time to clinical improvement, defined as a two-point reduction in disease severity on a six-point ordinal scale. the baseline characteristics though largely balanced had higher proportion of patients with medical comorbidities and presenting later than 10 days with higher respiratory rate. at baseline, most patients required supplemental oxygen, but not mechanical ventilation. in the (continued) issn: 1740-4398 review -remdesivir and covid-19 drugsincontext.com . sars-cov-2 rna loads were not reduced with remdesivir compared to placebo. the trial was halted before target enrollment was reached as the covid-19 outbreak subsided in the study region. as such, the statistical power was reduced from a planned 80 to 58%, and the study remained inconclusive.while the results of the study from china are inconclusive, the preliminary results of the first randomized controlled study from the usa conducted under the auspices of the national institute of allergy and infectious disease, adaptive covid-19 treatment trial have also been released (nct04280705, table 2 ) on the same day through a press release. 39 although full data release is awaited, the preliminary analysis of over 1063 enrollments showed that the median time to recovery was shorter in those who treated with remdesivir compared to those treated with placebo (11 days versus 15 days, p<0.001).the results also showed a trend toward survival benefit with remdesivir (mortality of 8% in remdesivir arm versus 11.6% in placebo, p=0.059). in absence of details, it is also uncertain as to what proportion of the population received treatment with additional therapeutic agents for covid-19. finally, in another press release, gilead sciences inc. summarized results of an open-label study comparing the treatment regimen of 5 versus 10 days of remdesivir for severe covid-19 (nct04292899, table 2 ). 40 clinical improvement was similar with either regimen; however, lack of placebo arm and limitation of the study details prohibit meaningful conclusions.together, these reports suggest a promising role for remdesivir for covid-19, though its effects on hard outcomes, including mortality, are still pending. release of the full reports of these recently reported randomized studies and of the ongoing studies referenced in table 2 will be needed to judge the true efficacy and safety of remdesivir for covid-19.remdesivir has a low affinity for human rna polymerase ii and human mitochondrial rna polymerase, which is expected to contribute to a favorable safety profile in humans. 22 safety was initially evaluated in phase one of the dose-ranging studies. 23 single doses from 3 to 225 mg were well tolerated with no observed toxicities. multiple administrations of remdesivir 150 mg for 7 or 14 days led to reversible grade 1 and 2 alanine aminotransferase (alt) and aspartate transaminase (ast) elevations. remdesivir is not considered to have reproductive or developmental toxicity. remdesivir injection is formulated with sulfobutylether-β-cyclodextrin (sbecd). 41 other drug products formulated with sbedc, such as intravenous voriconazole, carry warnings for sbecd accumulation in patients with renal issn: 1740-4398 review -remdesivir and covid-19 drugsincontext.com only been released for nct04257656, as described earlier. 38 the remaining active trials include comparisons with placebo, active comparators (e.g., hydroxychloroquine and lopinavir/ ritonavir), short (5 days) versus long (10 days) remdesivir regimens, and patients with moderate-to-severe covid-19.infectious disease outbreaks have shaped the course of human history, and with every new outbreak come new challenges. today, scientists and clinicians around the globe are fighting to halt the covid-19 pandemic. a chief concern remains: there are no antiviral treatments proven to be effective in fully published, peer-reviewed, randomized placebo-controlled trials. remdesivir has emerged as a promising candidate based on its in vitro activity against sars-cov-2, uncontrolled clinical reports, and limited data from randomized trials. however, expectations should be tempered based on lessons from the past. remdesivir has potent in vitro activity against ebov, and was highly efficacious in an animal model of evd. unfortunately, early hopes for a new paradigm in evd management were deflated with the completion of the first randomized trial. remdesivir holds promise for covid-19, but the first published randomized trial was underpowered and inconclusive. high-quality data are still lacking at this time. thus, clinicians across the world now eagerly await complete results from additional randomized trials in covid-19. will remdesivir deliver?dysfunction. 41 however, the clinical significance of vehicle accumulation is unclear. 42 patients with crcl < 30 ml/min have been excluded from remdesivir compassionate use and expanded access protocols thus far. 31 some ongoing clinical trials (table 2 ) are excluding patients with crcl ≤ 50 ml/min.in the open-label covid-19 compassionate use cohort, 37 32/53 (60%) patients reported adverse events, while 4/53 (8%) experienced adverse events leading to discontinuation. the most common adverse events were increased hepatic enzymes, diarrhea, rash, and renal impairment. this constellation of events is difficult to interpret as there is a significant overlap with clinical attributes of severe covid-19. no new safety concerns were noted in the published covid-19 randomized trial. adverse events leading to drug discontinuation occurred in 18 (12%) remdesivir patients and 4 (5%) placebo patients. 38 reported adverse events were uncommon in the landmark evd trial. the full toxicity profile will be further elucidated as results emerge from additional placebo-controlled trials in covid-19.there are currently seven randomized trials involving remdesivir registered on clinicaltrials.gov ( table 2 ). two of these trials, both conducted in china (nct04257656 and nct04252664), were recently terminated or suspended. the information posted to clinicaltrials.gov indicates difficulty enrolling subjects as the covid-19 pandemic has come under control in the region. of the two halted studies, results have contributions: all authors contributed equally to the preparation of this review. joe pardo and asmita gupte were involved in the organization, review and critique of the manuscript. ashutosh shukla was involved in the conception, execution, review and critique of the manuscript. gajapathiraju chamarthi was involved in the review and critique of the manuscript. all named authors meet the international committee of medical journal editors (icmje) criteria for authorship for this article, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given their approval for this version to be published.the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.the international committee of medical journal editors (icmje) potential conflicts of interests form for the authors is available for download at: https://www.drugsincontext.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/dic.2020-4-14-coi.pdfthe novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov), officially named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is a newlyemerged human infectious coronavirus. since december 2019, it has spread rapidly in china in a short period of time. as of march 17, 2020, there have been 81116 confirmed cases and 3231 deaths. it has also outbreak in other countries, such as korea, japan, italy, singapore, and iran, with a total of 85296 cases confirmed. due to it is a newlyemerged virus, researchers have taken quick actions to isolate the virus and perform gene sequencing, making identifying treatments possible. even so, it takes time to develop new drugs and vaccines, as well as to explore biotherapeutics, thus it is unlikely to be applied to patients with urgent need. therefore, "conventional drug in new use" becomes a viable solution. the sars-cov-2 is 80% homologous with the acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (sars-cov), which also broke out in china in 2002, and some enzymes are even more than 90% homologous [1] . consequently, we are expecting to find drugs for the treatment of covid-19 from the experience of sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov). some drugs, such as ribavirin, interferon, lopinavir, and corticosteroids, have been used in patients with sars or mers [2] , within the selection range of "conventional drug in new use". through clinical treatment of the covid- 19 , it has been found that neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, peramivir, zanamivir), ganciclovir, acyclovir, ribavirin are ineffectual and not recommended for clinical application [3] . when we set our sights on the broad-spectrum antiviral drugs, we found that a drug unlisted, remdesivir, has demonstrated strength in trials related to mers-cov and ebola virus infection. in the united states, the first patient with covid-19 has shown significant improvement in clinical symptoms within 24 h of treatment with remdesivir. this case has convinced the public that remdesivir could become a new "specific drug" for covid-19. this article starts from the structure, immunogenicity, and pathogenesis of infection of the sars-cov-2, and then analyzes the feasibility of conducting trials and putting into clinical use of covid-19 from the pharmacological characteristics and successful cases of remdesivir. different from sars-cov and mers-cov, and becomes the seventh member of the coronavirus family to infect humans [4] .sars-cov-2 shows the typical beta coronavirus organization: 5′ untranslated region (utr), replication enzyme coding region, s gene, e gene, m gene, n gene, 3' utr, and several unidentified nonstructural open reading frames ( fig. 1 ) [4] . the replication enzyme coding region mainly expresses and encodes two large genes: orf1a and orf1b, which encode 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp1~nsp16) that are highly conserved throughout the coronavirus. s gene, m gene, e gene, and n gene respectively encode four main structural proteins: spike (s), membrane (m), envelope (e), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins. the s protein is the receptor binding site, which is on the viral surface; the m protein shapes the virions, promotes membrane curvature, and is responsible for the transport of nutrients across cell membranes; the e protein plays a role in the assembly and release of virus, and is involved in viral pathogenesis; the n protein can bind virus rna genome and maintain its stability [5] . among them, s protein plays a key role in virus recognizing and binding to host cell surface receptors, and mediating the fusion of virus envelope and cell membrane [6] . through the analysis of the whole genome sequence of sars-cov-2, it shares 40% sequence similarity with mers-cov and 80% sequence similarity with sars-cov, indicating that sars-cov-2 is more compatible with sars-cov [7] . in addition, by performing systematic structural simulations and immunogenicity scans of the s proteins of all coronaviruses, as well as calculating the immunogenic distance between sars-cov-2 and other coronavirus subtypes, it can be concluded that the immunogenicity of the s protein of sars-cov-2 is closer to that of sars-cov [8] . it is known that sars-cov enters target cells by binding the s protein to the ace2 receptor on the cell surface, which is triggered by the cell serine protease tmprss2 [9] . in view of the 76% amino acid similarity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov [10] , we can speculate that the novel coronavirus may have a similar function to sars-cov, which has been preliminary proved in bioinformatics prediction methods as well as in vitro tests [9] .previous studies have shown that 4 of the 5 key amino acids of the s protein on the surface of sars-cov-2 that binds to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor on the target cells have changed. it was suspected it may affect the affinity of the s protein to ace2 receptor, and in turn affect the spread of the virus among the public [10] . however, through calculation methods of molecular structure simulation, the interaction between the s protein of sars-cov and the ace2 receptor has perfectly maintained in a holistic manner [11] . at present, it has been proved that the binding affinity between the extracellular domain of the s protein of sars-cov-2 and ace2 receptors is about 10-20 times higher than that of sars-cov, which may facilitate human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 [12] .covid-19 is a respiratory syndrome caused by sars-cov-2 infection. in general, covid-19 is an acute resolved disease, and the most common symptoms at onset are fever, dry cough, and fatigue, partly with nausea, diarrhea, or other gastrointestinal symptoms. compared with sars and mers, covid-19 has milder clinical symptoms and lower fatality [13, 14] , but it can also be fatal. severe patients may develop diffuse alveolar injury, progressive respiratory failure, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and so on.similar to sars-cov, the receptor binding domain (rbd) of s protein on the surface of sars-cov-2 binds to the ace2 receptor on the cell surface to facilitate the virus entering the host cell; then the virus exposes its rna, translates its rna replicase, and forms an rna replicase-transcriptase complex. through transcription and replication, the complex forms rna negative strands that will be translated for the structural proteins of the virus later. then the structural proteins and rna in the cytoplasm assemble into new viral particles, which are released from infected cells by exocytosis to infect other cells (fig. 2 ). each infected cell produces thousands of novel viral particles that spread to bronchi, eventually reach the alveoli, and extrapulmonary organs, causing pneumonia and targeted organic infections. however, the ace2 receptor is not only expressed in the respiratory organs. it has been reported that, by using the rna-seq method to express ace2 receptors in human tissues, the number of ace2 receptors expressed in the gastrointestinal tract (high in esophagus, small intestine, and colon, but low in stomach), kidneys, and testes is nearly 100 times higher than that in the lung [15] , suggesting that these tissues may also be the target organs for sars-cov-2 invasion. it may explain why some patients with covid-19 developed other system injuries clinically besides respiratory system injuries. furthermore, it have been found that sars-cov-2 nucleic acid detection is positive in the feces of some patients, indicating that there may be live virus in the feces, and the digestive system may be a potential route for covid-19 [16] .in covid-19, in addition to the direct damages caused by the virus, the indirect immune injuries caused by the injured tissues also attract great concern, which may be related to the severity and fatality of the disease. previous studies have shown that pulmonary inflammation and extensive lung injury in patients with sars are associated with an increase in proinflammatory cytokines (such as il-1β, il-6, il-12, ifn-γ, ip-10, and mcp-1) in serum [17] . and it has been reported that the mers-cov infection induced elevated proinflammatory cytokine concentrations (such as ifn-γ, tnf-α, il-15, and il-17) in serum [18] . we note that patients with covid-19 also have high levels of il-1β, ifn-γ, ip-10, and mcp-1 in their serum, leading to activation of the th1 cell responses. furthermore, the concentrations of gcsf, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, and tnf-α in icu patients were higher than those in non-icu patients, indicating that cytokine storms were associated with disease severity. apart from this, sars-cov-2 infection also activates the secretion of cytokines (such as il-4 and il-10) in th2 cell responses that suppress inflammation, which is different from sars-cov infection [17] . further researches are needed to investigate the responses of th1 and th2 in sars-cov-2 infection to elucidate the pathogenesis of currently, the pathogenesis of covid-19 is unclear. the first pathologic autopsy of a patient with covid-19 demonstrated that the lungs of the patient reviews diffuse alveolar injury and pulmonary hyaline membrane formation, consistent with ards. the overall pathological manifestations of the lungs were similar to sars and mers. flow cytometry signified that the number of cd4 + and cd8 + t lymphocytes in peripheral blood was greatly reduced, but their state was overactivated. other than this, ccr4 + and ccr6 + th17 lymphocytes with highly proinflammatory effects increased in cd4 + t lymphocytes; cd8 + t lymphocytes had a high concentration of cytotoxic granules, of which 31.6% were perforin positive, 64.2% were particle lysin positive, and 30.5% were both particle lysin and perforin positive. it manifests that the severe immune injury in this patient may be closely linked to the overactivation of t lymphocytes characterized by the increase of th17 lymphocytes and the high cytotoxicity of cd8 + t lymphocytes [19] .we presume that the failure to develop a full adaptive immune response to covid-19 could be due to: the progression of pneumonia was too rapid to allow the available establishment of adaptive immune responses. likewise, the counts of peripheral cd4 + and cd8 + t lymphocytes were substantially reduced, leading to insufficient immune defenses. furthermore, peripheral t lymphocytes are in an over-activated state, manifested by increase of th17 and high cytotoxicity of cd8 + t lymphocytes, accounting for to a certain degree of immune injury in patients. this over activation not only failed to establish an immune response, but also caused tissue injuries, mostly manifested as severe injury in the lungs, and some patients died of multiple organ failure. this situation further accelerates the deterioration and shortens the course of the disease, hampering the establishment of fully adaptive immune response. the immunopathological injuries caused by the over activation also provides us with an idea for treating covid-19, for example, we can probably apply the il-17 inhibitor (secukinwmab) directed against th17 cell activation, but it still need more exploration. also, vaccines are also one of the solutions to make up for the lack of adaptive immune response.the latest study terms that the changes of viral nucleic acid in patients with covid-19 is similar to that in patients with influenza, but different from those with sars. viral load can be detected not only in symptomatic patients but also in asymptomatic patients, pointing out the potential for virus transmission in asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients. these findings are coherent with reports evidencing that the virus transmission may have occurred early in infectious processes, illustrating that case detection and isolation may require a different strategy from that required to control sars-cov [20] .remdesivir (gs-5734) is a nucleoside analogues drug (fig. 3b ) with extensive antiviral activity and effective treatment of lethal ebola and nipah virus infections in nonhuman primates [21] . as an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) inhibitor, it can inhibit the replication of multiple coronaviruses in respiratory epithelial cells. a recent study reported that remdesivir competes with natural counterpart atp. once remdesivir added into the growing chain (i position), it cannot cause an immediate stop. on the contrary, it will continue to extend three more nucleotides down to stop the strand at (i + 3) position (fig. 2) [22] .in the ces1c (−/−) mouse sars model, the preventive treatment trial of remdesivir achieved satisfactory results. administering 1 day after the onset of the disease, lung virus titers decreased significantly, fig. 2 . sars-cov-2 invasion process and how remdesivir works 1 sars-cov-2 enters target cells by binding the s protein to the ace2 receptor on the cell surface; 2 remdeivir, the nucleotide analogues, act as rdrp inhibitors, can provide a scheme for blocking rna replication; 3once remdesivir added into the growing chain (i position), is cannot cause an immediate stop. on the contrary, it will continue to extend three more nucleotides down to stop the strand at (i + 3) position; 4 remdesivir triphosphate cannot be removed by nsp14-exon.the original structure of the drug is derived from drugbank (https://www.drugbank.ca, accessed feb 25). with improvements on pulmonary function. administering 2 days after the onset, the pulmonary virus titer can be obviously reduced, but the survival rate of mice is still relatively low. this study implied that when the pulmonary injuries reach the maximum, simply reducing the virus titer can no longer suppress the strong immune responses in mice, also showing that administering before the peak of virus replication can significantly improve symptoms of the infected mice [23] . in a rhesus monkey model infected with mers-cov, treating with remdesivir 24 h before infection can completely prevent symptoms caused by mers-cov, strongly inhibit viral replications in the respiratory tract, and prevent the formation of pulmonary lesions. administering remdesivir 12 h after infection provides clear clinical benefits, reducing clinical symptoms, lung virus replication, and lung lesions [24] . pharmacokinetic experiments in cynomolgus monkeys showed the first-pass effect of oral remdesivir resulted in a low bioavailability of the drug. intramuscular injection of 3 mg/kg had a 50% survival rate compared with the control group. administering intravenously at a dose of 10 mg/kg, remdesivir rapidly decomposed into the original drug (nucleoside phosphate) in rhesus monkeys. within 2 h, remdesivir quickly distributed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs), and soon afterwards activated to nucleoside triphosphate to reach a peak, with a survival rate of 100% [25] . as for pharmacokinetic studies in vivo, after the intravenous infusion of the remdesivir solution formulation at a single dose of 3-225 mg for 2 h, it showed dose-linear pharmacokinetics. intravenous infusion of 150 mg of a remdesivir solution repeated 1 h per day showed a linear pharmacokinetics over a period of 14 days. after intravenously injecting 75 and 150 mg of remdesivir solution formulations over 2 h, the pharmacokinetic profile was similar to that of a lyophilized formulation. intravenous infusion of 75 mg of drug over 30 min provides similar levels of parent drug exposure to the same dose over 2 h (table 1) . after the intravenous infusion, remdesivir will enter the cellular metabolism to form active gs-443902 (fig. 3c) , but the frequencies of pbmcs exposure of gs-443902 is higher than those of intravenous infusion of remdesivir 150 mg within 2 h. studies in pbmcs show that the half-life of gs-443902 is more than 35 h [26] . in the case of daily administration, the active substance of the drug gs-443902 will accumulate in vivo. as a result, in large-scale clinical trials, after the first dose of 200 mg is administered, the subsequent dose is adjusted to 100 mg to ensure the proper blood concentration in vivo [27] .intravenous infusions in previously phase i clinical trials have good safety and pharmacokinetic properties. also, no cytotoxicity, hepatorenal toxicity, or no serious adverse reactions related to metering have been observed in climbing experiments. subjects were tolerant in studies that repeated 150 mg intravenously daily for 7-14 days. remdesivir did not show any renal injuries in a multi-dose study [26] . phase ii clinical trials were conducted in ebola virus-infected patients.in clinical trials of anti-ebola drugs, the fatality rate of patients in the experimental group using remdesivir was 53%, and the efficacy was significantly worse than that of the two monoclonal antibodies mab114 (fatality rate 35%) and regn-eb3 (fatality rate 33%) [27] . the 53% fatality rate was not significantly different from the average 50% fatality rate of ebola virus infection, and as a result, phase ii clinical trials were stopped. nevertheless, in consideration of ebola's high lethality and monoclonal antibodies with more obvious therapeutic effects, when there are merely 175 patients injected remdesivir, we cannot assume remdesivir of no avail. the small sample size is not enough to deny the effect of remdesivir. moreover, receptors of ebola virus are widely distributed in vivo, not only to the respiratory tract, but also to the digestive tract, urinary tract, and blood system, etc., causing mortally hemorrhagic fever; in addition, ebola virus persists in the eyes and central nervous system for long [28] . once remdesivir entering body, it will be quickly distributed to the testis, epididymis, eyes, and brain, but relatively less in eyes and brain [29] . all these indicate that the wide range of spread of ebola virus in the high lethality tissues make remdesivir control ebola ineffectively. the wuhan virus research institute conducted in vitro experiments on covid-19 of remdesivir and found that remdesivir was the fastest-acting and most powerful antiviral agent. in the primary culture of human airway epithelial cells in vitro, sars-cov's ic 50 = 0.069 μm, mers-cov's ic 50 = 0.074 μm, and the dose-dependent effect on virus inhibition [2] , which is speculatively related to the fact that remdesivir triphosphate cannot be removed by nsp14-exon [30] . it has been conjectured the loss of function of exonuclease may be involved with the three additional nucleotides added after the incorporation of remdesivir into the extended strand [22] .in vitro and animal models, remdesivir has demonstrated activity against both sars and mers that also belong to coronaviruses, and theoretically provides support its effectiveness in treating covid-19.presently, there have been successful cases of remdesivir in the treating covid-19. the new england journal of medicine reported the entire course of rehabilitation of the first patient with covid-19 in the united states. the patient once visited wuhan but was neither directly exposed to wuhan seafood market nor had direct contact with the diagnosed patients. he returned to washington on january 15, 2020. on 19 january, due to cough and fever for four days, he went to the hospital for emergency treatment, and was then diagnosed with covid-19. his condition was stable from the second to the fifth day of admission (the sixth to ninth day of onset). on the evening of the fifth day of admission, the blood oxygen saturation decreased to 90%. the condition continued to worsen, and chest radiographs on the sixth day of admission (tenth day of onset) showed typical characteristics of covid-19. in view of the continuous aggravation of the patient's clinical symptoms, the physicians gave a chartered medication (compassionate use) to remdesivir on the evening of the 6th day of admission, and began to give intravenous to the patient on the evening of the seventh day of admission (the eleventh day of onset), without adverse reactions. vancomycin was discontinued that night and cefepime was discontinued the following day. on the eighth day of admission (the twelfth day of onset), the patient's clinical symptoms were improved, and the oxygen saturation increased to 94%. although the patient was still hospitalized as of january 30, 2020, all symptoms had been resolved except for cough and occasional running nose [31] .it is worth noting that from the data in the article, it can be found the viral load of patients has decreased before remdesivir injection (table 2) , which is not described in detail in the original report. it's known that the viral infection is self-limiting, and the patient is a mild to moderate infectious case with a controlled fever in time, thus it is possible that his recovery is related to the role of self-defense mechanisms and supportive treatment as well. it cannot be inferred that table 1 drug concentrations in plasma and the concentration of pharmacologically active substances in pbmc in healthy people. the improvement of patients' condition after taking the drug is definitely connected to remdesivir. whether there is a link between the improvement of the symptoms and the drug is worth further consideration. clinical symptoms, especially respiratory symptoms, have been improved significantly within 24 h, bringing hope for the treatment of patients with severe covid-19. for covid-19 no specific medication is available, remdesivir is expected to be a "specific drug". however, for the acute infectious diseases, reducing the number of viral copies in the body is the key point. also, the efficacy of the drug should be focused on the pharmacokinetics and kinetics data of covid-19 in the ongoing phase iii clinical trials.the outbreak of sars-cov-2 in wuhan constituted an epidemic threat in china. the world health organization announced it a public health emergency of international concern on january 30, 2020. during the outbreak, the number of confirmed cases in china showed an exponential growth. the people and the government of the country tried their best to fight the epidemic with soaring combat mood. the nation's enthusiasm to fight the epidemic provides the trials on covid-19 a favorable environment. at the same time, article 23 of china's new drug administration law, which came into effect on december 1, 2019, has enabled the "compassionate use" to develop adaptively in china. two clinical trials on remdesivir have passed the most stringent ethical review of the 74 projects. on february 5, 2020 the trial has officially launched with experimental drugs provided by gilead sciences for free in china by professor chen wang, an academician of chinese academy of engineering, an internationally renowned respiratory expert who successfully suggested chinese government building "fang cang" hospitals to cure more than 10 thousand mild or prepatent covid-19 patients [32] . due to the large number of confirmed cases of covid-19 in china with no effective drugs, it is easy to collect clinical samples for trials theoretically. however, the rigor of the included samples hindered recruitment. as public attach more attention on prevention and treatment, fewer patients meet stringent inclusion criteria, resulting in a slow recruitment process. another reason is that there are plenty of drugs in the clinical trials, speeding up the patients' leaving hospital. nevertheless, it has been reported that more severe patients have been recruited, which provides favorable conditions for the trial of the severe group, and as a result, at least, it can be rapidly applied to the clinical treatment of severe patients in the near future. the need of treatment on covid-19 is urgent, so if the results of clinical trials prove it has the potential to benefit the treatment, according to china's "compassionate use", remdesivir will be more immediately used in patients with severe illness. meanwhile, the opening of green channels under special circumstances to speed up the review and approval process of the drug approval center will undoubtedly help save the lives of critical patients and promote the developing of "specific drugs". in the absence of clinical trial results, it is still difficult to put remdesivir into large scale clinical use [33] . with the political support, the rapid development of clinical trials on remdesivir is imperative.a drug, gs-441524 (compound a, fig. 3a ) for treating feline infectious peritonitis (fip) caused by coronavirus infection in cats has been tested in cats. its safety and effectiveness in treating fip have been proven [34] , with fda's approval. it can be seen from the structure that remdesivir is phosphorylated from gs-441524, with identical target rdrp (fig. 2) . it is noteworthy that though coronavirus reproduces more than 20 generations in gs-441524 yields resistance, the resistant virus is still sensitive to high concentrations of remdesivir and the fitness of the resistant virus has reduced to the same level as wild-type mers-cov [35] , which avoids resistant mutant coronaviruses from producing resistant supervirus. at the beginning of developing remdesivir, gilead science selected a large number of nucleosides or their prodrugs to conduct in vitro growth inhibition experiments on ebola-infected human microvascular endothelial cells in the laboratory and found compound a showed inhibitory activity (ec 50 = 0.78 μm), and the compound a was gs-441524. thereafter, on the basis of compound a, after examining the activity and toxicity of compounds surrounding compound a, modifying the prodrug, and optimizing amino acids and acyl groups, the cynomolgus monkey performs a pharmacokinetic test to select a structure such as gs-5734 (fig. 3b) [25] . although in phase ii it was not as effective as competitive drugs and clinical trials were terminated, remdesivir showed good safety and pharmacokinetics in both phases i and ii clinical trials. covid-19 has once again brought remdesivir to the stage of clinical trials. whether the results of phase iii clinical trial will make its comeback to the stage is worthy of expectation.phase ii clinical trials have demonstrated human tolerance to remdesivir. of the 175 patients in the phase ii clinical trial administering remdesivir, 9 were reported to have serious adverse reactions, 8 of whom were considered not related to drugs, and 1 with severe hypotension was thought to be drug-related, but still not confirmed [27] . the gs-441524, a drug used to treat fip, has shown a high degree of safety in feline trials as well. the focal injection site reactions only showed in immediate pain with vocalization, occasional growling, and postural changes lasting for 30-60s. these initial reactions were relieved after the owners became more adept at administering the injection. except for a cat with a slight increase in urea nitrogen and sdma of the third round of treatment, no other symptoms of systemic poisoning were observed [34] . relevant research signified that through a large number of synthesis and structure-activity analysis, the toxicity was greatly reduced after gs-411524 was synthesized into gs-5734 (remdesivir) [36] . the safety of remdesivir in human is further speculated.coronaviruses must replicate nucleic acids to generate new progeny virus after entering human cells. sars-cov-2 is known to be single stranded rna virus, so rdrp must be used to replicate nucleic acids. remdesivir, a nucleotide analogues, act as rdrp inhibitor, can provide a scheme for blocking rna replication. related studies have found that it plays a role in the final stage of entering the cell, which is consistent with its expected mode of action. wuhan virus research institute carried out a vitro inhibition test and found that remdesivir can block virus infection at very low micromolar concentration of vero e6 cells infected with virus, and the cell selectivity is high (ec 50 = 0.77 μm, cc 50 > 100 μm, si > 129.87) [2] . in an anti-ebola infection experiment on cynomolgus monkeys, intravenous injection of 10 mg/kg of remdesivir, the drug can exist in the blood for a long time and can inhibit to ebola virus with a percentage of 100 [25] . wuhan virus research institute's research that applied remdesivir to vero e6 cells with an ec 90 = 1.76 μμ, lower than that of the monkey model, draw to a speculation that it could also play a role in sars-cov-2 infected monkeys. based on the effectiveness in previous researches, although there are many unknowns and limits of remdesivir, the phase iii clinical trials on sars-cov-2 are not only a fight against this epidemic, but also of strategic importance to reserve more effective antiviral drugs for the future.strategic reservation for antiviral drugs will avoid the difficulty of medicine unavailable when an outbreak comes again. remdesivir's situational and political superiority, as well as its previous research results and application effects make it imperative to carry out the clinical trials focusing on the sars-cov-2. given that sars-cov-2 is an rna virus that is easy to mutate, the rapid starting of clinical trials is undoubtedly a right choice to prevent the resistance mutation due to blind medication. it has been covered in the world health organization (who) director-general's opening remarks at the media briefing on covid-19 on february 20, 2020 that the two clinical trials on remdesivir of therapeutics prioritized by the who r&d blueprint are y.-c. cao, et al. travel medicine and infectious disease xxx (xxxx) xxxx expected preliminary results in three weeks. on february 24, the who cast a vote of confidence for gilead sciences' experimental antiviral drug, remdesivir, indicating that remdesivir has great potential and may be the best candidate for the treatment of covid-19. whatever the progress of the clinical trials is, we are expecting that the clinical trials of remdesivir, a starring drug, would bring outstanding breakthroughs to the treatment of covid-19, or more promisingly, other virus infection in the future.all authors contributed to the conception of the review. yc cao and qx deng reviewed the literature and drafted the manuscript. sx dai critically reviewed the manuscript. all authors contributed to the revision of the manuscript.the authors report no conflicts.coronaviruses are a family of enveloped viruses with a positivesense, single-stranded rna genome that infects animal species and humans. among coronavirus members are those responsible for the common cold, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars), middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mers), and the recently emerged severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2, the causative pathogen of the disease covid-19). 1 coronaviruses primarily cause respiratory and intestinal infections in animals and humans. 2 discovered in the 1960s, they were originally thought to be only responsible for mild disease, with strains such as hcov 229e and hcov oc43 responsible for the common cold. 3 that changed in 2003 with the sars pandemic and in 2012 with the outbreak of mers, both zoonotic infections that resulted in mortality rates greater than 10% and 35%, respectively. 4 both coronaviruses likely emerged from native bat populations, which maintain a broad diversity of coronaviruses, and were transmitted through an intermediate host to humans. loss of natural habitat and increased exposure to new hosts are likely responsible for the increased frequency of zoonotic infections originating from bats. 5, 6 evidence also supports that the novel coronavirus which emerged in the wuhan region of china in late 2019 also originated from bats. 7 this novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2, resulted in an outbreak of pathogenic viral pneumonia in wuhan, hubei province, china, as reported to the world health organization (who) in december 2019. subsequent spread has led to a global pandemic (officially declared by the who on march 11, 2020 8 ) .covid-19 disease appears to be a spectrum of clinical presentations ranging from asymptomatic to severe respiratory failure. common symptomology at the onset of illness are fever, cough, and general myalgia, with less common symptoms including sputum production, headache, and diarrhea. 9−11 an initial case analysis from china through mid-february 2020 found 14% of cases were associated with severe disease (dyspnea, respiratory frequency ≥ 30/min, blood oxygen saturation ≤ 93%, partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio < 300, and/or lung infiltrates > 50% within 24−48 h), and 5% of cases were critical (i.e., respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction or failure). 12 a more extensive meta-analysis found a slightly higher severe disease percentage (20.3%). 13 the disease case fatality rate (cfr) varies depending on region, population demographics, and heath care capabilities; for instance, in italy an overall cfr of 7.2% is estimated, in part driven by the higher proportion of individuals of advanced age compared to china. 14 on the basis of global data, the cfr from covid-19 based on confirmed cases is estimated to be ∼6.9%. 15 disease progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome typically occurs in older patients (over 63), often with underlying medical conditions such as hypertension or diabetes; 16 elevated risk of mortality was associated with advanced age, sepsis, blood clotting deficiencies. 17, 18 in individuals less than 60 years of age, an increased body to mass index (over 30) was associated with increased disease severity and progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome. 19 other symptoms, including neurologic symptoms and coagulopathies, have also been reported in a portion of infected individuals. 20−24 similar to other coronaviruses, sars-cov-2 primarily infects the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract, with a cell tropism of nasal epithelial cells, pneumocytes, and alveolar macrophages in the lung and enterocytes in the bowel. 25−27 although not limited to only these specific cell types, evidence does support that cell binding via the viral s protein to the host receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is required for infection ( figure 1 ). 28, 29 following entry of the virus into the host cell, the virus complex is then translocated to the endosome, where endosomal acid proteases cleave the s protein mediating membrane fusion. 28 the viral genome is released and translated into the viral replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab, which are cleaved into functional proteins by viral proteases. subgenomic templates for mrna synthesis and translation of the viral structural proteins occur through discontinuous transcription. 2 viral genome replication is mediated by the viral replication complex, which includes an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, exonu-cleasen, and other accessory proteins. subsequent assembly of viral nucleocapsids from the packaged viral genomes and translated viral structural proteins occurs at the endoplasmic figure 1 . life cycle of sars-cov-2 in host cells. sars-cov-2 primarily infects the respiratory tract (nasal epithelial cells, pneumocytes, and alveolar macrophages) and the gastrointestinal tract (enterocytes). the virus enters though direct interaction between the viral s protein and the cellular receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). following entry, the viral genome is released and translated into the viral replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab, which are cleaved into functional proteins by viral proteases. 2 viral genome replication is mediated by the viral replication complex, including the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp). viral nucleocapsids are assembled from the packaged viral genomes and translated viral structural proteins and released through exocytosis. potential targets and postulated mechanism of action for antiviral interventions are shown: blocking virus/host cell interaction through the use of antibodies/nanobodies (and convalescent plasma therapy) or recombinant ace2 protein; use of hydroxychloroquine (based on in vitro data) to inhibit endosome maturation; use of protease inhibitors to inhibit viral/endosome membrane fusion or viral polypeptide maturation; nucleoside/nucleotide analogues to inhibit viral genome replication. reticulum-golgi intermediate compartment, 30 with infectious virions then released from the cell through exocytosis.as a new disease, sars-cov-2 does not have any clinically proven therapeutics. furthermore, a significant amount of preclinical research was reported in the search for therapeutic treatments for the related viruses sars and mers. as the sars and mers coronavirus outbreaks did not persist, no therapeutic or vaccine development programs were completed. the consequence is that drug repositioning and repurposing has received a significant amount of attention, 31 and approved agents including hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, ritonavir, ruxolitinib, and camostat have entered clinical trials to address the current sars-cov-2 pandemic (figure 1 ). 32−34 although some candidates do have pre-existing data to support activity against coronaviruses, other repurposing candidates for potential use against sars-cov-2 are based on their ability to inhibit sars-cov-2 viral replication in vitro. 29,35−37 these include hydroxychloroquine, a known autophagy inhibitor that suppresses lysosomal function, 38 and the serine protease inhibitor camostat. 29 the ability of these compounds to act as prophylactic agents, treat disease, or even modulate viral replication in vivo has not been demonstrated, although clinical evaluation of several of these potential therapeutics is ongoing.one of the first clinical candidates that has received attention is remdesivir, a pre-existing drug candidate developed by gilead sciences as part of an antiviral development effort, with initial results against ebola virus (ebov) reported in 2015. 39 it was recently authorized for compassionate use and has now entered controlled clinical trials. like all other therapeutic approaches for patients with covid-19, remdesivir was not developed specifically to treat covid-19, and here we review its discovery and mode of action.remdesivir (gs-5734) was developed by gilead sciences and emerged from a collaboration between gilead, the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and the u.s. army medical research institute of infectious diseases (usamriid). they sought to identify therapeutic agents for treating rna-based viruses that maintained global pandemic potential, such as those that indeed emerged following the initiation of the program, including ebov and the coronaviridae family viruses exemplified by middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars).as a starting point for discovery, a library of ∼1000 small molecules focused around nucleoside analogues was compiled, based on prior knowledge of effective antiviral compounds targeting rna viruses. nucleosides are poorly cell-permeable (and therefore can have a low hit rate in cell-based screens such as antiviral screens), so modified nucleosides such as monophosphate, ester, and phosphoramidate prodrugs composed a significant portion of the library. such prodrugs are typically more permeable and metabolized to liberate the nucleoside or phosphorylated nucleoside within cells. 40−42 while the data from the original full screen does not appear to have been disclosed, a 1′-cn modified adenosine c-nucleoside hit (gs-441524), along with a prodrug form of the monophosphate of gs-441524 (gs-5734, later renamed as remdesivir), was found to be highly potent. 43 gs-441524 and its s-acyl-2-thioethyl monophosphate prodrug had previously been reported in 2012 as potent leads from a series of 10substituted 4-aza-7,9-dideazaadenosine c-nucleosides, with broad activity against a panel of rna viruses: yellow fever virus (yfv), dengue virus type 2 (denv-2), influenza a, parainfluenza 3, and sars. 44 the primary assay used was the cytoprotection effect (cpe) assay, in which live virus is incubated with a target cell line and the antiviral activity is inferred by the ability of a test agent to rescue cell death, measured using a standard cell viability reagent. 45 in a 2012 study, gs-5734 showed cpe activity against sars strain toronto 2 (ic 50 = 2.2 μm) without causing cytotoxicity toward the host vero african green monkey kidney epithelial cells used in the cpe assay (note that different target cells were utilized in viral cpe assays).when the ebola outbreak occurred in 2014, the assembled library was utilized to identify and prioritize compounds with efficacy against ebov. the study by madelain et al. found that gs-5734 reduced ebov replication in hela cells with an ic 50 ≈ 100 nm, and it retained potency in in vivo nonhuman primate ebov infection models, while gs-441524 was inactive. 46, 47 in addition to demonstrating activity against ebov, warren et al. showed that remdesivir also had antiviral activity against several other viruses, including the coronavirus mers, with an ic 50 of 340 nm in vitro.with the demonstration that gs-5734 (remdesivir) possessed broad activity against rna viruses, multiple groups assessed antiviral activity both in vitro and in vivo, 45, 48, 49 validating its activity against coronaviruses. antiviral activity was confirmed against sars, mers zoonotic coronaviruses, 49 as well as the circulating human coronaviruses hcov-oc43 and hcov-229e, causative agents of the common cold. 50 furthermore, de wit et al. demonstrated that remdesivir had both prophylactic and therapeutic activity against mers in a nonhuman primate in vivo model. 51 the pharmacokinetics of remdesivir have been summarized in compassionate use documentation published by the european medicines agency (ema, 2020). remdesivir is administered via an intravenous injection (iv) with a loading dose on day 1 (200 mg in adults, adjusted for body weight in pediatric patients) followed by a daily maintenance dose (100 mg in adults) for up to 10 days. in nonhuman primates, daily administration of 10 mg/kg of remdesivir yielded a short plasma half-life of the prodrug (t 1/2 = 0.39 h), but sustained intracellular levels of the triphosphate form. 45 in vitro and preclinical in vivo animal models supported the effectiveness of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 and related coronaviruses. these include a recent in vitro study of remdesivir assessing antiviral activity against sars-cov-2 (previously known as 2019-ncov, strain ncov-2019betacov/ wuhan/wiv04/2019) using qrt-pcr quantification of viral copy number in infected vero e6 cells. this study demonstrated an ic 50 of 770 nm and an ic 90 equal to 1,760 nm (with cytotoxic concentration >100 mm). 52 in addition, works by sheahan et al. and de wit et al. demonstrated in vivo efficacy of remdesivir at inhibiting viral replication and reducing viral related pathology against related coronaviruses. 51, 53 these findings, along with the safety profile of remdesivir in the clinical trial assessment against ebov, 54 support the evaluation of remdesivir as a potential therapeutic drug for repurposing against the sars-cov-2 pandemic.driven by the ebov outbreak in 2014 and based on in vitro and animal model in vivo efficacy against ebov, 45 gilead sciences initiated clinical evaluation of remdesivir for ebov. gilead pursued fda evaluation under the fda's animal rule, permitting the reliance on efficacy findings from animal studies for drugs in which it is not feasible or ethical to conduct human trials. as such, remdesivir was included in a randomized, controlled trial of ebola virus therapeutics in patients within the democratic republic of the congo (nct02818582); however, midstudy primary analyses found remdesivir inferior to the antibody based therapeutics mab114 and regn-eb3, with respect to mortality, and the remdesivir intervention arm was terminated. 54 mulangu et al. reported one serious adverse event related to remdesivir, an instance of hypotension, along with elevated creatinine and aspartate aminotransferase plasma levels (a suggestive marker for impaired kidney or liver function, respectively) in remdesivirtreated patients compared to either antibody based therapeutic arms. although remdesivir was inferior against ebov based on efficacy compared to antibody therapy, the study arm did provide an initial insight into the safety profile in patients.antiviral chemotherapeutic interventions often target specific viral enzymes or attack a weak point of viral replication within the host, such as targeting the divergent rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp; figure 2 ). nucleoside analogues represent a class of antiviral agents that has proven efficacious against several viruses, including hepatitis b and c as well as hiv. generally, these fall into three general classes: mutagenic nucleosides, obligate chain terminators, or delayed chain terminators. 55 ribavirin, a mutagenic nucleoside, targets the viral reliance on an rdrp to catalyze the replication of the rna genome from the original rna template. 56, 57 in a seminal paper, crotty et al. demonstrated that the rna virus poliovirus exists on the edge of viability, due to the proportion of virus particles with deleterious mutations. furthermore, treatment with concentrations of ribavirin that caused a 9.7fold increase in mutations was sufficient to induce "error catastrophe," in effect lethally mutating the poliovirus, reducing infectivity by 99.3%. 58 obligate chain terminators, such as azidothymidine (azt), lack the reactive 3′-hydroxyl group, which directly prevents additional dna synthesis after incorporation. 59 lastly, delayed chain terminators, which include remdesivir, block transcription despite still possessing the 3′-hydroxyl and thus can still form a phosphodiester bond with the next incorporated nucleotide. however, evidence suggests that the 1′cn substituent of remdesivir sterically repurposing or repositioning an effective small-molecule therapeutic promises the fastest therapeutic means to stem the tide of the pandemic. 61 highlighted is rdrp residue s861, which is predicted to sterically interact with the 1′cn substituent of remdesivir inducing delayed chain termination. 60 clashes with rdrp (residue s861) upon further chain elongation (remdesivir + three additional nucleotides), distorting the positioning of the rna and hampering translocation to the remdesivir + fourth position ( figure 2 ). 60 remdesivir (gs-5734), a prodrug, is metabolized within cells into an alanine metabolite (gs-704277), further processed into the monophosphate derivative and ultimately into the active nucleoside triphosphate derivative (figure 3 ). nucleotide analogues are not highly cell permeable, and once in the cell they require di-and then triphosphorylation to produce the nucleoside triphosphate (ntp) that can be utilized by the viral rna-dependent polymerases for genome replication. as such, ntps can then be misintegrated into viral rna by the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp; figure 2 ). to address this, an approach to antiviral drug design can employ the utilization of phosphoramidate prodrugs (protides, inferred as prodrugs of nucleotides). 62−65 protides are composed of a nucleoside monophosphate capped with an aryl group and an amino acid ester (a phosphoramidate). following diffusion into the cell, the prodrug is presumed to metabolize in a sequence of hydrolytic steps that starts with esterase-mediated ester hydrolysis to a carboxylate that cyclizes internally to the phosphonate ejecting the phenoxide; the resultant unstable cyclic anhydride is hydrolyzed open by water to the alanine metabolite gs-704277 whose p−n bond is hydrolyzed by a phosphoramidase-type enzyme ( figure  3 ). 66−69 this final step liberates the nucleoside monophosphate, which is highly polar, and does not diffuse back across the cell membrane (essentially trapping it within the cell). subsequent phosphorylation by host cell kinases convert the compound into the ntp analogue that can be used as a substrate by the viral rdrp enzyme. 70 while the nucleoside analogue core of remdesivir, gs-441524, can diffuse into cells, the initial phosphorylation step for nucleosides is rate-limiting (slow), which is believed to account for the reduced antiviral activity of gs-441524 compared to remdesivir. 49, 71 this approach has been successfully applied to a number of fdaapproved antiviral drugs including the gilead products sofosbuvir (for treating hcv) and tenofovir alafenamide (first approved for treating hiv). 64 upon diffusion of remdesivir into the cell, it is metabolized into the nucleoside monophosphate form via a sequence of steps that are presumably initiated by esterase-mediated hydrolysis of the amino acid ester that liberates a carboxylate that cyclizes on to the phosphorus displacing the phenoxide. the unstable cyclic anhydride is hydrolyzed by water to the alanine metabolite gs-704277 whose p−n bond is hydrolyzed by phosphoramidase-type enzymes to liberate the nucleoside monophosphate or nucleotide analog. the artificial nucleoside monophosphate is routed to further phosphorylation events (hijacking the endogenous phosphorylation pathway) yielding the active nucleoside triphosphate analogue form that is utilized by the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp). utilization of the gs-441524 nucleoside triphosphate analogue by rdrp inhibits viral replication through inducing delayed chain termination.http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acscii outlook remdesivir's antiviral activity, sterically interacting with the viral rdrp to induce delayed chain termination, has been demonstrated in vitro against multiple coronaviruses (sars, mers, contemporary human cov and bat-covs). 72 remdesivir was also shown to perturb pan-cov rdrp function by inhibiting viral replication of sars, mers, and the model βcoronavirus murine hepatitis virus (mhv), even in settings with intact exonuclease proofreading activity. 45 biochemical data from recombinant respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) rdrp suggested the primary mechanism of action was through delayed chain termination. 73 75 providing approximately 500-fold selectivity. this selectivity is achieved, at least in part, due to the nucleoside analogues being poor substrates for the human polymerases. 76 interestingly, in vitro assays demonstrate that the triphosphate form of the inhibitor was incorporated at increased rates compared to natural nucleotide pools, 77 likely adding to strong antiviral potency of remdesivir through premature rna synthesis termination.with the covid-19 outbreak increasing in size and a lack of alternative therapeutics, two clinical trials using remdesivir were designed and initiated in china. on february 5, 2020, a phase 3 randomized, quadruple-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was registered at capital medical university, with the goal to determine safety and efficacy of remdesivir in patients with mild to moderate sars-cov-2 infection (nct04252664, since suspended). 78 a day later, a second trial (nct04257656, since terminated) was registered at the same location, focused on patients with advanced covid-19 respiratory disease. 79 both trials had planned to track the primary outcome as time to clinical improvement, up to 28 days: normalization of fever, oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate, and alleviation of cough which is sustained for 72 h. both trials delivered remdesivir as a 200 mg loading dose on the first day, with 9 subsequent days of maintenance dosing at 100 mg; this regime is identical to that utilized in the previous nct03719586 ebola trial, which appears to be the model for all subsequent trials involving remdesivir (discussed below; figure 4 and table 1 , registered trials of remdesivir).contemporaneous to the development of the chinese trials, the first cases of covid-19 were emerging in the usa. on january 20, 2020, a patient reported to urgent care in snohomish county, washington with subjective fever and a 4-day history of cough, later to be confirmed as the first positive case of covid-19 in the usa. 80 on the seventh day of hospitalization and after worsening clinical status, the patient was given iv remdesivir under compassionate use access (gilead sciences), with no adverse events observed on infusion. 80 the patient's clinical condition improved the next day, though concurrent treatment with acetaminophen, among the candidate therapies, remdesivir has demonstrated efficacy in both in vitro and in vivo models against coronaviruses figure created with r, 91 utilizing the packages rnaturalearth, 92 sf, 93 ibuprofen, guaifenesin, vancomycin, cefepime, and supplemental oxygen confound the direct interpretation of remdesivir's impact. subsequently, 12 patients were confirmed to be infected with sars-cov-2 between january 20, 2020, and february 5, 2020. 81 of these 12 patients, seven were hospitalized and three received remdesivir (compassionate use access; gilead sciences) upon worsening clinical disease. treatment was continued for 4−10 days with 200 mg iv on the first day and 100 mg each following day. following the initial dose, all patients experienced "transient gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, gastroparesis, or rectal bleeding," although treatment was continued until improvement in respiratory symptoms, with all 12 patients reporting symptom resolution by february 22, 2020 . 81 the small sample size and lack of controlled randomization preclude analysis of clinical efficacy or safety.the subsequently, gilead sciences initiated two clinical trials that began in mid-march, comparing remdesivir to standard of care in patients with moderate or severe coronavirus disease in an open-label, randomized trial, nct04292899. 84 this trial will explore the safety and efficacy of remdesivir in combination with standard of care to compare study arms of 5-or 10-day remdesivir dosing on the primary outcome of fever and oxygen saturation. nct04292730 maintains three study arms to compare remdesivir provided over 5 or 10 days, to standard of care alone, with the primary outcome being the proportion of patients discharged by the 14th day. 85 to determine the most effective treatments for covid-19 and ensure sufficient power to observe definitive results, the who announced the solidarity clinical trial, a four-arm trial comparing remdesivir, lopinavir/ritonavir, lopinavir/ ritonavir with interferon-β1a, and chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine (isrctn83971151). with the goal of reducing trial design time and start-up, the who seeks to rapidly facilitate comparison of treatments on a worldwide scale. data will be analyzed on an interim basis by an independent group of experts, the global data and safety monitoring committee, 86 enabling the modification of study design if particular treatments show early promise. as of march 27, 2020, over 70 countries had committed to participating.in a trial sponsored by the oslo university hospital, the who nor (norwegian)-covid 19 study is a multicenter, adaptive, randomized, open label study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of hydroxychloroquine, remdesivir, and current standard of care (nct04321616, 2020-001052-18). 87 the comparative arms of the study are daily remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine loading dose of 800 mg × 2 followed by importantly, exclusion criteria include prolonged qt interval (>450 ms) due to the known toxicity issues associated with hydroxychloroquine. an observational study sponsored by the groupe hospitalier pitie-salpetriere, with collaborator cmc ambroise pare, was initiated to investigate adverse events in covid-19 treatment (nct04314817). 88 the study will consider events as classified by the international classification of disease icd-10, and track lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine, azithromycin, remdesivir, and interferon-β1a, potentially expanding the scope in the future prior to the primary completion date in january 2021.the discovery trial is an adaptive, open-label, randomized interventional trial that includes five treatment modalities (nct04315948): standard of care alone or standard of care plus the following: remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir and ritonavir, or lopinavir, ritonavir, and interferon-β1a. 89 the remdesivir dose regime is identical to existing trials, with maintenance dosing continuing up to 10 days. lopinavir and ritonavir tablets are to be administered every 12 h for 14 days (400 mg of lopinavir /100 mg of ritonavir). in combination with the lopinavir/ritonavir schedule, interferon-β1a will be administered subcutaneously at a dose of 44 μg, for three doses in 6 days (day 1, day 3, day 6). hydroxychloroquine will be given 400 mg, twice on the first day, followed by 400 mg once daily for 9 days. initially, the study will include five french hospitals (paris − hopital bichat-ap-hp, lille, nantes, strasbourg, lyon) with potential expansion to other participating sites. 90 the primary outcome is the reported disease severity on a seven-point ordinal scale, assessed on the 15th day, with secondary outcomes tracking various physiological and clinical metrics.with the overwhelming influx of compassionate use requests, on march 23, 2020, gilead sciences suspended compassionate use access to remdesivir for all cases save children and pregnant women, shifting their focus to support mounting clinical trials and establish a system of expanded access, wherein hospitals or physicians can request emergency use of remdesivir for multiple patients at one time. 95 in an open letter to the public on march 28, 2020, gilead ceo reported that they had provided over 1000 doses of remdesivir through compassionate use requests. 96 to date, the fda has granted expanded access treatment protocols for remdesivir, sponsored by the u.s. army medical research and development command (nct04302766) 95 and gilead sciences (nct04323761). 97 the primary objective of these studies is the provision of expanded access to remdesivir for the treatment of sars-cov2 infections. gilead sciences has acknowledged that production of remdesivir is an involved process, and this is being scaled up to meet demand.remdesivir is certainly not the only nucleoside analogue that is being investigated for use against sars-cov-2, but it is the most clinically advanced. a recent publication by sheahan et al. describes the ribonucleoside analogue, β-d-n 4 -hydroxycytidine (nhc, eidd-1931) , that has in vitro activity against sars-cov-2 and in vivo against the related sars virus. 98 although in preclinical development, eidd-1931 is orally bioavailable, a significant advantage compared to remdesivir, and has increased potency against viruses containing mutations in rdrp that conferred increased resistance to remdesivir, supporting the potential for a combination therapy to address the risk of sars-cov-2 becoming clinically drug resistant. other clinically approved nucleoside/nucleotide analogues, such as the hepatitis c drug sofosbuvir and hiv drugs alovudine and zidovudine, have also been shown to be active against the sars rdrp in in vitro biochemical assays and might have the potential to be repurposed against covid-19. 99 for a general review of nucleoside and nucleotide analogues for cancer and viral diseases, including approved drugs and clinical candidates, please reference jordheim et al. 100 as the covid-19 pandemic races across the globe, the scientific community, from academic and government laboratories to small biotechnology companies and multinational pharmaceutical corporations, has mobilized to develop and evaluate potential therapeutics and vaccines. 101−104 repurposing or repositioning an effective small-molecule therapeutic promises to be the fastest therapeutic means to stem the tide of the pandemic. 105, 106 among the candidate therapies, remdesivir has demonstrated efficacy in both in vitro and in vivo models against coronaviruses. recently, through a compassionate use indication, remdesivir has supportive evidence for yielding some clinical improvement in covid-19 patients. 107 in addition, an interim analysis of the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial (nct04280705) supports improvement in the primary endpoint for patients receiving remdesivir, compared to control, with a 31% faster time to recovery. 108 based on these initial findings, the u.s. food and drug administration has issued an emergency use authorization for the emergency use of remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients. with no drug having fda approval for marketing as a treatment for sars-cov-2, this is the first fda authorization of an investigational therapeutic for use in treating sars-cov-2. 109 while remdesivir represents one compound whose recent use authorization may, in part, mitigate the morbidity, mortality, and strain on global while remdesivir represents one compound whose consideration may yet play a role in mitigating the morbidity, mortality, and strain on global healthcare systems caused by covid-19, ongoing clinical trials will provide much-needed clarity surrounding the repurposing of approved drugs and experimental agents against sars-cov-2.a novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) reported in wuhan in late december 2019 has rapidly spread to the rest of the world (1, 2) . novel coronavirus pneumonia is becoming a worldwide public health event due to the rapid increase in new cases and the high severity and mortality (1) (2) (3) . a latest research shows that covid-19 patients in the intensive care unit were older (median age 66 vs 51) and more likely to have comorbidities (72.2% vs 37.3%) than patients not in the intensive care unit, suggesting that elderly people or patients with underlying disease have higher disease severity (3). chronic kidney disease (ckd) is a common disorder and the prevalence of ckd is around 10% in adults (4, 5). thus, ckd patients combined with covid-19 should be drawn enough attention from nephrologists.it is worth noting that the 2019-ncov can not only cause pneumonia, but also damage other organs, such as the heart, liver and kidneys (6). angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) mediates the entry of 2019-ncov coronavirus into human cells (7).it has been found that ace2 is highly expressed in renal tubular cells, implying that 2019-ncov may directly bind to ace2-positive cells in the kidney and thus induce kidney injuries (7). indeed, a clinical study reported that 27.06% of patients with covid-19 exhibited acute renal failure (arf), while elderly patients (≥60 years) were more likely to develop arf (65.22% vs 24.19%) (8) . a further immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that the antigen for 2019-ncov accumulates in renal tubules (8) . another clinical study with 59 covid-19 patients showed that proteinuria occurred in 63% of patients (9) . 19% and 27% covid-19 patients have elevated plasma creatinine and urea nitrogen levels, respectively (9) . a consecutive cohort study with 710 covid-19 patients further shows that the prevalence of renal impairment is high, which is associated with in-hospital death (10) . therefore, enough attentions should be paid to kidney protection of covid-19 patients, and the effect of anti-covid-19 agents on the kidney should also be concerned.renal interstitial fibrosis is a common pathway and main pathological basis for the progression of various chronic kidney diseases to the end-stage renal disease (esrd) (11, 12) . it is characterized by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix in the kidney leading to completely loss of renal function (11, 12) . loss of renal tubule drives the development of renal interstitial fibrosis by producing a large number of profibrotic factors such as tgf-β (12, 13) . it has been shown by several animal models that the tgf-β / smad3 signaling pathway play a key role in renal fibrosis (14, 15) .remdesivir (gs-5734) is a nucleoside analogue designed for the treatment of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars), the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and ebola virus (16, 17) . it can be anabolized to the active triphosphate metabolite and then incorporated into the newly synthesized rna strand of the virus as a substrate for viral rna-dependent rna synthetase (rdrp), thereby prematurely terminating viral rna transcription (16, 17) . in vitro study shows that remdesivir can effectively inhibit the infection of 2019-ncov (18) . a single case study shows that treatment with remdesivir improved the clinical condition of the first severely infected covid-19 patient in the united states in 24 hours (19) . currently, several clinical trials using remdesivir as a treatment for infected covid-19 patients are undergoing around the world. the first phase iii clinical trial which is conducted in china is expected to be completed in the end of april 2020 (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04257656).the aim of the current study is to determine the effect remdesivir on renal fibrosis.gs-441524, the active metabolite of remdesivir, was used to treat tgf-β stimulated rat renal interstitial fibroblasts (nrk-49f) and huamn renal epithelial cells (hk2) (20) . 24 hours stimulation with 2.5 ng/ml tgf-β increased the cell proliferation of nrk-49f cells as shown by cck8 assay, and treatment with the figure   2d ).mouse renal fibrosis model was established by uuo operation. one day after sham or uuo operations, mice were treated with vehicle or remdesivir for 10 days.treatment with remdesivir had no effect on body weight of sham and uuo mice, and all mice were survived during the treatment (data not shown). mild interstitial fibrosis was observed in vehicle treated uuo mice, which was attenuated by remdesivir ( figure 3a ). the protein expression of fn, collagen-i (col-i), psmad3, and α -sma were up-regulated in uuo mouse kidneys as compared with that in sham operated mouse kidneys, and the treatment with remdesivir significantly reduced the expression of these pro-fibrotic proteins in uuo mouse kidneys ( figure 3b ). liver function (alt and ast) and renal function (scr and bun) were determined.remdesivir has no effect on either liver function or renal function ( figure 3c figure 3d ). similarly, serum or kidney ala-met can only be detected in remdesivir treated sham or uuo mice ( figure 3d ).remdesivir (1 mg/ml, 50 μ l/mouse) or vehicle was infused retrogradely through ureter to the left kidney which was subjected to unilateral utero ligation (uuo) operation. masson staining shows that interstitial fibrosis was attenuated in uuo kidneys at day7 by local remdesivir injection ( figure 4a ). the expression of fn,col-i, psmad3, and α -sma were reduced in remdesivir treated uuo kidneys as compared with that in vehicle treated control kidneys at day7 as shown by western blotting ( figure 4b ). liver function (alt and ast) and renal function (scr and bun)were not changed by remdesivir in uuo mice ( figure 4c ). the remdesivir metabolite gs-441524 can only be detected in serum and kidney at 1 hour after injection only in remdesivir treated mice, which can not be detected at day7 ( figure 4d ). the ala-met is abundant in remdesivir treated kidneys at 1 hour after injection and it was reduced to background level at day7 ( figure 4d ).the effect of remdesivir on renal fibrosis is currently unknown. in the present study, we showed that remdesivir inhibits renal fibrosis. first, treatment with remdesivir or its active metabolite gs-441524 inhibited fibrosis in two cellular models for renal fibrosis. second, systematic administration of remdesivir inhibited renal fibrosis as shown by masson staining and western blotting. third, local infusion of remdesivir into uuo kidneys further revealed the anti-fibrotic effect of remdesivir.the limitation of this study is that uuo model is not suitable to study the pharmaceutical effect on renal function. uuo model is a classic model to study renal fibrosis, although we did observe a slightly increase in scr and bun levels in uuo mice as compared with that in sham mice (21) . the renal and liver function were assessed in this study to exclude the potential toxic effect of remdesivir, and we show no effect of remdesivir on renal and liver function in this study.the concentration of remdesivir was measured to assess the dosing efficacy. however, we are not able to detect remdesivir in serum or kidneys in two different dosing regimens or at different time points. this is probably due to the rapid turnover of remdesivir by esterases which are abundant in blood and tissues (17, 22) . next, we measured the concentration of two remdesivir metabolites, alanine metabolite (ala-met) and nucleoside metabolite (gs-441524) (17) . gs-441524 and ala-met can be detected at 1 hour after ip injection in serum and kidneys of sham and uuo mice.gs-441524 was detected in the serum and kidney at 1 hour after renal injection but not at day 7 post-injection. to prove the specificity of renal infusion of remdesivir, we further measured ala-met which can only be detected in kidneys but not in serum at 1 hour after renal injection, and it was not detectable at day 7 after renal injection.in conclusion, we showed that remdesivir inhibits renal fibrosis in obstructed kidneys.male c57 mice (spf grade, 20-25g) were purchased and housed in shanghaimodel organisms center inc (smoc) according to local regulations and guidelines.after anesthesia with sodium pentobarbital (8mg/kg, i.p.), the left mouse kidney cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020. 06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint this study is registered at the international platform of registered systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (inplasy202060046). 3 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020. 06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint in december 2019, in wuhan, china, several cases of pneumonia were caused by a novel coronavirus, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the world health organization (who) officially designated this new disease as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). 1,2 covid-19 is declared a global pandemic, and has led to over 8.5 million infections and 452 thousand deaths up to now. due to the lack of a specific antiviral agent that targets the virus, covid-19 pandemic remains largely uncontrolled with high morbidity and mortality, posing a huge challenge globally. 3 therefore, it is of great importance to explore safe and effective treatment options.remdesivir (gs-5734) is an inhibitor of the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase and may cause premature rna-chain termination. it has a broad antiviral spectrum that covers pneumoviruses, paramyxoviruses, filoviruses, and coronaviruses.furthermore, remdesivir plays an important role in the treatment of middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov). 4 interestingly, remdesivir is effective in inhibiting sars-cov-2 growth in vitro; 5 it has reportedly reduced viral load in the lungs and improved disease symptoms in a mouse model of sars-cov. 6 it has been identified by the who as the most promising therapeutic candidate for the treatment of covid-19. 7 however, since the therapeutic effect of remdesivir is controversial, 7-10 we aimed to evaluate clinically meaningful evidence on its efficacy and safety in the treatment of covid-19 via an analysis of pooled randomized controlled trials (rcts).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprintwe systematically searched pubmed, embase, and the cochrane central register of controlled trials from their inception to june 11, 2020, to identify rcts on remdesivir treatment for covid-19, with no restrictions on publication type or language. our main search keywords were "coronavirus disease 2019," "covid-19," "novel coronavirus 2019," "2019 novel coronavirus," "severe acute respiratory syndrome-corona virus-2," "sars-cov-2," "remdesivir," "gs 5734," and "randomized controlled trial" (appendix 1). studies were considered eligible if they met the following criteria: (1) presented original data from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial; (2) used two comparator groups with one receiving remdesivir and the other receiving a placebo; (3) reported the number of patients discharged from hospital, death, and adverse events as outcomes; and (4) had adequate data to be pooled for the analysis. two authors (tzw and zy) independently selected eligible articles. first, titles and abstracts were evaluated to exclude non-relevant articles. then, full text was read to confirm whether studies conformed to our inclusion criteria. disputes between the two authors were resolved by consensus. the quality of the studies was assessed using the jadad scoring system, 11 in which the maximum score is 5. we defined high quality as a jadad score of ≥3.0.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint two authors (zy and tzw) extracted all data. for each study, we recorded the following variables: first author's last name, publication year, sample size, participants' sex and age, and patient distribution on a six-category scale (appendix 2) at enrollment and at 15 ± 2 days after enrollment, adverse events, and outcome measurements related to risk estimates with 95% confidence interval (ci).pre-specified endpoints included discharge and death as primary endpoints with adverse events including anemia, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, acute kidney injury, septic shock, and cardiac arrest as key secondary endpoints. each outcome was assessed according to the definitions reported in the study protocols. we conducted a pooled analysis to measure the efficacy and safety of remdesivir for covid-19 treatment. we pooled the risk ratios (rr) and 95% ci values calculated using chi-squared (χ 2 ) tests. cochran q and i 2 statistics were used to evaluate statistical heterogeneity. 12 when the p-value was >0.1 and the i 2 value was <50%, a fixed-effects model 13 was used to estimate the overall summary effect sizes. when either the p-value was <0.1 or the i 2 value was >50%, the data were considered to be heterogeneous, and a random-effects model 14 was applied to determine the overall summary effect sizes. stata software v12.0 (college station, tx, usa) was used to analyze the data.this study is registered at the international platform of registered systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (inplasy202060046). 6 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprintwe found 87 relevant studies through our initial search. after removing 10 duplicate articles and 21 reviews, 56 remained. eventually, two studies 7-8 were finally included in our analysis after screening titles and abstracts. no eligible studies were identified by screening the bibliographies of the relevant studies ( figure 1 ). according to the jadad scale, two studies were of high quality with scores of 5 (table 1) . a total of 1299 patients with covid-19 randomly allocated to a group treated with remdesivir (n = 699) or group treated with placebo (n = 600) were included in our analysis. the distribution of patients based on a six-category scale at enrollment are shown in table   1 , figure 2a , and figure 2b . among the included patients, the average age was over 50 years and number of men exceeded that of women. details of the characteristics of the studies are summarized in table 1 . second, the data of 1296 patients diagnosed with covid-19 were analyzed to explore the association between remdesivir treatment and adverse events. the 7 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint analysis suggested that remdesivir decreased the occurrence of serious adverse events (rr, 0.77 [95% ci, 0.63-0.94]; p = 0.716, i 2 = 0.0%) ( figure 3a ). furthermore, remdesivir showed a tendency to reduce non-serious adverse events, although the tendency was not statistically significant (rr, 0.92 [95% ci, 0.80-1.06]; p = 0.225, i 2 = 32.0%) ( figure 3b ).additionally, when anemia, septic shock, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, acute kidney injury, and cardiac arrest were regarded as endpoints, remdesivir was associated with decreased risk of all of them, except cardiac arrest, although these differences were not statistically significant ( figure 3c -3h).there is an urgent need for effective therapies for covid-19. remdesivir is a nucleotide analog prodrug with broad-spectrum antiviral activity and is currently being investigated in multiple covid-19 clinical trials. 15 our analysis showed that remdesivir was effective and safe in treating patients with covid-19.first, our analysis indicated that remdesivir significantly increased the discharge rate of patients with covid-19 at approximately 15 days (figure 2a, 2b) , indicative of its efficacy. remdesivir has been reported to have potential benefits in severely ill patients with covid-19. 10, [16] [17] however, an open-label, randomized, multicenter trial in patients with severe covid-19 presented a different result, that is, a non-significant difference between 5-and 10-day courses of remdesivir. 9 based on rcts, beigel et al. reported that patients treated with remdesivir had a shorter 8 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. figure 2a , b). we believe that this result is more convincing than that presented by any single study.second, our results indicated that remdesivir significantly decreased the mortality of patients with covid-19 ( figure 2c, 2d, 2f) . remdesivir has been shown to be effective in treating sars-cov-2 and related coronaviruses in an animal model; 18 therefore, many studies have been conducted to test whether remdesivir can reduce mortality in patients with covid-19. two recent studies reported that remdesivir reduces mortality compared with placebo in patients with covid-19 (8.0% vs. 11.6% and 7.1% vs. 11.9%), 8, 19 and this was consistent with our results (8.2% vs. 12.7%, figure 2c , 2d). furthermore, the mortality risk was 0.70 (95% ci, 0.47-1.04) in beigel's study, 8 which presented results similar to ours (rr 0.64 [95% ci 0.44-0.92]); however, our result was statistically significant ( figure 2f) . a study in china reported a different conclusion, with no difference in mortality between patients treated with 9 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint remdesivir and placebo at 7, 14, and 28 days (6.5% vs. 5.2%, 9.8% vs. 9.0%, and 14.7% vs. 13.0%, respectively). 7 however, its incomplete enrolment, owing to a lack of eligible patients and low persuasiveness, owing to its 2:1 randomization, may have made the experiment statistically inadequate. because our study combined two high-quality randomized case-control studies, we believe that our results are more convincing. and previous vivo and vitro experiment also both supported our results.remdesivir was found to prevent covid-19 infection in vitro experiments at extremely low concentrations. 5 at the same time, a recent study found that remdesivir had clinical effect in rhesus monkeys infected with covid-19: rhesus monkeys treated early with reddisivir had less lung damage, no signs of respiratory infection, and less lower respiratory viral load than controls. 15 third, our analysis indicated that remdesivir significantly decreased the risk of serious adverse events ( figure 3a ) with a tendency to reduce the risk of non-serious adverse events ( figure 3b ). further evaluation of adverse events such as anemia, septic shock, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, and acute kidney injury, showed similar trends. these data suggest that remdesivir is safe to be used for the treatment of covid-19.our analysis had some limitations. first, the small number of studies that were included greatly weakened the reliability of our results. second, the rr values calculated were unadjusted owing to a lack of raw data, which may lead to bias. third, the overall sample size is not large enough, which limits statistical power. thus, 10 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint larger-scale rcts are needed, and our pooled analysis findings should be interpreted with caution. however, we will update the analysis as new studies that meet inclusion criteria emerge.overall, this analysis demonstrated that remdesivir significantly increased the recovery rate, decreased mortality, and decreased the risk of serious adverse events.our findings highlight the efficacy and safety of remdesivir for the treatment of covid-19, which should be incorporated into routine therapy. furthermore, this analysis also suggests that larger cohorts and randomized controlled trials are needed to more thoroughly investigate the treatment efficacy and safety of remdesivir for covid-19.we declare no competing interests.we thank all the contributors of the two eligible studies. we thank the yunnan key laboratory of digital orthopaedics. we thank the national natural science . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint 12 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. 13 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. 14 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 2 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20136531 doi: medrxiv preprintcoronaviruses are a cause of respiratory tract infections in humans [1] . a novel coronavirus emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019 [2] , subsequently called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [3] . coronavirus disease (covid-19) is caused by sars-cov-2 [3] and since march 2020 this outbreak has been declared a pandemic by the world health organisation (who) [4] . fever, cough and shortness of breath are the main reported symptoms of covid-19 [5] but it also has a concerning case mortality rate among certain populations, such as older adults and those with underlying health conditions.currently, there is a need to identify effective, safe treatments for covid-19 as quickly as possible, due to the ongoing pandemic. one such proposed treatment is remdesivir, which is an investigational antiviral medicine with proven activity against rna viruses [6, 7] .remdesivir was originally developed for treatment of ebola virus disease and results from the phase 3 randomised clinical trial for this indication have been published [8] . it has been shown to have broad spectrum in-vitro activity against several coronaviruses, including sars-cov-2 [6, 9, 10] in-vivo activity against mers-cov in animal models [11, 12] , and has been made available for patients with covid-19 through compassionate use programmes [13, 14] .several clinical trials are ongoing to examine the effectiveness and safety of remdesivir in covid-19 in humans [15] [16] [17] [18] . most recently, remdesivir was granted an emergency use authorisation in covid-19 by the us food and drug administration. whilst there is considerable interest in the use of remdesivir for covid-19, there has not been a systematic benefit-risk assessment on the use of remdesivir for covid-19 treatment using a structured descriptive framework.the ongoing monitoring of the benefit-risk balance for remdesivir in covid-19 treatment is strengthened by use of a systematic assessment. the benefit-risk action team (brat) framework allows identification of the key benefits and risks of a product in a defined disease context within a structured descriptive framework; further quantitative assessments can then be applied and conducted according to the availability of relevant data at that time [19] . the brat framework was also specifically designed to assist communication with regulatory authorities [20] . the decision-making process is transparent due to the framework design, while any assumptions can be explored further by sensitivity analysis through a quantitative component [21] .this benefit-risk assessment has been conducted based on publicly available publications to date (data-lock april 30th 2020). it is however acknowledged that there is extremely limited data available at this timepoint. the benefit-risk assessment has been designed to be . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprint implemented regardless of the quantity of data available, but the intention is that the framework will subsequently be readily available to repeat the assessment as further data arise, e.g. results from new and ongoing clinical trials, allowing for rapid decision-making.to examine the benefit-risk profile of remdesivir in covid-19 patients compared to standard of care, placebo or other treatments.the brat framework was used to assess the overall benefit-risk of using remdesivir as a treatment for covid-19 compared to standard of care, placebo or other treatments. brat uses a six step iterative process to support the decision and communication of a benefit-risk assessment: define decision context, identify outcomes, identify data sources, customise framework, assess outcome importance, and display and interpret key benefit-risk metrics [20, 21] . we identified three settings of interest for use of covid-19 treatments; treatment for severe disease, treatment of milder disease in the community, and prevention in health care professionals exposed to the virus. we have focused on the use of remdesivir for the treatment of severe covid-19 disease within this benefit-risk assessment. for the purposes of this study, we considered severe covid-19 to include any patient who was hospitalised as a result of the infection.the population of interest were patients with severe covid-19, while the exposure of interest was remdesivir. the comparators of interest were standard of care, placebo or other treatments for covid-19.regardless of importance, all potential benefits and risks related to remdesivir were initially identified. key benefits and risks were then selected by clinician judgement, which were those considered to drive the benefit-risk balance of remdesivir. the key benefits and risks were used to construct a value tree, ranking benefits and risks in order of considered importance.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprintwe searched pubmed, google scholar and government agency websites to identify suitable data for inclusion. the search strategy used was: remdesivir and (coronavirus or covid* or "sars-cov-2" or "2019-ncov") papers were included if they reported quantitative data on effectiveness and/or safety of remdesivir in patients with severe covid-19. case reports were excluded. results were restricted to english language only (abstracts in english language were acceptable where sufficient data was provided) and peer-reviewed publications (for pubmed and google scholar) since 2019 to 30th april 2020. where a control group was included, data were extracted for each benefit and risk, for both remdesivir and the comparator (standard of care, placebo or other treatments).a summary benefit-risk table was created to allow visualisation of the magnitude of each benefit and risk. risk differences and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (ci) were calculated for each outcome where both numerator (number of events) and denominator (number of patients at risk) were available for both the treatment group (remdesivir) and comparator group.due to paucity of data, a fully quantitative assessment was not undertaken. however, the risks and risk difference per 1000 patients were calculated for each benefit and risk. the outcomes identified in the value tree were ranked so that swing weighting can be applied in future assessments. the weighted net clinical benefit (wncb) can subsequently be calculated using these weights [21] [22] [23] . we would propose using the sutton et al method, where benefits have a positive contribution to the wncb and risks have a negative contribution [23] ; the overall wncb would be considered positive (benefit outweighs the risk) where wncb >0. a sensitivity analysis can also be used to examine the robustness of the assigned weights and whether significant changes would alter the benefit-risk profile [19] . analysis using wncb was not undertaken at this time due to the limited release of clinical trial data. figure 1 displays the value tree of the key benefits and risks related to remdesivir treatment in covid-19. the benefits included in the value tree include key endpoints included in clinical trial protocols for studies assessing the efficacy of remdesivir in severe covid-19 disease. as . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprint remdesivir is currently not approved for use in any condition, it is acknowledged that its safety profile has not been completely characterised. for the purposes of identifying potentials risks associated with the use of remdesivir in covid-19 disease, safety data has been identified from currently available sources. these include studies reporting its use in the treatment of ebola virus disease [8] , cases series documenting the use of remdesivir in covid-19 disease [24] , and safety data included in the study by wang et al [25] . both the efficacy and safety outcomes have been presented in ranked numerical order according to perceived clinical significance.the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprintas remdesivir is an unapproved medicine in most countries, its safety profile has not yet been fully characterised. known key risks at the current time have been included in the value tree, identified from a variety of sources, including recently published clinical trial data in the context of covid-19 [25] . these have also been ranked according to perceived seriousness. cardiovascular outcomes including hypotension and arrhythmias have been documented following the use of remdesivir [8, 27, 24] , however the risk of cardiovascular outcomes with remdesivir remains largely unknown [28] . hypotension was reported in one patient in the phase 3 study investigating remdesivir in the context of ebola virus disease; this patient subsequently suffered a cardiac arrest, although the author states that this death could not readily be distinguishable from underlying fulminant ebola virus disease itself [8] . cardiac arrest was also reported in a further patient in the remdesivir group reported in the covid-19 study by wang et al [25] . multiple organ dysfunction, septic shock, acute kidney injury and hypotension have also been reported as adverse events amongst patients provided with remdesivir either on a compassionate-use basis, or in a clinical trial [24, 25] . respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome has been cited as an adverse event in patients taking remdesivir [25, 29] , and as such has been included here, although it is acknowledged that this may be related to underlying disease (covid-19), rather than to remdesivir.elevations in liver transaminases and gastrointestinal events, including diarrhoea, have also been reported with the use of remdesivir [13, 8, 24, 30] , in addition to reports of haemorrhage of the lower gastrointestinal (gi) tract [25, 31] .where available, clinical trial data relating to any efficacy or safety outcomes included in the value tree for both remdesivir and a comparator group were extracted and included in table   1 . based on this data, summary metrics including risks per 1000 patient years, and risk differences have been presented in table 2 . we identified 68 papers through literature searching from pubmed and 384 papers from google scholar. we also identified results from one clinical trial on the niaid website. after initial review, one paper and results from one clinical trial on the niaid website were included in the final benefit-risk assessment.in the wang et al trial, the benefit of time to clinical improvement was not statistically significant (21 vs 23 days, hr=1.23, 95% ci: 0.87, 1.75). in the niaid trial, a statistically significant shorter time to recovery in patients treated with remdesivir was observed (11 vs 15 days; p<0.001), with non-significant reduced mortality risk (8% vs 12%; p=0.059). other . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprint non-significant benefit data were identified from the wang et al trial including invasive ventilation and oxygen use at day 28 (1% vs 4% and 12% vs 17%, respectively).risk data were only available from the wang et al trial, which reported fewer serious adverse events in patients taking remdesivir (18%) comparted to the placebo group (26%), however more patients in the remdesivir group discontinued treatment as a result of an adverse event compared to those patients receiving placebo (12% vs 5%).this benefit-risk assessment presented the currently known key benefits and risks for the use of remdesivir for severe covid-19 disease. the value tree provides a visual summary of these key benefits and risks, which have been ranked according to perceived clinical importance. as remdesivir is currently unlicensed in most countries, these include endpoints used in remdesivir clinical trials, and risks identified from available data sources. a literature search (including grey literature from government agency websites) identified relevant numerical data for these outcomes for both remdesivir, and comparator groups. recently, the first results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial studying remdesivir in the context of covid-19 have been published [25] . the primary outcome suggested a reduction in the median time to clinical improvement, although this difference was non-significant (21 vs 23 days, hr=1.23, 95% ci: 0.87, 1.75). however, the planned sample size of 453 patients (151 on placebo and 302 on remdesivir) was not reached due to difficulties in enrolment, and therefore this study may have been underpowered to detect significant differences.nevertheless, multiple additional endpoints were included in this study, and these data have been presented in table 1 . whilst no statistically significant differences were observed between the remdesivir and placebo group [25] , the study reported generally improved outcomes in the remdesivir group compared to placebo, including reductions in mortality, risk of invasive and non-invasive ventilation, and need for supportive oxygen at day 28.data has also been presented for remdesivir and the placebo group included in the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial [26] . as of 29 th april 2020, limited data has been made available on the nih website [26] and suggested a statistically significant reduction in time to recovery from a median 15 days (placebo group) to 11 days (remdesivir group) (p<0.001). further study results provided suggested a non-significant reduced mortality risk amongst remdesivir patients (8.0%) vs. patients given placebo (11.6%), p=0.059, which equates to 40 fewer deaths per 1000 patients treated with remdesivir.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprint key risks have been identified and included based on currently available evidence, however it is acknowledged that the safety profile of remdesivir has not been fully characterized. from risk data currently available, key risks were identified and ranked according to seriousness.the cardiovascular side effects of remdesivir are largely unknown; one patient in the study by wang et al was noted to have had a cardiac arrest. individual cases of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and septic shock were also reported in this study [25] , whilst reports were also identified in patients receiving remdesivir on a compassion ate use basis [24] . in the latter case, reports of these events occurred in patients who were on invasive ventilation.whilst there were multiple reports of liver enzyme abnormalities in patients who received remdesivir in the study by wang et al [25] , three patients discontinued treatment as a result of liver enzyme elevation (two reports of raised alanine aminotransferase, one report of increased total bilirubin). reports of acute respiratory distress syndrome have also been reported as adverse events in patients taking remdesivir [25, 29] . sixteen patients experienced this outcome during treatment in the study by wang et al, [25] , which led to discontinuation in seven patients. finally, whilst fewer patients experienced an adverse event classified as serious in the remdesivir group (18%) compared to the placebo group (26%), a higher number of patients discontinued remdesivir as a result of an adverse event (12% vs. 5%) [25] .currently there would appear to be favourable efficacy results from patients treated with remdesivir in the context of severe covid-19 disease from these preliminary data available.the data in the study by wang et al [25] did not include any statistically significant results, although it is acknowledged that the study was underpowered. primary endpoint data available from the adaptive covid 19 trial [26] have also suggested a shorter time to recovery in patients treated with remdesivir, with non-significant reduced mortality risk. there is limited safety data available at the current time, although it is expected that this will increase as more clinical trial safety data becomes available. from the limited clinical trial safety data , it is unclear whether reports of serious adverse events are a function of the underlying severe covid-19 disease, or attributable to treatment with remdesivir. it is anticipated that both the efficacy, and the safety profile will be further strengthened in the coming months with the availability of additional clinical trial data.sample sizes for each outcome were limited to those available in the original studies and may not have adequate power to detect differences in risk between groups, especially where the outcomes examined were not the primary outcome of interest. the benefit-risk assessment is . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093898 doi: medrxiv preprint limited by the availability of data in the published literature. however, this assessment can be subsequently updated once further data from clinical trials are available. in addition, given the public health urgency of the covid-19 pandemic, it is important to provide a systematic assessment of the benefits and risks of remdesivir treatment with evidence available to date and establish a framework which can be used to rapidly update the assessment once further data become available.data quality is not reflected in this benefit-risk assessment, though all data was extracted from peer-reviewed manuscripts, with the exception of data included from the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial. these data were obtained from the niaid website, and included time to recovery and mortality data. since the full results of this clinical trial were not made available at the time of datalock (april 30 th 2020), a wncb analysis was not undertaken because there was a concern that only including efficacy outcomes from the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial may bias the wncb results. it is anticipated that such an analysis can be undertaken in the future when results are made available, to provide further evidence on the benefit-risk profile.confirmation of causality was not a requirement for inclusion of data in the brat assessment.patients may have been on other concomitant medications or had other medical conditions at the time of remdesivir treatment. finally, we considered hospitalisation of patients to reflect severe covid-19, but we acknowledge that severity of disease may vary regardless of hospitalisation.preliminary clinical trial results suggest a favourable benefit-risk profile for remdesivir compared to placebo, however there is limited safety data available at the current time. the current framework summarises the key anticipated benefits and risks for which further data are needed. ongoing clinical trial data can be incorporated into the framework when available to provide an updated benefit-risk assessment.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 12, 2020. east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) . historically, these coronaviruses had got great clinical importance in infecting humans (kuiken et al., 2003) . at present, the novel coronavirus strain, the sars-cov-2, the causative agent of covid-19 emerged in wuhan, china, in december 2019 (zhu et al., 2020) . since then, the number of cases and deaths related to this virus have been skyrocketing throughout the world.as per the world health organization (who) report, the total number of cases and deaths outside china has overtaken the total number of cases in china (who, 2020) . who has declared covid-19 worldwide pandemic and global public health emergency with europe and lately unites states of america became new epicenters. who has recommended several preventive measures including laboratory tests for any suspected cases, quarantining suspects, applying physical distancing, frequent hand washing, and using hand and surface sanitizers to help contain further spread of the pandemic (who, 2020) . despite such preventive strategies, there is no vaccine or drug therapy officially approved for prophylaxis or treatment of covid-19. at present, there are several classes of drugs undergoing clinical trials including rna polymerase inhibitors (remdesivir and favipiravir), protease inhibitors (lopinavir/ritonavir), aminoquinolines (chloroquine and its hydroxyl derivative), anti-inflammatory agents (corticosteroids, and xiyanping injection), angiotensin converting enzyme type 2 blockers, convalescent plasma, viral rna antisense technologies, monoclonal antibodies, and chinese traditional medicines (http://www.chictr.org.cn/index.aspx and https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/home).among the above-mentioned classes of antiviral counterparts, aminoquinolines (chloroquine and its hydroxyl derivative) and protease inhibitors (primarily lopinavir/ritonavir) have taken the largest share of clinical trials since the sars-cov-2 outbreak. however, their clinical benefit has become full of controversies according to the various research findings.with regard to the aminoquinolines and their role in covid-19 therapy, in an open-label non-randomized clinical trial, gautret et al. reported 100% viral clearance in nasopharyngeal swabs with combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, 57.1% in hydroxychloroquine group, and 12.5% in standard of care group in cohort of 6 patients after 5 to 6 days follow-up (gautret et al., 2020) . in addition, in study conducted in 62 patients in china, the use of hydroxychloroquine could significantly shorten the time to clinical recovery and promote the absorption of pneumonia in randomized open label clinical trial . in contrary to this, a recent study from china in individuals with covid-19 found no difference in the rate of virologic clearance at 7 days with or without 5 days of hydroxychloroquine, and no difference in clinical outcomes indicating the absence of evidence of a strong antiviral activity (rapid viral clearance) or clinical benefit of this combination for severe covid-19 patients. another randomized open label clinical trial posted on medrxiv (preprint) reported that the overall 28-day negative conversion rate and symptoms alleviation rate in hydroxychloroquine plus standard of care group was not different from standard of care group (tang et al., 2020) . apart from this, the safety issues of aminoquinolines should also be emphasized. the cardiovascular and retinal toxicities may also limit the usefulness of these agents if there is hope from ongoing randomized, blinded and placebo controlled trials. for example, the hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin have shown to prolong qt-interval resulting torsades de pointes (a form of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia) and sudden cardiac death (chorin et al., 2020) .a randomized, open label clinical trial conducted on protease inhibitors (lopinavir/ritonavir) indicated that treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir did not show statistically significant difference in the time to clinical improvement and mortality censored at day 28 though a secondary outcomes measures were found promising in lopinavir/ritonavir group . this trial was initiated in severe covid-19 patients lately and lacks blinding and well established placebo.remdesivir is one of the frontline medications being used as expanded access and is under extensive clinical investigation. hereafter, this review aims to address the viral polymerase inhibitor remdesivir as a potential therapeutic option for covid-19.remdesivir (gs-5734 ™ ) is a phosphoramidate prodrug of a pyrrolo[2,1-f][triazin-4-amino] adenine c-nucleoside having broad spectrum antiviral activity ( figure 1 ). remdesivir is metabolized into its active form, gs-441524, that interferes with viral rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) enzyme thereby it evades proofreading by viral exonuclease, and arrests rna synthesis. this drug has shown potent inhibitory activity against rdrp with intact proof reading and with low level of resistance to target mutations (agostini et al., 2018) . it is supported in the study conducted by gordon et al. who demonstrated rdrp is, indeed, the target of remdesivir in mers-cov strains (gordon et al., 2020) . studies based on the molecular dynamics simulation and free energy perturbation methods clearly indicated sars-cov-2 rdrp as a target of remdesivir (zhang and zhou, 2020) . though, it has not been officially approved for ebola and coronaviruses yet (siegel et al., 2017) , gilead sciences is working closely with organizations and health authorities to respond to the covid-19 outbreak through synthesizing and providing this investigational drug (gilead sciences, 2020a).agostini et al. demonstrated that remdesivir can potently inhibit coronaviruses such as sars-cov-1 and mers-cov in vitro (agostini et al., 2018) . remdesivir can inhibit sars-cov-1 and mers-cov replication in several in vitro systems, including primary human airway epithelial cell cultures (sheahan et al., 2017) . in research conducted by sheahan et al, remdesivir showed superior antiviral activity to lopinavir/ritonavir against mers-cov in vitro (sheahan et al., 2020) . in mers-cov nonstructural proteins (nsp5, nsp7, nsp8, and nsp12) of insect cell lines, remdesivir showed potent inhibitory activity against nsp12(rdrp) in vitro (gordon et al., 2020) . yethindra et al. demonstrated that remdesivir showed strong inhibition against sars-cov and mers-cov in human air way epithelial cells, at early stages in replication process via inhibiting viral rna synthesis (yethindra, 2020) . on the top of these, remdesivir has shown promising results in clinical control of sars-cov-2 pneumonia in-vitro in human liver cancer cell lines . beyond beta-covs, remdesivir has shown potent inhibition of human endemic and zoonotic delta-covs with highly divergent rdrp in human hematoma (huh7) cell lines (brown et al., 2019) .in a mouse model of sars-cov-1, prophylactic and therapeutic (at early stage) administration of remdesivir significantly reduced pulmonary viral load and improved respiratory function and other clinical signs of the disease (sheahan et al., 2017) . likewise, both prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir has shown improvement on the pulmonary function and reduced lung viral loads and severe lung pathology in mers-cov strains in mice model (sheahan et al., 2020) . in the rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection, remdesivir reduced virus replication, the severity of the disease, and lung damage when administered in animals infected with mers-cov (de wit et al., 2020) . despite having an in-vitro antiviral activity against sars-cov-2, there are no published studies justifying the activity of remdesivir in animal models of sars-cov-2 in vivo until the time of this review.according to the paper published at the new england journal of medicine on 05 march, 2020, it had been suggested that remdesivir might be a potential therapeutic option for the therapy of covid-19 patients. in the report, remdisivir intravenous infusion (compassionate use) was started on day 7 in covid-19 patient. during the treatemnt, no adverse events were observed in association with the iv infusion. the patient's clinical condition improved. the bilateral lower-lobe rales apeared initially were no longer present. his appetite improved, became afebrile and asymptomatic except intermittent dry cough and rhinorrhea (holshue et al., 2020) . however, this is a single patient report and is too infant to conclude its efficacy and disentangle the true effect size of this drug because of the chance of recovery from this disease without treatment(s). hence, it is imperative to have adequate, well controlled, randomized, and blinded clinical trials in large cohorts of patients to justify its clinical utility in real settings.as summarized in table 1 , gilead sciences has initiated two phase 3 randomized, open label clinical trials comprising approximately 1,000 covid-19 patients. in the first trial, 400 patients with severe covid-19 cases were enrolled to evaluate the safety and efficacy of remdesivir on 5 (arm 1) and 10 days (arm 2) regimens with standard of care in both arms without comparator (gilead-sciences, 2020b). in the second trial, 600 patients with moderate covid-19 cases were enrolled to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the same dosage regimen of remdesivir in addition to the standard of care and with standrad of care alone as active comparator (gilead-sciences, 2020c).with the coordination of china-japan friendship hospital, two phase 3 randomized, double blind, placebo controlled clinical trials were intiated in china to evaluate the safety and efficacy of remdesivir paralleled to palcebo therapy.the first phase 3 trial has already involved 308 hospitalized adult patients with mild to moderate cases of covid-19 (cao, 2020a) . the patients were randomized to intervention arms of either remdesivir 10 days regimen or placebo that matched to remdesivir. the primary end point of this trial is set to determine the time to clinical recovery (ttcr) within 28 days. another phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial is evaluating the safety and efficacy of 10 days of remdesivir regimen in 453 hospitalized adult patients with severe covid-19 compared to placebo matched to remdesivir in remdesivir as promising option for covid-19frontiers in pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org may 2020 | volume 11 | article 791 dose and duration. the primary outcome measure in this trial is the time to clinical improvement (ttci) censored at day 28 (cao, 2020b) (table 1) . at the time of this revision, the finding of the second trial was published on lancet. though not statistically significant, patients receiving remdesivir had a numerically faster time to clinical improvement than those receiving placebo among patients with symptom duration of 10 days or less ). in addition, remdesivir did not show statistically significant clinical benefits . however, the numerical reduction in time to clinical improvement in those treated earlier requires confirmation in the larger cohort of patients and in the remaining trials with the coordination of the u.s. national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid), another phase 3 adaptive, randomized, double blind, placebo controlled clinical trial enrolled 394 hospitalized patients with covid-19 to assess the safety and efficacy of remdesivir. in this trial, patients were randomized to either placebo or 10 days therapy with remdesivir (200 mg remdesivir iv loading dose for day 1 followed by 100 mg iv daily maintained for 9 days, total of 10 days therapy). the primary indicator in this trial is the percentage of patients reporting each severity rating on the 7-point ordinal scale within 15 days (niaid, 2020) ( table 1) .with the sponsor and coordination of u.s. army medical research and development command (amrdc), remdesivir is also provided as expanded access (compassionate use) (us-amrdc, 2020) through emergency investigational new drug applications. the term expanded access (compassionate use) is a potential pathway in which a patient with an immediately lifethreatening condition or disease gain access to an investigational medical product for treatment of patients outside of clinical trials when no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy options are available (fda, 2020) . to this end, remdesivir synthesized and developed by gilead sciences is readily available for compassionate use for covid-19 patients (coppock, 2020) ( table 1) . latest observational study published on the new england journal of medicine revealed that severe covid-19 patients treated with compassionate-use of remdesivir showed clinical improvement in 68% cases (grein et al., 2020) .on the top of this, who has initiated solidarity trial at global level to evaluate the safety and efficacy of remdesivir in one of the interventional arms (branswell, 2020) . likewise, national institute of health and medical research (inserm) of france has planned to initiate discovery trial (inserm, 2020) . the trial protocol has already been registered on 20 march, 2020 and available at https:// clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04315948. the recruiting of participants has not been started but estimated to enroll 3,200 patients in 4 arms in which remdesivir alone is to be provided in usual dosage regimen in one of the interventional arms.despite the promising effects of remdesivir against previous betacoronaviruses as well as the current novel coronaviruses in vitro, there is no published in vivo study that substantiates the in vitro activities against this global public health threat. a case report and observational studies are not sufficient to generate evidenced-based medicine on the clinical use of remdesivir for this pandemic. a double blind, placebo controlled randomized clinical trial showed that remdesivir did not have statistically significant clinical benefit in reducing the time to clinical improvement in severe covid-19 patients compared to placebo. though remdesivir is readily available for compassionate use in many countries, it is imperative to wait the remaining ongoing clinical trials to justify its clinical utility on larger cohort of covid-19 patients.the author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and has approved it for publication.the first human coronaviruses (hcovs) were identified in the 1960s [1] , and for the majority of the past six decades, hcovs have generally maintained a relatively innocuous reputation as a cause of the common cold [2] . however, public perception and awareness of hcovs has shifted considerably in the last twenty years, with the onset of three high profile outbreaks that have garnered international attention and have subsequently led to renewed interest in potential therapeutic options for hcov-related illnesses. in 2002-2003, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) infected more than 8000 people, reaching 26 countries and resulting in a 10% case fatality rate [3] . in the~7 years between april 2012 and november 2019, there were 2494 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) that reached 27 countries and had a mortality rate of approximately 34% [4] , though serologic studies have implied that the prevalence of mers-cov may have been underestimated [5] . most recently, the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in december 2019 in wuhan and its subsequent spread to over 160 countries across the world has generated intense interest in vaccine development and treatment options for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [6, 7] .remdesivir (gs-5734, fig. 1a ) is an investigational broad-spectrum small-molecule antiviral drug that has demonstrated activity against rna viruses in several families, including coronaviridae (such as sars-cov, mers-cov, and strains of bat coronaviruses capable of infecting human respiratory epithelial cells), paramyxoviridae (such as nipah virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and hendra virus), and filoviridae (such as ebola virus) [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . originally developed to treat ebola virus infection [8] , remdesivir is a prodrug of the parent adenosine analog, gs-441524 (fig. 1b) , both of which are metabolized into an active nucleoside triphosphate (ntp) by the host (fig. 1c) [13] . the parent nucleoside, gs-441524, has displayed antiviral activity against sars-cov, marburg virus, and feline infectious peritonitis virus, among others [9, [14] [15] [16] . a number of studies have examined the effects of these two drugs on coronaviruses (covs) both in vitro and in vivo using mouse and non-human primate animal models [9] [10] [11] 13, 17, 18] .there are currently no antiviral drugs approved for the treatment of cov-specific illnesses. given the rapidly evolving pandemic of covid-19, it is crucial for public health practitioners and the one health community to stay up to date on potential therapeutic options that are under investigation [19] . based on existing data, remdesivir is a fig. 1 promising candidate, and multi-site clinical trials of remdesivir are now underway among hospitalized adults with covid-19 [20] . this review summarizes the knowledge to date on remdesivir as a therapeutic option for covs.viruses classified under the coronaviridae family are enveloped positive-sense, single-stranded rna viruses that exhibit high genetic diversity [21] . within the orthocoronavirinae subfamily, there are four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus. viruses in this family can infect a wide variety of host species, such as birds, humans, and non-human mammals, including dromedary camels, alpacas, domestic pigs, dogs, cats, ferrets, minks, and bats [5, 11, 12, 16, [22] [23] [24] . however, to our knowledge, only viruses of the alpha-and betacoronavirus genera infect humans [2] , though those in the gamma-and deltacoronavirus genera have indirect effects through economic impacts on the agricultural production of poultry and pigs [12] . host specificity is believed to be largely dependent upon variation in the cov spike attachment glycoprotein [23] . although the infectivity of most strains is host species-specific, host range is wide across different covs, and some bat covs rely on the same host receptor (angiotensin-converting enzyme-2; ace-2) as human covs to facilitate entry into cells [11, 25, 26] . it has been hypothesized that the cov propensity for host-switching may partly be attributable to recombination events that alter the spike protein, which, in turn, affects interactions with host receptors (e.g., ace-2) [27, 28] .historically, hcovs were largely considered to be relatively low virulence viruses that produced less severe, self-limiting disease, and were predominantly known as the second most prevalent cause of colds and upper respiratory infections (uris), after rhinoviruses [2, 29] . the endemic human covs that cumulatively account for about 10-30% of uris are hcov-229e and hcov-nl63, which are both alphacoronaviruses, and hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1, which are both betacoronaviruses [2] . among patients with uris severe enough to warrant hospitalization, one study found that approximately 5% of cases were attributable to rhinoviruses or hcovs, but a substantial proportion of these hospitalized patients had underlying pulmonary or cardiac comorbidities that may have exacerbated their conditions [29] .the virus underlying covid-19 (sars-cov-2) is a betacoronavirus that is closely related to sars-cov. these covs share~80% rna sequence identity [30, 31] . the similarity is even greater between the viruses when comparing the sequences specific to a key drug target, the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) (> 90% sequence identity) [30] . by contrast, mers-cov shares about 50% genomic sequence identity with sars-cov-2 [31] , and with the exception of some bat strains, many animal covs are even less similar [12] .as a nucleoside analog, remdesivir acts as an rdrp inhibitor, targeting the viral genome replication process. the rdrp is the protein complex covs use to replicate their rna-based genomes. after the host metabolizes remdesivir into active ntp, the metabolite competes with adenosine triphosphate (atp; the natural nucleotide normally used in this process) for incorporation into the nascent rna strand [32] . the incorporation of this substitute into the new strand results in premature termination of rna synthesis, halting the growth of the rna strand after a few more nucleotides are added. although covs have a proofreading process that is able to detect and remove other nucleoside analogs, rendering them resistant to many of these drugs, remdesivir seems to outpace this viral proofreading activity, thus maintaining antiviral activity [30] . unsurprisingly, agostini et al. reported that a mutant murine hepatitis virus (mhv) devoid of proofreading ability was more sensitive to remdesivir [13] . the opposite is also possible-that mutations that improve proofreading or otherwise increase fidelity of the base-pairing process may result in remdesivir resistance [33] . in fact, agostini et al. also induced mutations in mhv (through passage in remdesivir) that conferred strong resistance against the drug, but these mutated strains were outcompeted by wild-type mhv in coinfected cell cultures that were not exposed to remdesivir [13] . how well this experiment would represent a situation in which a resistance mutation developed naturally, though, is unclear. nonetheless, some evidence suggests that remdesivir could have an additional mechanism of action that has yet to be discovered, which, if true, may allow for partial antiviral activity to continue despite viral mutations that enhance replication fidelity [11] [12] [13] .the existing studies on the potential antiviral effects of remdesivir that are of highest relevance to the virus underlying the current pandemic, sars-cov-2, are those that have been conducted on genetically similar coronaviruses. as discussed above, within the coronaviridae family of viruses, there is a substantial amount of genetic heterogeneity, even among human strains [34] . this genetic diversity is posited to be attributable to the large viral genome and the molecular nuances of the viral rna replication processes (e.g., rdrp infidelity) [21] . although remdesivir is a broad-spectrum antiviral, its efficacy against other families of viruses may not be generalizable to its effectiveness against sars-cov-2, and attempts to predict the level of potential generalizability are hampered by the possibility that the drug may have secondary mechanisms of action that are yet to be elucidated. as a result, this review focuses on studies of the effects of remdesivir on covs specifically; however, some information about research on other lesser related viruses (e.g., ebola) is briefly mentioned for additional context on the drug.the majority of in vitro efficacy studies conducted to date have reported positive results on the anti-cov activity of remdesivir and gs-441524 (table 1) . commonly used metrics in these studies are the half maximal effective concentration (ec 50 ), which is the drug concentration at which half of the maximum response is attained after exposure, or the half maximal inhibitory concentration (ic 50 ), which is the drug concentration at which half of the peak inhibiting effect of the drug against a specific viral function is achieved. lower ec 50 and ic 50 values indicate higher potency. typical outcomes measured in such studies include the amount of viral rna (e.g., copies of certain open reading frames) in the culture, the number of virus-infected cells in the culture, or changes in viral replication rates.in studies of sars-cov and mers-cov in human respiratory epithelial cell cultures, remdesivir has demonstrated strong antiviral activity (ec 50 ≈ 0.07 μm for either virus) with relative consistency, and has been shown to be capable of inhibiting mers-cov replication at levels below those that would result in unacceptable cytotoxicity [11, 13] . interestingly, a study published in february 2020 by wang et al. was the first, to our knowledge, to examine the effect of remdesivir against sars-cov-2, the hcov involved in the current pandemic [17] . this study investigated the impact of seven different drugs on viral titers, cytotoxicity, and infection rates, using vero e6 cells (a cell line originating from african green monkey kidney epithelial cells). they found low potency of most of these drugs for inhibiting sars-cov-2. ec 50 values ranged widely from 109.5 μm for ribavirin to 1.13 μm for choloquine and 0.77 μm for remdesivir, which were the two drugs that required the lowest concentrations for blocking viral infection.a few in vitro studies have also investigated the utility of remdesivir against non-human covs. for example, a study by murphy et al. reported anti-cov activity of remdesivir's parent nucleoside, gs-441524, against an alphacoronavirus that only infects wild and domestic cats, the feline infectious peritonitis (fip) virus (ec 50 = 0.78 μm; table 1 ) [14] . in 2019, brown et al. observed some antiviral effects of remdesivir against sars-like bat covs (specifically, bat-cov hku3, bat-cov sch014, and bat-cov wiv1) and mers-like bat covs (specifically, bat-cov hku5) [12] .further, this study detected a weaker antiviral effect against porcine deltacoronavirus (pdcov; table 1 ), particularly when tested in porcine cell lines. among currently known covs, pdcov has the least similar rdrp sequence compared to sars-cov and mers-cov (only 67-69% similarity in amino acid sequence) [12] . in fact, the rdrp of pdcov has a different amino acid at a specific site (phenylalanine to leucine at residue 483), a dissimilarity that has been previously associated with increased resistance to remdesivir in other covs [12, 13] . therefore, it was important to attempt to disentangle whether the lower antiviral activity observed could be related to a viral characteristic of pdcov or if it could be attributable to differences in the cell lines used. while diminished potency of remdesivir against pdcov was noted in cultures of porcine kidney epithelial cells (llc-pk1), in a human liver cell line (huh7), the ec 50 was relatively low (ec 50 not reached in llc-pk1 vs. ec 50 = 0.02 μm in huh7; table 1 ). similarly, the ec 50 was substantially higher for antiviral activity against an endemic hcov (229e) in the porcine cell line (3.8 μm compared to 0.02 μm in huh7), again indicating the likely lower potency of the drug in this context. thus, the observed variations in remdesivir potency against the same viruses in the different cell lines may imply that there is some factor associated with the cell line, rather than the virus, that may be affecting the drug's antiviral activity. in fact, the authors state that these findings may imply that llc-pk1 cells lack a cellular process necessary for remdesivir antiviral activity, which could also support the hypothesis that remdesivir may have another mechanism of action that is not presently understood.animal studies on remdesivir efficacy against covs have utilized transgenic mice and rhesus macaques [10, 11, 13, 18] . for example, using a mouse model with a ces1c-knockout (which better emulates human metabolism of remdesivir compared to wild-type mice) and a humanized mers-cov receptor, sheahan et al. found that both prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir had protective effects against mers-cov replication and associated pathology, generally resulting in less lung damage and better pulmonary function compared to controls [10] . interestingly, among mice that were infected with a higher virus quantity (i.e., more plaque-forming units), those receiving prophylactic remdesivir one day before infection had significantly better 6-day survival than infected control mice that did not receive remdesivir. however, the mice were sacrificed before longer follow-up data could be obtained. similarly, in a rhesus macaque model of mers-cov pathogenesis, prophylactic and therapeutic administration of remdesivir demonstrated favorable results, reducing respiratory tract viral titers and pulmonary pathology [18] . prophylactic use was initiated 24 h prior to viral challenge, whereas therapeutic use was initiated 12 h after challenge. while respiratory rate was not substantially different between the prophylactic, therapeutic, and control groups, x-ray scores, representing the severity of pulmonary infiltrates, were significantly better in the prophylactic and therapeutic groups, comparing each to controls [18] . incidentally, remdesivir has also been associated with beneficial effects, including reduced severity of respiratory signs and improved survival, against challenge with nipah virus, which is a non-cov virus in the paramyxoviridae family, in african green monkeys [21] .in a ces1c-knockout mouse model of sars-cov infection, prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir treatment resulted in lower lung viral titers, and if therapy was administered 1 day post-infection (which is before peak viral replication), it was associated with greater pulmonary function, compared to controls [11] . however, there were no differences in disease pathology or survival if treatment was administered 2 days post-infection.some veterinary studies have also examined the effects of the parent nucleoside, gs-441524, in cats with fip, a condition associated with very high mortality in cats [14, 16] . gilead sciences (foster city, california) had provided this drug to researchers at the university of california, davis to evaluate its potential utility in veterinary indications [35] . subsequently, gs-441524 became an intermediate in the production of the prodrug, remdesivir, which has superior ability to transport the active compound into cells [9, 18] . because both drugs yield the same active metabolite in host cells, some prior studies on the antiviral activity of remdesivir also investigate gs-441524 [15, 18] , and/or discuss its relevance in the veterinary studies [9, 12] .in 2018, murphy et al. examined the efficacy of gs-441524 against fip in 12 experimentally infected cats [14] . controls were not included, as historical data on untreated cats were available, demonstrating a mortality rate close to 100% [14, 36] . after experimental challenge with the fip virus, 2 cats did not develop fip-related signs and remained untreated [14] . in the 10 infected cats, treatment was initiated upon onset of fip-associated clinical signs (~10-18 days post infection), and continued for 2 weeks. of these cats, half (n = 5) were treated with a 5 mg/kg dose of gs-441524 administered subcutaneously once per day, and the other half (n = 5) were treated with 2 mg/kg daily. if disease recurred after initial treatment, cats were re-treated using the same regimen for another 2 weeks. follow-up continued for 8 months. all treated cats demonstrated favorable responses to gs-441524 treatment within 24-48 h, regardless of dose, and were still alive and clinically unremarkable 8 months post infection. two cats (one from each dose group) experienced disease recurrence at 4 weeks and 6 weeks after initial treatment and were re-treated. adverse events related to treatment, other than temporary discomfort at the injection site, were not observed. this study was based on a small number of animals, and it is unclear whether experimental infection is a relevant representation of naturally-occurring fipv infection in cats. future studies with additional follow-up time would be helpful for assessing whether unexpected long-term sequelae are observed in the cats, since such information on surviving animals is sparse given the high fatality rate. in a field trial of treatment with gs-441524 for naturally occurring fip, pedersen et al. treated 31 cats with an initial dose of 2 mg/kg daily [16] . within the first week of treatment, 4 cats (13%) with severe disease died or were euthanized, a fifth cat died after 26 days, and another was euthanized about 2-weeks post relapse due to the development of neurological signs and a lack of response to treatment. the remaining cats completed at least 12 weeks of treatment, but 8 experienced relapses requiring re-treatment with gs-441524. dose escalation from 2 mg/kg to 4 mg/kg daily was required for 5 cats. a total of 25 treated cats (81%) survived fip for at least 44 weeks of follow up, indicating that gs-441524 (and presumably, its prodrug remdesivir) is also a promising therapeutic candidate for treatment of alphacoronavirus-related disease in cats. most cats in this study had "wet" or effusive fip, the hallmark of which is the accumulation of fluids in the abdominal or thoracic cavities. there were only 3 cats in the study with abdominal non-effusive ("dry") fip, which is a more chronic condition, and another 4 cats initially had dry fip that progressed into wet fip. one cat in the dry fip group and one in the dry-to-wet group did not survive. because of the small number of cats with dry fip, conclusions cannot be drawn about whether remdesivir has greater efficacy in the treatment of some clinical manifestations of fip than others. a strength of this study is that it was conducted among animals with naturallyoccurring cov infection as a field trial, better representing real-world circumstances.the first patient to present with covid-19 in the u.s. was treated with intravenous remdesivir under the compassionate use clause after developing pneumonia in january 2020 [37] . this 35-year-old male had been infected during travel to wuhan and returned to the u.s. where he was hospitalized for more than 12 days. he was treated with intravenous remdesivir on the seventh day, and his condition was reportedly improving on the eighth day. no adverse events related to remdesivir use were noted. the case report was written prior to the patient's discharge.human data on remdesivir use for covid-19 will likely continue to become available from compassionate use cases before the clinical trial is completed. in fact, there are many anecdotal reports already circulating about treatment of covid-19 patients with remdesivir. according to a recent newspaper article, 17 passengers on the diamond princess cruise ship were treated with intravenous remdesivir for 10 days and were alive at the time of article release. one of the physicians involved in their treatment, who is affiliated with the u.s. national institutes of health (nih), felt that the patients were less dependent on ventilators after receiving the drug. nevertheless, no conclusions can be drawn based on such reports.a preprint of a case series on the first 12 covid-19 patients in the u.s. (who had disease onset between january 14 and 29, 2020) recently became available, though it had not been peer-reviewed at the time of writing [38] . this report, authored by a team from the centers for disease control (cdc), described the demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients, as well as information on course of disease and clinical management. seven of the 12 patients (58%) were hospitalized, and three of these patients received remdesivir intravenously at the onset of worsening symptoms (two on the eleventh day of illness and one on the seventh day). treatment with remdesivir was tolerated, though temporary gastrointestinal upset and elevated aminotransferase levels were observed in all three patients after administration. treatment was discontinued after respiratory symptoms improved (total treatment durations of 4 days, 5 days, and 10 days). it should be noted that one of these three patients is the same patient described in the case report discussed above [37] .some safety data were formally collected during a clinical trial conducted in the democratic republic of congo that randomized 175 patients to be treated with remdesivir for ebola [39] . incidentally, randomization to remdesivir treatment was discontinued in this trial after an interim analysis showed superior survival for two other trial drugs, despite preclinical and compassionate use data having been favorable for remdesivir against the ebola virus prior to the trial [9] . interestingly, patients who received remdesivir had slower rates of viral clearance compared to patients who received single-dose antivirals (specifically, mab114 and regn-eb3), which the authors hypothesized may be related to the fact that the treatment plan for remdesivir involved multiple intravenous infusions. however, for now, information on the potential efficacy of remdesivir specifically against covs is largely limited to in vitro and animal studies, though covid-19 related knowledge is evolving quickly.overall, past studies on other covs may have limited generalizability to the virus underlying the current pandemic because of the high genetic diversity of the coronaviridae family, although broadspectrum drugs tend to be directed at well-conserved targets [11, 40] . in addition to this issue, there are a number of factors that can impact how predictive findings from in vitro or in vivo models may be of clinical efficacy against sars-cov-2. for example, drugs that may be effective in vitro may not have clinical utility if the therapeutic dose induces severe adverse events in the patient. alternatively, if the treatment dose does not attain an effective serum concentration in patients, or if ec 50 is greater than the achievable maximum serum concentration (c max ), then the drug is less likely to have therapeutic utility. with regard to animal models, how closely the model represents disease pathogenesis and drug metabolism in humans can be challenging to gauge.multiple clinical trials are underway on the use of remdesivir for treatment of covid-19 [41] . the nih-sponsored clinical trial, ongoing in the u.s. and the republic of korea, is a double-blinded, placebocontrolled trial in which patients are randomized to receive either placebo or an initial dose of 200 mg of intravenous remdesivir on the first day, followed by a maintenance dose of 100 mg per day, through discharge up to a maximum of 10 total treatment days [20] . the primary outcome of the trial, as described in the u.s. national library of medicine clinical trials registry, will be expressed as the proportion of patients in each category of a seven-category clinical severity scale on the fifteenth day post treatment initiation (table 2 ) [42] . additionally, gilead sciences is sponsoring a remdesivir study among patients with severe covid-19 with a composite primary outcome measure of fever normalization and oxygen normalization [43] . hospitalized, on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 3hospitalized, on non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices 4hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen 5hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen 6 not hospitalized, limitation on activities 7not hospitalized, no limitations on activities ⁎ please note that information is taken verbatim from the u.s. nationallibrary of medicine clinical trials registry [42] .e.s. amirian and j.k. levy one health 9 (2020) 100128two double-blinded placebo-controlled trials are also recruiting in hubei province, china [44, 45] . one targets hospitalized patients with mild-to-moderate covid-19 [44] , while the other is focused on severe cases [45] . the primary outcome measure for the study on mild or moderate cases is time to clinical recovery, as defined by normalization of body temperature, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and the resolution of cough for at least 72 h [44] . in the study on severe cases, time to clinical improvement is the primary outcome and is defined using a six-category scale, ranging from discharge to death [45] .while previous studies on remdesivir are promising, formal clinical evaluation is strongly warranted. in general, there are many reasons why favorable preclinical data can fail to translate directly into human clinical trial results [46] , such as inadvertent use of irrelevant models, inability to achieve effective serum drug concentrations in patients, or the occurrence of unanticipated severe adverse events among patients. therefore, postulating on expected results of the trials is extremely challenging.nonetheless, there are hundreds of clinical trials ongoing internationally on different drugs that utilize various mechanisms of action [41, 51] , including trials on other nucleosides inhibitors (e.g., ribavirin), protease inhibitors (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir), and interleukin-6 receptor inhibitors (e.g., sarilumab) [41, 47] . another well-known candidate that is being evaluated in multiple trials against covid-19 is chloroquine (or hydroxychloroquine), which is already approved as an antimalarial (and for extraintestinal amebiasis) [41, 48] . results of the clinical trials currently underway in the u.s. and china will provide crucial information about whether remdesivir represents a viable treatment option for covid-19 [20, 49] . if the trial findings are ultimately positive, it will be imperative to ensure that the drug is produced on a commercial scale capable of meeting the demand generated by both the current pandemic and future outbreaks. such a change in production may also allow for the added benefit of the drug becoming more available for agricultural and veterinary use for relevant indications.this work did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.the authors report no relevant conflicts of interest. e.s. amirian was previously employed by mckesson specialty health, where she conducted health economics and outcomes research contract studies. however, none of these studies involved gilead sciences.since first being identified in december 2019, the novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has rapidly spread around the globe and viable therapeutic options are an area of great interest. at present th ere are nearly 3.5 million global cases of sars-cov-2, with nearly 250,000 deaths. treatments are rapidly evolving during the time of this deadly pandemic and several drugs remain under investigation as potential therapies for critically ill covid-19 patients. proposed antiviral treatment options include hydroxychloroquine, remdesivir, and lopinavir/ritonavir, which are all safe in pregnancy [1] . other potential therapies which are contraindicated in pregnancy include ribavirin and baricitinib [1] . ribavirin has teratogenic properties; it induces miscarriages and leads to craniofacial and limb defects in mouse models [1, 2] .baricitinib has shown embryotoxicity in mouse models [1, 3] .remdesivir is a nucleoside analog that inhibits rna-dependent rna polymerase.remdesivir has previously demonstrated in vivo activity against both ebola virus [4] and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) [5] . remdesivir underwent in vitro testing early in the sars-cov-2 outbreak at the wuhan virus research institute, and was first used successfully in a us covid-19 patient in january 2020 [6] . early data on compassionate use of a 10-day course of remdesivir have shown a significant improvement in rates of extubation and reduction in mortality for covid-19 patients [7] and randomized controlled trials to assess its efficacy more completely are ongoing both in the united states and abroad.case j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f a 35-year-old employee (g7p4115) of an inpatient hospice center presented to the hospital via transfer at 22 weeks and 2 days of gestation with a chief complaint of hypoxia in the setting of known sars cov-2 infection. the patient's past medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus, asthma, and class iii obesity. the patient initially presented four days prior to an outside facility with a chief complaint of fever, cough, and myalgias. she tested positive for covid-19. the patient was managed as an outpatient for four days until development of worsening dyspnea and hypoxia. at this time s he was transferred and admitted to the teaching hospital for higher-level care.on arrival at the hospital the patient was noted to be hypoxic and in respiratory distress with oxygen saturation of 86% on 6 liters nasal cannula. the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) and placed on high-flow non-invasive positive-pressure ventilation. chest x-ray on admission showed extensive, bilateral consolidation suggestive of multifocal pneumonia, with more extensive disease visible in the left lung. repeat chestx-ray performed 24 hours later showed interval worsening of consolidation of alveolar opacities, consistent with both covid-19 pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome.medical therapy was initiated with transfusion of covid-19 convalescent plasma, rocephin 2g intravenous (iv) daily and azithromycin 500mg iv for concern for possible superimposed bacterial pneumonia. hydroxychloroquine 400g twice daily was initiated on the day of admission, followed by 400mg daily for three days.given that periods of prolonged immobility, such as extended mechanical ventilation, are associated with increased risk of thrombo embolic disease, and that sars-cov-2 infection appears to cause a diffuse inflammatory reaction which places patients at j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f an increased risk embolism, this patient was anticoagulated for the duration of her admission with a therapeutic dose of low molecular weight heparin.early during the hospitalization a care coordination meeting was held to discuss the plan of care from an obstetric standpoint. the society for maternal fetal medicine has advised that caution be used when giving corticosteroids for fetal lung development in cases of maternal covid-19 infection due to possible worsening of pulmonary function and viral shedding [8] . taking into account this patient's severe respiratory failure, established co-morbidities, and the limited fetal benefit of steroids at 22 weeks of gestation, antenatal steroids were deferred during her admission. it was also felt to be in the best interest of both the mother and fetus to forego delivery for fetal distress until 25 weeks of gestation.on the morning of hospital day (hd) 2, the patient was intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation for worsening respiratory distress. during the period of mechanical ventilation the patient was noted to have labile blood pressure, with periods of intermittent hypertension and hypotension. intermittent pressure support with iv ephedrine was provided as needed for hypotension. a trial of prone ventilation was attempted on hd 4 and discontinued secondary to an episode of torsades de pointes. given this new emergence of a cardiac arrhythmia, hydroxychloroquine was also discontinued at this time.the use of glucocorticoids for treatment of coronavirus infections remains somewhat controversial, as early use of systemic glucocorticoids has been shown to increase viral load and potentially worsen disease course in patients with sars, and early data shows that may also be the case in patients with sars-cov-2. specifically, the use of high-dose glucocorticoids have been associated with detrimental effects in both sars and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof sars-cov-2 patients. [9, 10, 11] . however, given the correlation of significant cytokine storm with severe disease, the use of low-to medium-dose glucocorticoids may be of use in patients who have already progressed to a critical disease state [11] . as the patient had rapid progression from mild to critical disease, with a known history of asthma, the decision was made to initiate a short course of iv glucocorticoids with hydrocortisone 50mg iv which was started as a three times daily dose and tapered over the course of five days. appropriate steps to establish management of hyperglycemia were also initiated at this time.application for compassionate-use remdesivir therapy had been completed on admission and the patient was subsequently approved for trial of use. she was started on remdesivir on hd 5 with a 200mg iv dose. remdesivir therapy continued with 100mg iv doses every 24 hours for an additional nine days. daily labs were obtained following remdesivir initiation to monitor for developing renal and/or hepatic impairment. mild transaminitis was noted with peak aspartate transaminase (ast) and alanine aminotransferase (alt) values of 49 and 51 on hd 8. the patient was gradually weaned off paralytics with an appropriate response. after passing a trial of spontaneous breathing on hospital day 10 (five days after the initiation of remdesivir therapy), she was extubated and placed on supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula. oxygen requirements were gradually decreased and on hd 11, the patient was successfully transitioned to room air. liver enzymes normalized. no renal dysfunction was observed throughout the hospitalization.no further episodes of cardiac arrhythmia occurred during this admission. on hd 14, at 24 weeks and 2 days of gestation, she was ambulating with mild shortness of breath, vital signs remained stable and within normal limits, and the patient was found to be j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f appropriate for discharge following her final dose of remdesivir. at the time of writing, the patient had had no further issues after discharge and was continuing antenatal care with both primary obstetric office and maternal fetal medicine specialists.this patient's care was complicated by several factors in addition to her acute sars -cov-2 infection, including the potential need for anticoagulation, her existing respiratory disease, the questionable viability of her pregnancy given its early gestationa l age, and the potential use and efficacy of investigational therapies such as convalescent plasma and remdesivir.the use of convalescent plasma transfusions for the treatment of acute viral illnesses is an established therapy which has previously shown benefit in the treatment of sars, mers, and ebola virus patients [12] . at present no official recommendations for the use of convalescent plasma as a covid-19 therapy exist and research is currently ongoing; however, in a limited uncontrolled case series of five critically ill covid-19 patients who received convalescent plasma therapy, all five patients showed significant clinical improvement [13] . the hospital is currently participating in a trial of convalescent plasma therapy for inpatient management of severe and critical covid-19 infections, and this patient was deemed eligible for a trial of therapy. as such, this patient was transfused one unit of convalescent covid-19 plasma on the day of admission.remdesivir, a pro-drug nucleotide analog of adenosine, competes for an atpbinding site on rna-dependent rna polymerase and has previously been shown to have activity against both mers and ebola virus [4, 5] . at present no official guidance has been j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof published for the use of remdesivir in the treatment of covid-19, but use under compassionate-use protocols it is available as research into the efficacy of this therapy is ongoing. on the date of this patient's admission an application was made for compassionate-use remdesivir therapy, which was subsequently approved. remdesivir was initiated on day 5 of this patient's hospitalization, by which time the patient's status had deteriorated and she required mechanical ventilation as described. following initiation of remdesivir the patient improved relatively quickly and was able to be extubated on day 5 of the 10-day course of remdesivir therapy. the patient was able to be transitioned to room air 24 hours later, and was subsequently discharged on no supplemental oxygen on day 10 of her remdesivir trial. this result is in line with other such case reports of compassionate-use remdesivir, which, while limited in power and uncontrolled, have shown that initiation of remdesivir may reduce time to extubation, increase the rate of extubation, and decrease mortality in covid-19 patients requiring mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal oxygen therapy [7] . randomized controlled trials are ongoing and needed to determine the efficacy of remdesivir in the management of critically ill sars -cov-2 infected patients, but this case and other limited case series show promise for remdesivir as a viable therapy for covid-19.el 31 de diciembre de 2019 se detectó en la ciudad de wuhan (china) un brote neumonía de etiología desconocida que fue rápidamente comunicado a la oms. una semana después, el 7 de enero de 2020 se aisló de estos pacientes un nuevo coronavirus, designado inicialmente como 2019-ncov [1, 2] . el 11 de febrero de 2020 la oms estableció el nombre de la enfermedad como covid-19 (coronavirus disease-2019) y se designó provisionalmente al coronavirus causante como sars-cov-2 [1] [2] [3] . . el sars-cov-2 es un nuevo virus que pertenece a la subfamilia orthocoronavirinae, género coronavirus y al subgénero sarbecovirus (beta-coronavirus, beta-2b) y dentro de ellos al clado o linaje 2, que está mucho más próximo genéticamente a los coronavirus de los murciélagos que del sars humano. el genoma del sars-cov-2 está formado por un arn de una sola cadena de unos 30.000 nucleótidos y seis orf (open reading frames), idénticos al resto de coronavirus, y varios genes adicionales. la mayoría de estos genes sólo presentan una homología del 80% con el antiguo virus sars-cov; sin embargo los genes implicados en la replicación (orf1ab) presentan una homología del 94% con este virus [2] [3] [4] . a pesar de ello la secuenciación completa de los genomas de los coronavirus detectados en pacientes, y especialmente el gen de la arn-polimerasa arndirigida (rprd) y el gen s (espícula externa), muestran que las resumen el 31 de diciembre de 2019 se detectó en la ciudad de wuhan (china) un brote neumonía causado por un nuevo coronavirus (sars-cov-2). debido a la elevada capacidad de difusión e infección humana se ha convertido en una nueva pandemia zoónotica. la ausencia de una vacuna ha determinado la búsqueda de fármacos antivirales con capacidad para inhibir la replicación del nuevo virus. de entre ellos, remdesivir, un análogo de la adenosina, es el que parece tener un futuro más prometedor. este fármaco ha mostrado in vitro y en animales una elevada capacidad para bloquear la infección y replicación viral con unas concentraciones alcanzables en el plasma humano. aunque todos los estudios se han realizado con el sars-cov y el mers-cov, parece que por analogía virológica y funcional, remdesivir es de los pocos antivirales con demostrada eficacia. sin embargo, se precisan estudios y ensayos clínicos en humanos para conocer el resultado de su aplicación en los mismos.este fármaco, por sí mismo o en combinación con ritonavir, ha mostrado actividad anti-coronavirus in vitro. frente al sars los pacientes tratados con esta combinación, frente al grupo tratado con ribavirina, presentaron un menor riesgo de desarrollar distress respiratorio o fallecimiento [11, 12] .otro grupo de antivirales de posible utilidad serían los análogos de los diferentes nucleósidos que han mostrado capacidad para bloquear la actividad replicativa de diferentes virus tanto adn como arn [13] . sin embargo, en el grupo de los coronavirus existe una dificultad biológica frente a estos compuestos, que es la síntesis de una 3´-5´-exoribonucleasa (exonn) que interactúa con ellos e inhibe su actividad [13] [14] [15] . gracias a este enzima compuestos como el 5-fluorouracilo y la ribavirina carecen de eficacia in vitro por evasión de su capacidad para interferir en la síntesis del nuevo arn viral [13, 14] .sheahan et al. [16] fueron los primeros en 2017 en comunicar que el profármaco monofosforamidato, un análogo del nucleósido c-adenosina (1´-ciano-4-aza-7,9-dideazaadenosine) (gs-5734 y gs-441524, posteriormente designado como remdesivir) presentaba capacidad para inhibir la infección y replicación del sars-cov, mers-cov y de algunas cepas de los bat-cov en cultivos de células epiteliales del tracto respiratorio humano [13, 14] . además, remdesivir presentaba eficacia terapéutica y profiláctica frente al sars-cov en el modelo murino [13, 17] .remdesivir, en su forma de trifosfato, es un análogo de la adenosina (figura 1) que compite preferentemente por el atp viral y se incorpora como falso nucleósido a la nueva cadena del arn viral determinando una terminación o interrupción prematura, primeras 2 horas post-infección, de la síntesis del arn y de la replicación viral, por ello también se le considera un inhibidor de la arn-polimerasa viral arn-dirigida (rprd) [4, 13, 16, 18] . gordon et al. [19] han demostrado in vitro que remdesivir interactúa de forma directa con las proteínas nsp8 y nsp12 de la rprd del mers-cov, siendo esa su diana terapéutica. además, confirman que los nucleósidos externos, aportados en este caso en forma de remdesivir, se incorporan mucho más eficientemente al proceso replicativo viral que los existentes en el propio citoplasma de la célula infectada [16] .el estudio de wang et al. [20] ha mostrado que la concentración efectiva-90 (ce 90 ) de este antiviral frente al sars-cov-2 en cultivo de células vero-e6, es de 1.76 µm, sugiriendo que esta misma concentración podría alcanzarse en el ser humano sin dificultad. también han comprobado como remdesivir inhibe eficientemente la infección por el sars-cov-2 en cultivos celulares (células huh-7 procedentes de cáncer hepático humano) [15, 18] .remdesivir ha demostrado in vitro capacidad para inhibir la replicación de un beta-coronavirus animal (mouse hepatitis virus) interfiriendo con la rprd a pesar de la presencia de la exoribonucleasa [14] ; este enzima viral (nsp14, exonn) se encargaría de escindir el antiviral y determinar la disminución de la sensibilidad o resistencia al mismo [16, 19] . destaca, además, que los coronavirus parcialmente resistentes a este antiviral, obtenidos in vitro tras >20 pases en presencia del gs-441524 cepas humanas constituyen un linaje distinto del sars-cov, pero muy cercano al linaje detectado en algunos murciélagos (batcov ratg13) [4] .el sars-cov-2 ha infectado en estos momentos muchas más personas que sus predecesores (>95.000). varios factores parecen haber favorecido esta rápida expansión; por una parte que el epicentro del brote, la ciudad de wuhan presenta unos 11 millones de habitantes y es el principal nudo de comunicaciones de la provincia de hubei, lo cual facilita los contactos persona-persona y la exportación de casos a otras ciudades. los datos estimados de su ro están en 2-3.5, de modo que cada paciente puede infectar a 2 ó 3 personas nuevas. este valor es parecido al sars (ro 2-5) y mucho mayor que el del mers (ro <1), pero el número de personas infectadas por nuevo coronavirus por trasmisión interhumana es unas 3-10 veces superior que los virus previos [1] [2] [3] .la ausencia de un fármaco antiviral de demostrada eficacia frente a los diferentes coronavirus obliga a utilizar diferentes estrategias para optimizar aquellos ya conocidos. la primera de ellas sería probar, utilizando los ensayos clásicos, los antivirales de amplio espectro conocidos que se utilizan para otras infecciones víricas. estos métodos establecen el efecto de este fármaco en las diferentes fases de replicación viral y formación de placas en los cultivos celulares. como ejemplos de este tipo de fármacos serían los diferentes interferones tipo i (ifnalfa, beta, kappa, etc…) o tipo ii (ifn-gamma). estos fármacos poseen la ventaja de conocerse de antemano todas sus propiedades farmacocinéticas y farmacodinámicas y sus posibles efectos adversos. sin embargo, ninguno de ellos ha demostrado eficacia ni efecto, cuando se administran en solitario, sobre los diferentes coronavirus estudiados, además de provocar ciertas reacciones adversas en algunos pacientes [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] .la segunda metodología sería la de utilizar la librería múltiple de compuestos químicos que se conocen y probar algunos de ellos, de acuerdo con su fórmula química, a la búsqueda del azar funcional. parece evidente que este sistema, que ha funcionado para otras patologías, no sería demasiado útil para obtener un fármaco anti-coronavirus sintético eficaz en un breve espacio de tiempo [5] [6] [7] .la tercera posibilidad sería el desarrollo de fármacos específicos basados en el conocimiento y análisis del genoma y del ciclo replicativo de los diferentes coronavirus [4, 5] . hasta la fecha se han probado muchos compuestos químicos capaces de bloquear in vitro esta actividad en los coronavirus; sin embargo la mayoría de ellos no son eficaces clínicamente por comportar situaciones de inmunosupresión del huésped o porque su dosis efectiva es muy superior a la obtenida a nivel plasmático [4, 6, 7] .frente al sars-cov-2 y de acuerdo con las primeras guías terapéuticas chinas, los únicos compuestos inicialmente recomendados serían el ifn-alfa (5 millones unidades) y la combinación lopinavir/ritonavir (400 mg/100 mg) [10] . el ifn-alfa es un antiviral de amplio espectro que se ha utilizado para el tratamiento de la hepatitis b. por su parte lopinavir es un inhibidor de la proteasa que se emplea para el tratamiento el vih.pecialmente el personal sanitario. como terapia en esta entidad debería administrarse lo antes posible (primeras 48 horas) ya que la replicación viral es máxima al inicio de la sintomatología y con ello se acortaría el tiempo de excreción del mismo y su transmisibilidad. por ello este antiviral podría tener utilidad terapéutica en los pacientes infectados por el sars-cov-2 [5, 6, 22] .sin embargo, en estos momentos, los pocos datos de eficacia y actividad antiviral se han realizado sólo frente al sars-cov o mers-cov, por ello todavía se desconoce la eficacia y seguridad de remdesivir en pacientes infectados por el sars-cov-2. sin embargo, según los datos obtenidos hasta el momento remdesivir podría ser la esperanza antiviral frente al sars-cov-2 que se expande pandémicamente por el planeta.los autores declaran que no existe conflicto de intereses.(análogo de remdesivir) desarrollan dos mutaciones temporales (f476l y v553l) en el gen de la rdrp, pero permanecen sensibles a concentraciones elevadas del mismo, mientras que se observa una disminución evidente del fitness y de su trasmisibilidad en comparación con la cepa salvaje del mers-cov [13] . este descenso del fitness se debe fundamentalmente a la alteración en la replicación del genoma viral, escasa fidelidad de copia de la rprd, errores en la incorporación de los nucleótidos a la nueva cadena viral y baja estabilidad de las proteínas derivadas de estos genomas [13, 16] .estos datos indican que para la obtención de la máxima actividad antiviral los análogos de los nucleósidos, incluido remdesivir, precisan inhibir de forma directa la expresión del gen exonn (exoribonucleasa), lo cual les permite obtener concentraciones intracelulares más elevadas [13] . a pesar de todo ello parece evidente la elevada capacidad de remdesivir para inhibir de forma directa y eficiente la replicación del arn de la inmensa mayoría de coronavirus, incluyendo muy probablemente el nuevo sars-cov-2 [13, 14, 19] .los estudios experimentales en animales demuestran que, comparado con el grupo control, este antiviral reduce de forma significativa la replicación y la carga viral, disminuye el daño pulmonar y esta actividad es mejor que la obtenida con la utilización de lopinavir/ritonavir combinado con ifn-beta en los ratones infectados por el mers-cov [16, [21] [22] [23] . este antiviral ha completado el ensayo clínico fase iii en el tratamiento de la infección por el virus ébola y se conocen los datos de farmacocinética y seguridad para los humanos [7, 8] . en algunos estudios la combinación de remdesivir + ifn-beta ha mostrado superior a la combinación lopinavir/ritonavir frente al mers-cov tanto in vitro como in vivo [11, 12, 23] . según comunicaciones de casos aislados la combinación de remdesivir con/ sin ifn-beta sería superior a la triple combinación lopinavir/ ritonavir/ifn-beta [11, 12] .el estudio de de wit et al. [22] demuestra la eficacia profiláctica de remdesivir en las personas expuestas al mers-cov, es-estructura química del análogo de la adenosina remdesivir (1´-ciano-4aza-7,9-dideazaadenosine) (gs-5734) [6] .on december 31, 2019 a pneumonia outbreak caused by a new coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was detected in the city of wuhan (china). due to the high capacity of diffusion and human infection it has become a new zoonotic pandemic. the absence of a vaccine has determined the search for antiviral drugs with the capacity to inhibit the replication of the new virus. among them, remdesivir, an analogue of adenosine, is what seems to have a more promising future. this drug has shown in vitro and in animals a high capacity to block infection and viral replication with attainable concentrations in human plasma. although all studies have been carried out with sars-cov and mers-cov, it seems that by virological and functional analogy, remdesivir is one of the few antiviral drugs with proven efficacy. however, studies and clinical trials in humans are required to know the result of their application in them.[remdesivir, the antiviral hope against sars-cov-2].on december 31, 2019 a pneumonia outbreak caused by a new coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was detected in the city of wuhan (china) due to the high capacity of diffusion and human infection it has become a new zoonotic pandemic the absence of a vaccine has determined the search for antiviral drugs with the capacity to inhibit the replication of the new virus among them, remdesivir, an analogue of adenosine, is what seems to have a more promising future this drug has shown in vitro and in animals a high capacity to block infection and viral replication with attainable concentrations in human plasma although all studies have been carried out with sars-cov and mers-cov, it seems that by virological and functional analogy, remdesivir is one of the few antiviral drugs with proven efficacy however, studies and clinical trials in humans are required to know the result of their application in them[remdesivir, the antiviral hope against sars-cov-2]on december 31, 2019 a pneumonia outbreak caused by a new coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was detected in the city of wuhan (china) due to the high capacity of diffusion and human infection it has become a new zoonotic pandemic the absence of a vaccine has determined the search for antiviral drugs with the capacity to inhibit the replication of the new virus among them, remdesivir, an analogue of adenosine, is what seems to have a more promising future this drug has shown in vitro and in animals a high capacity to block infection and viral replication with attainable concentrations in human plasma although all studies have been carried out with sars-cov and mers-cov, it seems that by virological and functional analogy, remdesivir is one of the few antiviral drugs with proven efficacy however, studies and clinical trials in humans are required to know the result of their application in themremdesivir, the antiviral hope against sars-cov-2/ remdesivir, la esperanza antiviral frente al sars-cov-2the ongoing pandemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections has led to more than 4 692 797 cases and 195 920 deaths globally as of april 25, 2020. 1 although most infections are selflimited, about 15% of infected adults develop severe pneumonia that requires treatment with supplemental oxygen and an additional 5% progress to critical illness with hypoxaemic respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and multiorgan failure that necessitates ventilatory support, often for several weeks. [2] [3] [4] at least half of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) requiring invasive mechanical ventilation have died in hospital, 4, 5 and the associated burden on health-care systems, especially intensive care units, has been overwhelming in several affected countries.although several approved drugs and investigational agents have shown antiviral activity against sars-cov-2 in vitro, 6, 7 at present there are no antiviral therapies of proven effectiveness in treating severely ill patients with a multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled trial (rct) of hydroxychloroquine involving 150 adults admitted to hospital for covid-19 reported no significant effect of the drug on accelerating viral clearance. 8 an rct enrolling patients within 12 days of symptom onset found that favipiravir was superior to arbidol in terms of the clinical recovery rate at day 7 in patients with mild illness (62 [56%] of 111 with arbidol vs 70 [71%] of 98 with favipiravir), but not in those with critical illness (0 vs 1 [6%]). 9 in severe illness, one uncontrolled study of five patients given convalescent plasma suggested a possible benefit, although the patients already had detectable anti-sars-cov-2 neutralising antibodies before receipt of the plasma. 10 an open-label rct of oral lopinavir-ritonavir found no significant effect on the primary outcome measure of time to clinical improve ment and no evidence of reduction in viral rna titres compared to control. 11 however, per-protocol analyses suggested possible reductions in time to clinical improvement (difference of 1 day), particularly in those treated within 12 days of symptom onset. further studies of lopinavir-ritonavir and other drugs are ongoing.remdesivir (also gs-5734) is a monophosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine analogue that has a broad antiviral spectrum including filoviruses, paramyxoviruses, pneumoviruses, and coro na viruses. 12, 13 in vitro, remdesivir inhibits all human and animal coronaviruses tested to date, including sars-cov-2, [13] [14] [15] and has shown antiviral and clinical effects in animal models of sars-cov-1 and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov infections. 13, 16, 17 in a lethal murine model of mers, remdesivir was superior to a regimen of combined interferon beta and lopinavir-ritonavir. 16 remdesivir is a potent inhi bitor of sars-cov-2 replication in human nasal and bron chial airway epithelial cells. 18 in a non-lethal rhesus macaque model of sars-cov-2 infection, early remdesivir admin istration was shown to exert significant antiviral and clinical effects (reduced pulmonary infiltrates and virus titres in bronchoalveolar lavages vs vehicle only). 19 intra venous remdesivir was studied for treatment of ebola virus disease, in which it was adequately tolerated but less effective than several monoclonal antibody therapeutics, 20 and has been used on the basis of individual compas sionate use over the past several months in patients with covid-19 in some countries. 21 case studies have reported benefit in severely ill patients with covid-19. 5, 21, 22 however, the clinical and antiviral efficacy of remdesivir in covid-19 remains to be established. here, we report the results of a placebocontrolled randomised trial of remdesivir in patients with severe covid-19.this was an investigator-initiated, individually randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial to assess the effectiveness and safety of intravenous remdesivir in adults (aged ≥18 years) admitted to hospital with severe covid-19. the trial was done at ten hospitals in wuhan, hubei, china).ethical approval was obtained from the institutional review boards of each participating hospital. written informed consent was obtained from all patients, or their legal representative if they were unable to provide consent. the trial was done in accor dance with the principles of the declaration of helsinki and the international conference on harmonization-good clinical practice guidelines. the protocol is avail able online.eligible patients were men and non-pregnant women with covid-19 who were aged at least 18 years and were rt-pcr positive for sars-cov-2, had pneumoniaevidence before this study we searched pubmed, up to april 10, 2020, for published clinical trials assessing the effect of remdesivir among patients with laboratory-confirmed coronavirus disease 2019 . the search terms used were ("covid-19" or "2019-ncov" or "sars-cov-2") and "remdesivir" and ("clinical trial" or "randomized controlled trial"). we identified no published clinical trials of the effect of remdesivir in patients with covid-19.our study is the first randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled clinical trial assessing the effect of intravenous remdesivir in adults admitted to hospital with severe covid-19. the study was terminated before attaining the prespecified sample size. in the intention-to-treat population, the primary endpoint of time to clinical improvement was not significantly different between groups, but was numerically shorter in the remdesivir group than the control group, particularly in those treated within 10 days of symptom onset. the duration of invasive mechanical ventilation, although also not significantly different between groups, was numerically shorter in remdesivir recipients than placebo recipients.no statistically significant benefits were observed for remdesivir treatment beyond those of standard of care treatment. our trial did not attain the predetermined sample size because the outbreak of covid-19 was brought under control in china. future studies of remdesivir, including earlier treatment in patients with covid-19 and higher-dose regimens or in combination with other antivirals or sars-cov-2 neutralising antibodies in those with severe covid-19 are needed to better understand its potential effectiveness.for the trial protocol see https://www.researchsquare. com/article/rs-14618/v1 confirmed by chest imaging, had oxygen saturation of 94% or lower on room air or a ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fractional inspired oxygen of 300 mm hg or less, and were within 12 days of symptom onset. eligible patients of child-bearing age (men and women) agreed to take effective contraceptive measures (including hormonal contraception, barrier methods, or abstinence) during the study period and for at least 7 days after the last study drug administration. exclusion criteria included pregnancy or breast feeding; hepatic cirrhosis; alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase more than five times the upper limit of normal; known severe renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 ml/min per 1·73 m²) or receipt of continuous renal replacement therapy, haemodialysis, or peritoneal dialysis; possibility of transfer to a non-study hospital within 72 h; and enrolment into an investigational treatment study for covid-19 in the 30 days before screening. the use of other treatments, including lopinavir-ritonavir, was permitted.eligible patients were randomly assigned (2:1) to either the remdesivir group or the placebo group. randomisation was stratified according to the level of respiratory support as follows: (1) no oxygen support or oxygen support with nasal duct or mask; or (2) high-flow oxygen, non-invasive ventilation, invasive ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. the permuted block (30 patients per block) randomisation sequence, including stratification, was prepared by a statistician not involved in the trial using sas software, version 9.4. eligible patients were allocated to receive medication in individually numbered packs, according to the sequential order of the randomisation centre (jin yin-tan hospital central pharmacy). envelopes were prepared for emergency unmasking.patients received either intravenous remdesivir (200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg on days 2-10 in single daily infusions) or the same volume of placebo infusions for a total of 10 days (both provided by gilead sciences, foster city, ca, usa). patients were assessed once daily by trained nurses using diary cards that captured data on a six-category ordinal scale and safety from day 0 to 28 or death. other clinical data were recorded using the who-international severe acute respiratory and emerging infections consortium (isaric) case record form. the safety assessment included daily monitoring for adverse events, clinical laboratory testing (days 1, 3, 7, and 10), 12-lead electrocardiogram (days 1 and 14), and daily vital signs measurements. clinical data were recorded on paper case record forms and then double entered into an electronic database and validated by trial staff. naso pharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs, expectorated sputa as available, and faecal or anal swab specimens were collected on days 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 21, and 28 for viral rna detection and quantification. the trial was monitored by a contract research organisation (hangzhou tigermed consulting). virological testing was done at the teddy clinical research laboratory (tigermed-di'an, hangzhou, china) using quantitative real-time rt-pcr. rna was extracted from clinical samples with the magna pure 96 system (roche, rotkreuz, switzerland), detected and quantified by cobas z480 qpcr (roche), using lightmix modular sars-cov-2 assays (tib mobiol, berlin, germany). at baseline, the upper (nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs) and lower respiratory tract specimens were tested for detection of e-gene, rna-dependent rna polymerase gene, and n-gene, then samples on the subsequent visits were quantitatively and qualitative assessed for e-gene.the primary clinical endpoint was time to clinical improvement within 28 days after randomisation. clinical improvement was defined as a two-point reduction in patients' admission status on a six-point ordinal scale, or live discharge from the hospital, whichever came first. the six-point scale was as follows: death=6; hospital admission for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or mechanical ventilation=5; hospital admission for noninvasive ventilation or high-flow oxygen therapy=4; hos-pital admission for oxygen therapy (but not requiring high-flow or non-invasive ventilation)=3; hospital admission but not requiring oxygen therapy=2; and discharged or having reached discharge criteria (defined as clinical recovery-ie, normalisation of pyrexia, respiratory rate <24 breaths per minute, saturation of peripheral oxygen >94% on room air, and relief of cough, all maintained for at least 72 h)=1. the six-point scale was modified from the seven-point scale used in our previous covid-19 lopinavir-ritonavir rct 11 by combining the two outpatient strata into one. secondary outcomes were the proportions of patients in each category of the six-point scale at day 7, 14, and 28 after randomisation; all-cause mortality at day 28; frequency of invasive mechanical ventilation; duration of oxygen therapy; duration of hospital admis sion; and proportion of patients with nosocomial infection. virological measures included the proportions of patients with viral rna detected and viral rna load (measured by quantitative rt-pcr). safety outcomes included treatment-emergent adverse events, serious adverse events, and premature discontinuations of study drug.the original design required a total of 325 events across both groups, which would provide 80% power under a one-sided type i error of 2·5% if the hazard ratio (hr) comparing remdesivir to placebo is 1·4, corresponding to a change in time to clinical improvement of 6 days assuming that time to clinical improvement is 21 days on placebo.one interim analysis using triangular boundaries 23 and a 2:1 allocation ratio between remdesivir and placebo had been accounted for in the original design. assuming an 80% event rate within 28 days across both groups and a dropout rate of 10% implies that about 453 patients should be recruited for this trial (151 on placebo and 302 on remdesivir). the possibility for an interim analysis after enrolment of about 240 patients was included in the design if requested by the independent data safety and monitoring board.the primary efficacy analysis was done on an intentionto-treat (itt) basis with all randomly assigned patients. time to clinical improvement was assessed after all patients had reached day 28; no clinical improvement at day 28 or death before day 28 were considered as right censored at day 28. time to clinical improvement was portrayed by kaplan-meier plot and compared with a logrank test. the hr and 95% ci for clinical improvement and hr with 95% ci for clinical deterioration were calculated by cox proportional hazards model. other analyses include subgroup analyses for those receiving treatment 10 days or less vs more than 10 days after symptom onset, time to clinical deterioration (defined as one category increase or death), and for viral rna load at entry. the differences in continuous variables between the groups was calculated using hodges-lehmann between feb 6, 2020, and march 12, 2020, 255 patients were screened, of whom 237 were eligible (figure 1). 158 patients were assigned to receive remdesivir and 79 to receive placebo; one patient in the placebo group withdrew their previously written informed consent after randomisation, so 158 and 78 patients were included in the itt population. no patients were enrolled after march 12, because of the control of the outbreak in wuhan and on the basis of the termination criteria specified in the protocol, the data safety and monitoring board recommended that the study be terminated and data analysed on march 29. at this stage, the interim analysis was abandoned. when all the other assumptions stayed the same, with the actual enrolment of 236 participants, the statistical power was reduced from 80% to 58%. three patients in the remdesivir group did not start their assigned treatment so were not included in safety analyses (figure 1). the median age of study patients was 65 years (iqr 56-71); sex distribution was 89 (56%) men versus 69 (44%) women in the remdesivir group and 51 (65%) versus 27 (35%) in the placebo group (table 1). the most common comorbidity was hypertension, followed by diabetes and coronary heart disease. lopinavir-ritonavir was co-administered in 42 (18%) patients at baseline. most patients were in category 3 of the six-point ordinal scale of clinical status at baseline. some imbalances existed at enrolment between the groups, including more patients with hypertension, diabetes, or coronary artery disease in the remdesivir group than the placebo group. more patients in the control group than in the remdesivir group had been symptomatic for 10 days or less at the time of starting remdesivir or placebo treatment, and a higher proportion of remdesivir recipients had a respiratory rate of more than 24 breaths per min. no other major differences in symptoms, signs, laboratory results, disease severity, or treatments were observed between groups at baseline.median time from symptom onset to starting study treatment was 10 days (iqr 9-12). no important differences were apparent between the groups in other treatments received (including lopinavir-rito navir or corticosteroids; time from symptom onset to corticosteroids therapy, days 9 (7-11) 8 (6-10)duration of corticosteroids therapy, days 9 (5-15) 10 (6-16)data are median (iqr) or n (%). *three patients did not start treatment so are not included in time from symptom onset to start of study treatment subgroup analyses. in patients with use of remdesivir within 10 days after symptom onset, 28-day mortality was not significantly different between the groups, although numerically higher in the placebo group; by contrast, in the group of patients with late use, remdesivir patients had numerically higher 28-day mortality, although there was no significant difference. clinical improvement rates at days 14 and day 28 were also not significantly different between the groups, but numerically higher in the remdesivir group than the placebo group. for patients assigned to the remdesivir group, duration of invasive mechanical ventilation was not significantly different, but numerically shorter than in those assigned to the control group; however, the number of patients with invasive mechanical ventilation was small. no significant differences were observed between the two groups in length of oxygen support, hospital length of stay, days from randomisation to discharge, days from randomisation to death and distribution of six-category scale at day 7, day 14, and day 28 (table 3; appendix p 9). of 236 patients (158 in the remdesivir group and 78 in the placebo group) who were rt-pcr positive at enrolment, 37 (19%) of the 196 with data available had undetec table viral rna on the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab taken at base line. the mean baseline viral load of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs was 4·7 log 10 copies per ml (se 0·3) in the remdesivir group and 4·7 log 10 copies per ml (0·4) in the control group (table 1). viral load decreased over time similarly in both groups (figure 3a). no differences in viral load were observed when stratified by interval from symptom onset to start of study treatment (appendix p 10). in the subset of patients from whom expectorated sputa could be obtained (103 patients), the mean viral rna load at enrolment was nearly 1-log higher in the remdesivir group than the placebo group at enrolment (figure 3b). when adjusted for baseline sputum viral load at enrolment, the remdesivir group showed no significant difference at day 5 from placebo, but a slightly more rapid decline in load (p=0·0672).the cumulative rate of undetectable viral rna of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs by day 28 was 153 (78%) of 196 patients, and the negative proportion was similar among patients receiving remdesivir and those receiving placebo (appendix p 4).adverse events were reported in 102 (66%) of 155 patients in the remdesivir group and 50 (64%) of 78 in the control group (table 4). the most common adverse events in the remdesivir group were constipation, hypoalbuminaemia, hypokalaemia, anaemia, thrombocytopenia, and increased total bilirubin; and in the placebo group, the most common were hypoalbuminaemia, constipation, anaemia, hypokalaemia, increased aspartate aminotransferase, increased blood lipids, and increased total bilirubin. 28 (18%) serious adverse events were reported in the remdesivir group and 20 (26%) were reported in the control group. more patients in the remdesivir group than the placebo group discontinued the study drug because of adverse events or serious adverse events (18 [12%] in the remdesivir group vs four [5%] in the placebo group), among whom seven (5%) were due to respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome in the remdesivir group. all deaths during the observation period were judged by the site investigators to be unrelated to the intervention).our trial found that intravenous remdesivir did not significantly improve the time to clinical improvement, mortality, or time to clearance of virus in patients with serious covid-19 compared with placebo. compared data are mean (se). results less than the lower limit of quantification of the pcr assay and greater than the limit of qualitative detection are imputed with half of actual value; results of patients with viral-negative rna are imputed with 0 log 10 copies per ml. with a previous study of compassionate use of remdesivir, 21 our study population was less ill (eg, at the time of enrolment, 0·4% were on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation vs 64% in the previous study) and was treated somewhat earlier in their disease course (median 10 days vs 12 days). such differences might be expected to favour remdesivir, providing greater effects in our study population, but our results did not meet this expectation. however, our study did not reach its target enrolment because the stringent public health measures used in wuhan led to marked reductions in new patient presentations in mid-march, and restrictions on hospital bed availability resulted in most patients being enrolled later in the course of disease. consequently, we could not adequately assess whether earlier remdesivir treatment might have provided clinical benefit. however, among patients who were treated within 10 days of symptom onset, remdesivir was not a significant factor but was associated with a numerical reduction of 5 days in median time to clinical improvement. ongoing con trolled clinical trials are expected to confirm or refute our findings. in one murine model of sars, remdesivir treatment starting at 2 days after infection, after virus replication and lung airway epithelial damage had already peaked, significantly reduced sars-cov-1 lung titres but did not decrease disease severity or mortality. 13 a need for early treatment has been found in non-human primate models of sars and mers in which virus replication is very short-lived and lung pathology appears to develop more rapidly than in human infections. 17, 19 such findings argue for testing of remdesivir earlier in covid-19.remdesivir did not result in significant reductions in sars-cov-2 rna loads or detectability in upper respiratory tract or sputum specimens in this study despite showing strong antiviral effects in preclinical models of infection with coronaviruses. in african green monkey kidney vero e6 cells, remdesivir inhibited sars-cov-2 with a 50% effective concentration (ec 50 ) of 0·46 µg/ml and an ec 90 of 1·06 µg/ml. 6 in human nasal and bronchial airway epithelial cells, a fixed 20 µm (12·1 µg/ml) concentration reduced estimated intracellular viral titres over 7·0 log 10 50% tissue culture infective dose per ml at 48 h. 18 in human airway epithelial cells, the ec 50 for remdesivir was 0·042 µg/ml for sars-cov and 0·045 µg/ml for mers-cov. 13 in a murine model of mers, subcutaneous remdesivir showed significant antiviral and clinical effects with a dose regimen that maintained plasma concentrations greater than 1 µm (0·60 µg/ml) throughout the dosing interval. 13 in rhesus macaques, a 5 mg/kg dose, reported to be roughly equivalent to 100-mg daily dosing in humans, was effective for treatment of mers-cov infection and reduced pulmonary virus replication when started at 12 h after infection. 18 healthy adult volunteers receiving doses similar to our trial (200 mg on day 1, 100 mg on days 2-4) had mean peak plasma concentrations of 5·4 µg/ml (percentage coefficient of variation 20·3) on day 1 and 2·6 µg/ml (12·7) on day 5. 24 doses of 150 mg/day for 14 days have been adequately tolerated in healthy adults, and a daily dose regimen of 150 mg for 3 days followed by 225 mg for 11 days appeared to be generally well tolerated in one patient with ebola meningoencephalitis. 25 however, the pharmacokinetics of remdesivir in severely ill patients, and particularly the concentrations of the active nucleotide metabolite (gs-441524) triphosphate in respiratory tract cells of treated patients, are unknown. studies of higher-dose regimens for which there are safety data (eg, 150-200 mg daily doses) warrant consid eration in severe covid-19. our study found that remdesivir was adequately tolerated and no new safety concerns were identified. the overall proportion of patients with serious adverse events tended to be lower in remdesivir recipients than placebo recipients. however, a higher proportion of remdesivir recipients than placebo recipients had dosing prematurely stopped by the investigators because of adverse events including gastrointestinal symptoms (anorexia, nausea, and vomiting), aminotransferase or bilirubin increases, and worsened cardiopulmonary status.limitations of our study include insufficient power to detect assumed differences in clinical outcomes, initiation of treatment quite late in covid-19, and the absence of data on infectious virus recovery or on possible emergence of reduced susceptibility to remdesivir. of note, in non-human primates, the inhibitory effects of remdesivir on infectious sars-cov-2 recovery in bronchoalveolar lavages were much greater than in controls, but viral rna detection in upper and lower respiratory tract specimens were not consistently de creased versus controls. 19 coronaviruses partially resistant to inhibition by remdesivir (about six-times increased ec 50 ) have been obtained after serial in vitro passage, but these viruses remain susceptible to higher remdesivir concentrations and show impaired fitness. 26 the frequent use of corticosteroids in our patient group might have promoted viral replication, as observed in sars 27 and mers, 28 although these studies only reported pro longation of the detection of viral rna, not infectious virus. furthermore, we have no answer to whether longer treatment course and higher dose of remdesivir would be beneficial in patients with severe covid-19.in summary, we found that this dose regimen of intravenous remdesivir was adequately tolerated but did not provide significant clinical or antiviral effects in seriously ill patients with covid-19. however, we could not exclude clinically meaningful differences and saw numerical reductions in some clinical parameters.ongoing studies with larger sample sizes will continue to inform our understanding of the effect of remdesivir on covid-19. furthermore, strategies to enhance the antiviral potency of remdesivir (eg, higher-dose regimens, combination with other antivirals, or sars-cov-2 neutralising antibodies) and to mitigate immuno pathological host responses contributing to covid-19 severity (eg, inhibitors of il-6, il-1, or tnfα) require rigorous study in patients with severe covid-19.bc, cw, and yew had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. cw and bc decided to publish the paper. bc, cw, yew, pwh, tj, and fgh provided input on the trial design. bc, cw, yew, fgh, and pwh were responsible for acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data. yew, fgh, pwh, and gf drafted the manuscript. bc, cw, pwh, fgh, gf, tj, and xg critically revised the manuscript. yew contributed to statistical analysis. gf gave valuable suggestions for data analysis. all authors contributed to conducting the trial.fgh has served as non-compensated consultant to gilead sciences on its respiratory antiviral programme, outside the submitted work. all other authors declare no competing interests.after approval from the human genetic resources administration of china, this trial data can be shared with qualifying researchers who submit a proposal with a valuable research question. a contract should be signed.they mainly produce respiratory tract infections, as observed with sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) (7, 8) . sequencing and phylogenetic analyses have shown that the novel sars-cov-2 strain is closely related to a group of human sars-like coronaviruses and bat sars-related coronaviruses (9) (10) (11) . the origin of sars-cov-2 remains unclear; it is unknown how it was first transmitted to humans. the high prevalence of sars-related coronaviruses in bats has suggested that a bat coronavirus might have jumped into a civet or some other mammal, and from there to humans, which started the former 2003 sars (2003-sars) epidemic. initial confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 were associated with huanan seafood and live-animal markets. however, no animal source has been identified to date, and spillover events may continue to occur. although bats might be the source of sars-cov-2, it is critical to identify the intermediate species to stop the current spread and to prevent future human sars-related coronavirus epidemics.a key issue is whether the current sars-cov-2 epidemic is similar to other sars outbreaks or whether it shows different features. the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of sars-cov-2 indicate that this new outbreak is different from the 2003-sars outbreak. sars-cov-2 displays higher transmissibility and lower mortality than 2003-sars (1, 3, 4) . sars-cov-2 has shown efficient intrafamilial spread (4) . the asymptomatic period of sars-cov-2 infections oscillates between 2 and 14 days, and some individuals probably transmit the virus without developing any disease symptoms. it remains to be elucidated whether this virus replicates more readily in the upper airway than sars-cov and mers-cov and whether it is similar to other human coronaviruses (hcovs) that cause colds but not pneumonia. it will be necessary to identify molecular determinants that mediate transmission from animal to human and from human to human. of note, in the novel sars-cov-2 strain, the nucleotide sequence of the external ectodomain in the spike protein receptor-binding domain is different from that of the 2003 sars-cov. when individual bat coronavirus spike genes were introduced into sars-cov infectious clones, the sars-cov/bat-cov spike viruses could bind to the human, bat, or civet angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) cellular receptor (12) . understanding the interaction between this novel sars-cov-2 spike protein and the host ace2 receptor might reveal how this virus overcame the species barrier between animals and humans. as discussed below, this information might promote the design of effective antivirals.to predict new zoonotic coronavirus jumps across species and to understand the rate of virus spread among people, it is crucial to determine whether sars-cov-2 is mutating to improve its binding to human receptors for infection. as an rna virus, sars-cov-2 has intrinsic genetic variability, which results in a high mutation rate. moreover, coronaviruses have the largest genomes (ϳ30 kb) among rna viruses. however, part of their sequence encodes a proofreading 3= exonuclease that can increase replication fidelity (13) . it has been suggested that any adaptation in the sars-cov-2 sequence that might make it more efficient at transmitting from person to person might also increase its virulence (14) . however, this mechanism could lead to a genetic bottleneck, known as muller's ratchet, which could significantly decrease viral fitness (15) . muller's ratchet predicts that, when mutation rates are high and a significant proportion of mutations are deleterious, a type of irreversible ratchet mechanism gradually reduces the mean fitness of small populations of asexual organisms. because genetic bottlenecks for rna viruses often occur during respiratory droplet transmissions, the sars-cov-2 is expected to become less virulent through human-to-human transmissions (16) .from the public health perspective, we urgently need to develop an effective vaccine and antiviral therapeutics to stop the sars-cov-2 epidemic. moreover, social and economic issues generated by this epidemic also call for rapid interventions. this review focuses on the potential of repurposing preexisting compounds that might provide new opportunities for treating people infected with sars-cov-2. previous work with sars-cov and mers-cov has provided an opportunity to accelerate the identification of meaningful therapies for fighting the novel sars-cov-2 epidemic. neverthe-less, we must be aware that, currently, no compound that targets sars-cov or mers-cov has moved beyond phase 1 trials.the most promising antiviral for fighting sars-cov-2 is remdesivir (gs-5734). remdesivir is an adenosine nucleotide analogue prodrug with broad-spectrum antiviral activity against filoviruses, paramyxoviruses, pneumoviruses, and pathogenic coronaviruses, like sars-cov and mers-cov (17) . pharmacokinetic studies have been completed and clinical trials are ongoing for testing remdesivir efficacy in treating ebola virus (18) . previous studies have indicated that nucleotide analogues generally show low efficacy against coronaviruses, due to the presence of the virus exonuclease proofreading enzyme. nevertheless, remdesivir was found to be effective against sars-cov, mers-cov, and bat cov strains (17) . in tissue cultures, remdesivir displayed half-maximal effective concentrations (ec 50 s) of 0.069 m for sars-cov and 0.074 m for mers-cov. of note, tissue culture studies have shown that remdesivir is also active in the submicromolar ec 50 range against a number of highly divergent coronaviruses, including the endemic human covs oc43 (hcov-oc43) and 229e (hcov-229e). thus, remdesivir has broad-spectrum anti-cov activity (19) . in a mouse model of sars-cov pathogenesis, prophylactic and early therapeutic administration of remdesivir significantly reduced the lung viral load. viral titers were reduced by ͼ2 orders of magnitude on day 4 or 5 postinfection. remdesivir improved the clinical signs of disease and respiratory function compared to untreated control animals (17) . comparable results were obtained with mers-cov in prophylactic studies carried out with a mers-cov mouse transgenic model. in that model, a humanized mers-cov receptor (humanized dipeptidyl peptidase 4 [hdpp4]) was expressed and carboxylesterase 1c (ces1c) was deleted to improve the pharmacokinetics of nucleotide prodrugs (20) . remdesivir specificity for coronavirus was demonstrated by propagating the virus in tissue culture. after 23 passages in the presence of drug, two mutations were identified (f276l and v553l) in the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase gene. these mutations increased the replication capacity of the virus in the presence of remdesivir (21) . however, these amino acid changes decreased the viral fitness and attenuated sars-cov pathogenesis in mice (21) . the efficacy of prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir treatment was recently tested in a nonhuman primate (rhesus macaque) model of mers-cov infection (22) . when prophylactic remdesivir treatment was initiated 24 h prior to inoculation, mers-cov was prevented from inducing clinical disease and inhibited from replicating in respiratory tissues, which prevented the formation of lung lesions. similar results were obtained when therapeutic remdesivir treatment was initiated at 12 h after virus inoculation (22) . human safety data are available for remdesivir (18) ; thus, human trials can be initiated for testing the efficacy of this compound against novel coronaviruses.therapies that are approved by the food and drug administration (fda) have been evaluated for antiviral activity against sars-cov and mers-cov. for example, lopinavir (lpv), a human immunodeficiency virus 1 (hiv-1) protease inhibitor, was combined with ritonavir (rtv) to increase the lpv half-life. the combination of lpv and rtv (lpv/rtv) was shown to be effective against sars-cov in patients and in tissue culture. the estimated ec 50 in fetal rhesus kidney-4 cells was 4 g/ml (23) . lpv/rtv also reduced weight loss, clinical scores, viral titers, and disease progression in marmosets infected with mers-cov (24) . nevertheless, the antiviral activity of lpv against mers-cov in tissue culture remains controversial. no optimal ec 50 was found in vero cells (25) , but an ec 50 of 8 m was reported in huh7 cells (26) .clinical observations in animals and humans showed that mers-cov infections were mediated by both virus replication and host inflammatory responses. those findings led to explorations of combination therapies that included type i interferon (ifn-i) and ifn-ii. interferon beta (ifn-␤) displayed the best efficacy, with ec 50 s of 1.37 to 17 iu/ml, for reducing mers-cov replication in tissue culture (25, 27) . similarly to lpv/rtv, clinical improvements with ifn-␤ were observed in common marmosets infected with mers-cov (24) . in the kingdom of south arabia, an ongoing randomized control trial (the miracle trial) was initiated to determine whether the combination of lpv/rtv and ifn-␤ could improve clinical outcomes in mers-cov infections (28) . importantly, an-other controlled trial was launched in china to test the efficacy of lpv/rtv and ifn-␣ 2b in hospitalized patients with sars-cov-2 infections (clinicaltrials registration no. chictr2000029308).the prophylactic and therapeutic properties of remdesivir and lpv/rtv-ifn-␤ were previously compared in a humanized transgenic mouse mers-cov infection model (29) . remdesivir improved pulmonary function, reduced lung viral loads, and ameliorated severe lung pathology. in contrast, prophylactic lpv/rtv-ifn-␤ reduced viral loads only slightly and did not impact other disease parameters, and therapeutic lpv/rtv-ifn-␤ improved pulmonary function but did not reduce virus replication or severe lung pathology (29) . overall, these results indicated that remdesivir showed more potential than lpv/rtv-ifn-␤ for treating mers-cov infections.ribavirin, a guanosine analogue, is an antiviral compound used to treat several virus infections, including respiratory syncytial virus, hepatitis c virus, and some viral hemorrhagic fevers. in most cases, ribavirin is combined with ifn. ribavirin was first marketed in 1980 for the treatment of respiratory syncytial virus in children. although promising results were obtained previously with ribavirin and ifn-␣ 2b in a mers-cov rhesus macaque model (30) , data have been conflicting on patients with mers-cov infections that were treated with a combination of ribavirin and ifn (either ifn-␣ 2a or ifn-␤1) (31) . however, ribavirin reduces hemoglobin concentrations, an undesirable side effect in patients with respiratory disorders. this feature reduces its potential as an antiviral against sars-cov-2.work with influenza virus has shown that monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies can be useful prophylactic and therapeutic tools. several antibodies have been shown previously to bind influenza virus hemagglutinin and inhibit virus replication (12) . for example, human immunoglobulin g1 (igg1) monoclonal antibody (mhaa4549a) binds to a highly conserved epitope on the stalk of influenza a virus hemagglutinin. in a phase 2 human influenza a virus challenge study, mhaa4549a significantly reduced the clinical symptoms and viral burden relative to placebo (32) . another example is vis410, a monoclonal antibody engineered to target all known influenza a virus strains. a phase 2a trial showed that vis410 had some clinical benefits (33) . current development efforts in monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against coronaviruses are mainly targeting mers-cov. in a phase 1 clinical trial, a human polyclonal antibody, sab-301, which is generated in trans-chromosomic cattle, was found to be safe and well tolerated in healthy participants. (34) . however, therapeutic treatment with human monoclonal antibodies did not protect against the severe disease or the loss of lung function induced by mers-cov in animal models (20) . the lack of viral sequence homology among different human coronaviruses suggests that current investigational antibody-based therapeutics will not be effective against novel virus variants. nevertheless, in considering future treatments for novel coronaviruses, immune-based therapies should be not discarded.another potential treatment option could be the use of novel coronavirus sera prepared from the blood of patients in convalescence (convalescent-phase sera). passive immunization is well established for viral infection prophylaxis. polyclonal antibody products have been licensed that target cytomegalovirus, hepatitis b virus, and varicella-zoster virus. a meta-analysis of reports on the 1918 influenza a virus (h1n1) epidemic concluded that early administration of convalescent blood products reduced the absolute risk of pneumonia-related death from 37% to 16% (35) . nevertheless, the appropriate titer of convalescent-phase sera antibody that is required for therapeutic efficacy against sars-cov-2 remains to be determined. moreover, additional studies performed with influenza virus have produced controversial results regarding the clinical benefit of administering high titers of anti-influenza immunoglobulins (36) . finally, it remains unclear whether methods based on the use of a sufficient pool of potential donors are feasible. work carried out with mers-cov showed that sera from patients recovering from infections did not contain sufficient antibody titers for therapeutic use (37) .another interesting therapeutic alternative that was previously explored with influ-enza virus was that of targeting cellular components involved in the host inflammatory response to the infection. for example, the activation of the inflammatory response to an infection can induce a cytokine outburst that results in an acute lung injury. an example of a therapy for this type of infection has been targeting of cellular toll-like receptor 4 (tlr4) with specific antibodies. tlr4 is a transmembrane protein that belongs to the pattern recognition receptor (prr) family. the prototype pathogenassociated molecular pattern (pamp) that tlr4 recognizes is that corresponding to the gram-negative bacterium endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (lps). tlr4 has been implicated in pathology associated with other infections and with tissue damage caused by noninfectious insults. tlr4 activation leads to activation of the nf-b intracellular signaling pathway and to inflammatory cytokine production, which in turn activate the innate immune system. interestingly, tlr4-null mice were highly resistant to infection by the mouse-adapted influenza a virus (38) . thus, protection against influenza virus infections was achieved by targeting tlr4 with small-molecule antagonists, like tak-242, or with anti-tlr4-specific antibodies (39, 40) . indeed, targeting a cellular protein would overcome the drawbacks associated with virus or coronavirus genetic heterogeneity.the high mortality rates observed in some emerging respiratory diseases induced by viruses like mers-cov, sars-cov, and novel influenza a virus strains (h5n1) have given rise to the hypothesis that the proinflammatory response might be involved in the disease pathogenesis. consequently, immunosuppressants (e.g., corticosteroids) might be used as an adjunct for treating severe forms of the disease. however, the therapeutic use of immunosuppressants is not free of controversy. to date, no conclusive results have been found for the effects of immunosuppressants in severe influenza virus infections (12) . furthermore, the use of corticosteroids to treat influenza virus has been associated with an increased risk of superinfection, prolonged viral replication, and an increased risk of death (41) . in contrast, corticosteroid treatment for mers-cov infections was not significantly associated with mortality, although a delay in mers-cov rna clearance was observed (42) . further studies should be performed to clarify the potential clinical benefit of prescribing immunosuppressants for coronavirus infections.to end this minireview, i discuss an interesting potential antiviral strategy. the spike protein of sars-cov mediates viral entry into target cells. intriguingly, cleavage and activation of the sars-cov spike protein by a host cell protease are essential for infectious viral entry (43) . this host protease could be a type ii transmembrane serine protease, tmprss2, which was shown to cleave and activate sars-cov spike protein in cell cultures. therefore, tmprss2 is a potential a target for antiviral interventions. for example, the serine protease inhibitor camostat mesylate inhibits the enzymatic activity of tmprss2 (44) . recently, administration of k11777, a cysteine protease inhibitor, in the subnanomolar range was shown to inhibit sars-cov and mers-cov replication in tissue cultures (45) . moreover, the clinically proven serine protease inhibitor camostat mesylate, which is active against tmprss2, partially blocked sars-cov-2 spike-driven entry into caco-2 and vero-tmprss2 cells (46) . future tissue culture and animal model studies should be conducted to clarify the potential antiviral activity of targeting tmprss2.by the end of february 2020, 2 months after the first cases of sars-cov-2 were reported in china, several hundreds of new infection cases had been registered, mainly in other asian regions and europe. this news has strongly suggested that we are in the thick of a sars-cov-2 pandemic. social alarm and health authorities have called for the development of therapeutic alternatives for fighting the current and, possibly, new coronavirus epidemics. animal models and clinical studies are urgently needed for evaluating the effectiveness and safety of promising antiviral compounds that target the virus and/or the immunopathology involved in the host responses. the identification and characterization of novel compounds and therapeutic alternatives will be required to better control this probable pandemic outbreak.human coronavirus 229e (hcov-229e) is one of the seven known human coronaviruses, which include hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43, hcov-hku1, mers-cov, sars-cov-1, and sars-cov-2. hcov-229e is a member of the genus alphacoronavirus, which infects humans and bats [1] . four of the human coronaviruses (hcov-229e, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, and hcov-nl63) are associated with lower respiratory tract infections, including bronchiolitis and pneumonia [2, 3] or upper respiratory tract infections characterized by rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, sore throat, sneezing, and cough that also may be associated with acute otitis media or asthma exacerbations [4] . infection with hcov-229e alone is most frequently associated with asymptomatic or mild disease and sometimes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [5] . the infection is also detected with other respiratory viruses, particularly with the human respiratory syncytial virus (hrsv) [2] . these hcov related infections may also be molecules 2020, 25 , 2343 2 of 8 accompanied by asthma exacerbations or acute otitis media. thus, exposure to hcov-229e is low-risk for healthy adults. the hcov-229e virus is easily accessible for the biosafety level 2 (bsl2) laboratory. therefore, hcov-229e may be a good initial model for the evaluation of antiviral compounds that could have potential applications against other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov-2, the coronavirus that causes covid-19. although the final selected compounds are still required to be evaluated against other coronaviruses to confirm their activity.as of may 16, 2020, according to the johns hopkins coronavirus resource center, the human mortality of the covid-19 pandemic infection is 313,220 people, while 4,720,197 people have been infected globally. currently, there are no approved drugs, monoclonal antibodies, or vaccines to treat or prevent human infections caused by sars-cov-2. the discovery and approval of new compounds take several years. therefore, several existing drug and potential drug candidates such as remdesivir and other antiviral agents have been considered to be repurposed as covid-19 treatments.remdesivir (gs-5734, figure 1 ) was developed by gilead and found to be effective against severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in animal models [6, 7] . remdesivir was also evaluated by gilead for sars-cov-2 in early 2020. it was then used by chinese medical researchers in patients for clinical testing in late january 2020, suggesting a favorable inhibitory effect on sars-cov-2 (unpublished results). since then, several clinical trials of remdesivir have been initiated by china and the world health organization (who). furthermore, randomized clinical trials are ongoing or planned to determine the effect on improvements in patient recovery [8] .remdesivir is still considered one of the most promising drug candidates for the treatment of covid-19.take several years. therefore, several existing drug and potential drug candidates such as remdesivir and other antiviral agents have been considered to be repurposed as covid-19 treatments.remdesivir (gs-5734, figure 1 ) was developed by gilead and found to be effective against severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in animal models [6, 7] . remdesivir was also evaluated by gilead for sars-cov-2 in early 2020. it was then used by chinese medical researchers in patients for clinical testing in late january 2020, suggesting a favorable inhibitory effect on sars-cov-2 (unpublished results). since then, several clinical trials of remdesivir have been initiated by china and the world health organization (who). furthermore, randomized clinical trials are ongoing or planned to determine the effect on improvements in patient recovery [8] .remdesivir is still considered one of the most promising drug candidates for the treatment of covid-19.on may 1, 2020, the us food and drug administration (fda stated that the potential benefits of remdesivir outweigh its known and potential risks for some patients with severe covid-19, since a nih study demonstrated better recovery times than with placebo [8] . the fda issued an emergency use authorization for remdesivir for the treatment of suspected or laboratory-confirmed covid-19 patients with severe disease.remdesivir is a phosphoramidite prodrug of an adenine c-nucleoside; it has a short plasma half-life (0.39 h) and is used in the iv dosage form. the compound is a broad-spectrum antiviral nucleotide prodrug that is metabolized first to the active triphosphate analog that inhibits rnadependent rna polymerase (rdrp), resulting in diminished viral rna replication [9] . there is a sequence identity among the rdrp of coronaviruses. for example, the rdrp of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share 96% sequence identity. therefore, drugs targeting viral rdrp proteins of sars-cov are likely to be effective for sars-cov-2 [10] . remdesivir has been found to have 'broad-spectrum' anticoronavirus activity due to its potency against previously reported coronaviruses, such as mers-cov, hcov-nl63, hcovoc43, and hcov-229e [7, 11, 12] . therefore, we assumed that compounds that are active against hcov-229e through interfering with rdrp could also exhibit promising antiviral activity against other coronaviruses such as sars-cov-2. on may 1, 2020, the us food and drug administration (fda stated that the potential benefits of remdesivir outweigh its known and potential risks for some patients with severe covid-19, since a nih study demonstrated better recovery times than with placebo [8] . the fda issued an emergency use authorization for remdesivir for the treatment of suspected or laboratory-confirmed covid-19 patients with severe disease.remdesivir is a phosphoramidite prodrug of an adenine c-nucleoside; it has a short plasma half-life (0.39 h) and is used in the iv dosage form. the compound is a broad-spectrum antiviral nucleotide prodrug that is metabolized first to the active triphosphate analog that inhibits rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), resulting in diminished viral rna replication [9] . there is a sequence identity among the rdrp of coronaviruses. for example, the rdrp of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share 96% sequence identity. therefore, drugs targeting viral rdrp proteins of sars-cov are likely to be effective for sars-cov-2 [10] . remdesivir has been found to have 'broad-spectrum' anti-coronavirus activity due to its potency against previously reported coronaviruses, such as mers-cov, hcov-nl63, hcovoc43, and hcov-229e [7, 11, 12] . therefore, we assumed that compounds that are active against hcov-229e through interfering with rdrp could also exhibit promising antiviral activity against other coronaviruses such as sars-cov-2.reverse transcriptase is an enzyme in the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) and many retroviruses that convert the rna template to dna. the enzyme has three enzymatic functions at the same time: (1) rna-dependent dna polymerase (rdrp), (2) rnase h, and (3) dna-dependent dna polymerase. the rna-dependent dna polymerase is used to synthesize a complementary dna strand to the rna template. after the removal of the rna strand from the rna-dna hybrid double helix by rnase h, the dna-dependent dna polymerase completes double-stranded dna synthesis [13] . several nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (nrtis) have been shown to be anti-hiv agents.here, we selected five nrtis to be evaluated versue remdesivir against hcov-229e. tenofovir (tfv, 2) ( figure 1 ) is a nucleotide analog of deoxyadenosine monophosphate, with activity against hiv-1, hiv-2, and hbv [14, 15] . efda (4 -ethynyl-2-fluoro-2 -deoxyadenosine, 3) is a highly promising potent nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (nrti) [16, 17] . currently, efda is in clinical development by merck. 3 -fluoro-3 -deoxythymidine (flt, alovudine, 4) and its fatty acyl ester conjugates have been used as anti-hiv agents [18] [19] [20] . 2 ,3 -dideoxy-3 -thiacytidine (lamivudine, 3tc, 6) [21] and 2 ,3 -dideoxy-5-fluoro-3 -thiacytidine (emtricitabine, ftc, 8) [22, 23] are commercially available anti-hiv agents. we have previously shown that the conjugation of certain fatty acids to the anti-hiv nrtis, such as flt, 3tc and ftc, enhanced activity against x4, r5, cell-associated, and/or multi-drug resistant virus when compared with their parent nucleosides [24] [25] [26] [27] .thus, the antiviral activity of remdesivir against hcov-229e was compared with selected nrtis and selected fatty acyl conjugates. the goal was to determine the antiviral activity and toxicity against hcov-229e in an anti-coronavirus cytoprotection assay. the method could be used to select potential compounds rationally for evaluation against sars-cov-2.nine compounds were evaluated against hcov-229e in normal human fibroblast lung cells (mrc-5) at six test concentrations. the compounds included five nrtis (tfv (2), efda (3), flt (4), 3tc (6), and ftc (8)) and three fatty acyl conjugates of flt (5), 3tc (7), and ftc (9) . we have previously reported the synthesis and evaluation of fatty acyl conjugates [19, 20, [24] [25] [26] [27] . fatty acylation of the parent nucleoside generated enhanced activity against cell-free, cell-associated, and/or multi-drug resistant virus.the antiviral efficacy and cellular toxicity data are summarized in table 1 these data indicate that remdesivir acts as an antiviral agent against hcov-229e, while anti-nrtis agents were found to be ineffective. this could be due to the unique interaction of remdesivir with rna-dependent rna polymerase in coronaviruses such as hcov-229e, while nrtis inhibit reverse transcriptase. this enzyme has rna-dependent dna polymerase function. nrtis also act as dna synthesis chain terminators. the mode of interaction of remdesivir with rna polymerase and the crystal structure of protein-nucleotide have not been published yet. the structure of remdesivir is unique as a nucleotide prodrug, with the presence of a nitrile group at the 1 position and both 3 and 4 -hydroxyl groups, leading to strong binding to rna polymerases that differentiates this compound from the other nucleoside analogs represented here. the structure of rna-dependent rna polymerase of sars-cov-2 was recently published [28] . further structural modification of anti-hiv nucleosides could incorporate some functional groups for binding to rna polymerases, and be used for more rationale-based antiviral drug design against coronaviruses. furthermore, the determination of the crystal structure of remdesivir in terms of its binding with rdrp will provide insights into understanding the critical functional groups for the binding and design of the next generation of nucleoside-based inhibitors with higher binding affinities.a series of anti-hiv nucleosides and their fatty acyl derivatives were compared with remdesivir for antiviral activity against hcov-229e in mrc-5 cells. among all the compounds, remdesivir was found to be potent, with an ec 50 value of 0.07 µm and a therapeutic index of more than 28.6 µm. the 5 -o-(tetradecanoul) ester derivative of ftc showed modest activity, with an ec 50 value of 82 µm. in general, nrtis did not show comparable activity against hcov-229e, compared to remdesivir. this work advances scientific knowledge in the area of the testing of antiviral compounds and the activity of anti-hiv drugs against coronaviruses. this information could also be used to design compounds that are potentially effective against other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov-2.the anti-hiv nucleosides were purchased from euro asia trans continental (bombay, india). the synthesis and evaluation of fatty acyl conjugates were conducted according to the previously reported procedures in our laboratory [19, 20, [24] [25] [26] [27] . the compounds were solubilized at 40 mm in 100% dmso immediately before assay set up. the test materials were evaluated using a high test concentration of 100 µm and five serial half-logarithmic dilutions in triplicate for the antiviral assay. the compounds were diluted to 200 µm (5 µl of 40 mm stock) in a drug dilution tube containing 995 µl of assay medium. three hundred twenty microliters (320 µl) of the 200 µm solution was transferred to 680 µl of assay medium (half-log dilution) for a total of five serial dilutions. one hundred microliters of each concentration were added in triplicate wells for efficacy, duplicate wells for cytotoxicity, and a single well for colorimetric evaluation. remdesivir was purchased from medchem express (monmouth junction, nj) and evaluated as a positive control compound in the antiviral assay.the viral assay protocols were approved by the institutional biosafety committee (ibc) at imquest biosciences. mrc-5 cells were obtained from atcc (ccl-171) and passaged in the dmem medium supplemented with fbs (10%), penicillin (100 u/ml), sodium pyruvate (1 mm), l-glutamine (2 mm), streptomycin (100 µg/ml), and neaa (0.1 mm) using t-75 flasks before use in the antiviral assay. preceding the assay, the cells were divided into 1:2 to make sure they were in an exponential growth coronavirus 229e (hcov-229e) was obtained from atcc (vr-740) and grown in mrc-5 cells (atcc# ccl-171) for the production of a stock virus pool. a pretitered aliquot of the virus was removed from the freezer (−80 • c). the aliquot was allowed to thaw slowly to room temperature in a biological safety cabinet. the virus was resuspended and diluted into assay medium (dmem supplemented with 2% heat-inactivated fbs, penicillin (100 u/ml), l-glutamine (2 mm), streptomycin (100 µg/ml)), in such a way that 100 µl of virus was added to each well. this amount was determined to result in 85 to 95% cell death at 6 days postinfection. each plate contained virus control wells (cells plus virus), triplicate cell control wells (cells only), drug toxicity wells according to the compound (cells plus drug only), as well as triplicate experimental wells (drug plus cells plus virus).a cell viability of more than 95% for the cells was utilized in the assay. the cells were resuspended at 3 × 10 3 cells per well in the tissue culture medium. then, the cells (a volume of 100 µl) were added to flat-bottom microtiter plates. the microtiter plates were incubated at 37 • c/5% co 2 overnight to allow cell adherence to occur. after incubation of the test compounds at 37 • c in a 5% co 2 incubator for six days, the plates were stained with the tetrazolium dye 2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino)carbonyl]-2h-tetrazolium hydroxide (xtt). xtt tetrazolium is known to be metabolized by the mitochondrial enzymes of metabolically active cells into a soluble formazan product. this reaction makes it possible to promptly perform quantitative analyses of the inhibition of virus-induced cell killing by antiviral test substances. xtt was prepared daily as a stock solution of 1 mg/ml in rpml1640. phenazine methosulfate (pms) solution was prepared in pbs (0.15 mg/ml) and stored in the dark at −20 • c. xtt/pms stock was prepared immediately before each use by adding a volume of 40 µl of pms per ml of xtt solution. xtt/pms (50 µl) was added to each well of the plate, and the plate was reincubated for 4 h at 37 • c. plates were sealed with adhesive plate sealers. then, they were shaken gently or inverted several times to mix the soluble formazan product. the plates were read spectrophotometrically at 450/650 nm with a molecular devices vmax plate reader (molecular devices, llc., san jose, ca, usa).the raw data were collected from softmax pro (version 7, molecular devices, llc, san jose, ca, usa) and imported into a microsoft excel xlfit4 (version 4, from idbs lab, boston, ma, united states) spreadsheet for analysis using four-parameter curve fit calculations. the antiviral activity and toxicity with graphic representation of the data were provided in a plate analysis report (par) summarizing the individual compound activity and a summary table of calculated tc 50 , ec 50 , and tl 50 values. the graphical presentation shows the percentages of cell viability and of reduced viral viral cytopathic effect (cpe) at each test concentration.since the beginning of the coronavirus disease of 2019 in wuhan, it has infected more than 7.1 million people and caused more than 400000 deaths worldwide (1) . the rapid spread of the virus has stricken global health and the economy (2) . therefore, researchers are working hard to find an effective treatment for the new coronavirus 2019currently, there is no established treatment, and supportive care is the only management in these patients (3) . many drugs tend to show up in many in vitro drug screens. however, their clinical effect is still under investigation. the medical community is actively trialing repurposed and novel medications to find an effective treatment (4) . drugs such as remdesivir have been the subjects of recent studies in this situation.remdesivir (also known as gs-5734) is an adenosine analog, firstly developed against the ebola virus in 2017 (5) . recent studies showed promising results against the rna coronaviruses (sars-cov and mers-cov) (6, 7) . a study reported its clinical benefits in rhesus macaques infected with sars-cov-2 (8) . in addition, other studies revealed its in vitro efficacy against sars-cov-2 in human cell lines (9) . however, remdesivir effect does not necessarily translate into in vivo efficacy. some studies investigated remdesivir clinical efficacy in human patients; however, most of them were small groups, underpowered and inconclusive.on may 1, 2020, fda issues emergency use authorization for the administration of remdesivir in covid-19 patients (10) . however, its efficacy is still controversial among experts. therefore, it is essential to gather all available clinical studies to provide unified evidence on its efficacy.here, we performed a comprehensive systematic review to investigate the latest clinical evidence on treatment efficacy and safety of remdesivir in hospitalized patients with covid-19.in this study, we adhered to the recommendations provided by the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) statement 2015 (11) .we performed a systematic search of the medline(pubmed), embase, and web of science databases with the mesh and non-mesh terms and the keywords of 'coronavirus' or 'covid-19' or 'sars-cov-2' or '2019-ncov' and 'gs-5734' or 'remdesivir' on may 29, 2020. google scholar and medrxiv were also searched with these keywords manually to retrieve gray literature. publication year were limited to 2020. details about search strategy and the keywords are presented in additional file. except for the time, no other restriction was considered for our search. we also looked into the references of the included papers for more relevant studies.screening was done independently by m.a and a.r. firstly, duplicated retrieved search results were identified and excluded. we screened the titles and the abstracts of the papers to exclude irrelevant studies. accordingly, search results were categorized into three categories including included, excluded, and unclear. then, full texts of the retrieved studies were reviewed for final inclusion. any disagreement was discussed in our project team.original articles comparing treatment efficacy and safety of covid-19 patients with remdesivir and placebo were included. also, studies evaluating treatment outcomes of covid-19 patients with remdesivir in groups with different duration of treatment or with dissimilar disease severity were included.review articles, duplicate studies, meeting abstracts, letters and editorials, case reports and case series, and studies with no original information about remdesivir therapy were excluded. in vitro and animal studies were also excluded.author's name, study design, number of patients, inclusion criteria, duration of illness before remdesivir therapy, arms or subgroups of the patients, improvement and/or mortality rates, viral load changes and adverse events were extracted.two authors, a.r and r.r, performed literature search, screening and inclusion of the studies, and data extraction independently, and disagreements were discussed with another author, mra, and resolved.we use cochrane risk of bias tool (12) and newcastle-ottawa scale(13) for assessing risk of bias of randomized controlled studies and observational studies, respectively. two authors, a.r and r.r independently assessed the risk of bias with the mentioned tools and m.a rechecked it.results of the final studies were reported separately in a narrative way. measured outcomes were mortality rates, time to clinical improvement, any adverse events, severe adverse events, and improvement rates. we used review manager 5.3 to draw forest plots of these outcomes. i 2 was considered as the indicator for heterogeneity. random effect model was used when i 2 exceeds 50%. mantel-haenszel odds ratio (or) and mean difference (md) were used for reporting effects of dichotomous and continuous outcomes, respectively. due to the great heterogeneity seen in these forest plots, meta-analysis was not possible. however, forest plots comparing measured outcomes in different subgroups were drawn. the day of measuring the outcomes (28-day vs. 14-day), types of the studies (rct vs. cohort), and design of the control group (placebo-control vs. 5-day treatment regimen) were used for dividing studies in different subgroups. median and interquartile range (iqr) were converted to mean and sd according to the formulas suggested by hozo et al (14) . besides, iqr of the 10-day arm in goldman study was assumed equal to the 5-day arm due to the near median and first quartile between two arms.from 329 records identified through database searching and references lists, 21 were selected for assessing full texts. after matching with our eligibility criteria, 5 studies were chosen for final inclusion (figure1).the dosage of remdesivir in these five studies was single 200mg intravenous dose in first day followed by once-daily 100mg intravenous dose from second day up to 10 days (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) . three multicenter randomized clinical trials were included in our study. adaptive covid-19 treatment trial (actt) and a trial in ten hospitals in china were both placebo-controlled and patients that were assigned to test arms received remdesivir and those who were assigned to control arms received intravenous placebo with the same frequency and duration of remdesivir infusions (17, 19) . however, participants in both arms of third trial received remdesivir but for different durations (18). 2 cohort studies were also included. both of them assessed compassionate use of remdesivir between 2 groups of patients: in grein study, patients were divided based on the need for invasive oxygen support, while antinori divided the patients into icu and ward groups (15, 16) . (table 1 studies included in qualitative synthesis (n = 5 ) all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. group2: 10 day arm 9 days (iqr 6-12) † † abbreviations: lpv/r -lopinavir/ritonavir, hcq -hydroxychloroquine, iqr -interquartile range, rdv -remdesivir *median duration of illness before hospitalization **median duration from hospitalization to remdesivir therapy † median duration of illness before rdv therapy in 5-day arm † † median duration of illness before rdv therapy in 5-day armin the preliminary report of actt, results of the analysis on 1059 participants with lower respiratory tract involvements of covid-19 were published (17) . in this double-blinded study, 77% of patients required oxygen administration at enrollment. the median time between illness onset and randomization of participants was 9 days (iqr 6 to 12) and no significant imbalances found in baseline characteristics of 538 participants in test arm and 521 patients in control arm. primary outcome in this trial was time to recovery which defined as time from enrollment to the first day on which patient being discharged or hospitalization extended only for infection-control reasons. time to recovery was 11 days in test arm (95% ci, 9 to 12) and 15 days in control arm (95% ci, 13 to 19). the rate ratio of recovery in 14th day was 1.32 (95% ci, 1.22 to 1.55) with no significant interaction with baseline clinical status. mortality was higher in test arm; however, the difference was not statistically significant with or without adjustment of baseline illness severity. 21% of participants in test arm and 27% in control arm experienced serious adverse events. there are a number of considerations that must be taken into account when interpreting these results.first, the patients were allowed to use other medications along with remdesivir or placebo according to each hospital policy. this heterogeneity in medications across different subgroups of patients affects the generalizability of the results. thus, the observed effects may be due to the combined effects of different medications and remdesivir making the results less generalizable. second, careful evaluation of the study tables revealed that only 180 out of 541 (33.3%) patients in the remdesivir group and 185 out of 522 (35.4%) patients in the placebo group received the full 10 doses of complete treatment at the time of data analysis. accordingly, the results may not be truly reflective of the response that would have been observed in the case of receiving the complete course of therapy.lastly, this trial is ongoing and preliminary results were published. therefore, the analyses of safety and efficacy of remdesivir in this study has not been completed yet and this imposes a high risk of bias. (figure2) in a study on 237 patients with covid-19 pneumonia and concomitant impaired oxygenation, the effect of remdesivir on clinical improvement was not statistically significant (19) . median time to clinical improvement was 21 days (iqr 13 to 28) in test arm compared to 23 days (iqr 15 to 28) in control arm, and rate of clinical improvement by day 28 was 65% in test arm and 58% in control arm. also, remdesivir was not associated with a significant increase in negative conversion rate of viral load reduction in nasopharyngeal and sputum samples being compared to placebo. researchers in this study calculated a sample size of 453 for 80% event rate within study duration of 28 days and 10% drop out rate, however, only 237 patients were enrolled.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. ** cumulative frequency of adverse events was not reported but events in 6 patients in group1 and 2 patients in group2 lead to drug discontinuation. ‡ = median day of 50% cumulative incidence of clinical improvement was reported as time to improvement in the study of goldman et al.there is a high risk of bias due to baseline characteristics imbalances resulted from inadequate sample size (figure2) ; participants in test arm had more comorbidities, more tachypnea, and longer duration of illness. participants of test arm had more adverse events (66% vs. 64%) and patients in control arm had more serious adverse events (26% vs. 18%).an open-label rct demonstrated that a 5-day course of remdesivir, 200mg in first day and 100 mg for next 4 days, may be sufficient (18). in this trial, from 397 covid-19 hospitalized patients, who did not require invasive ventilation at enrollment, 200 patients received 5-day course of remdesivir and 197 patients received remdesivir for 10 days. randomization has taken place, but lack of stratification has led to worse baseline clinical status of 10-day arm patients. rate of clinical improvement, which was defined as an improvement of more than one point on a 7-point ordinal scale by day 14, was 65% in 5-day arm patients and 54% in 10-day arm patients. nevertheless, rate of clinical improvement, clinical recovery, discharge or mortality by day 14 were not significantly different between two arms after adjustment of baseline clinical status. however, it should be stated that among patients receiving invasive mechanical ventilation at day 5, ones assigned to 10-day (n=41) regime had lower mortality as compared to 5-day (n=25) regime (17% vs. 40%). in analysis of drug safety, both arms were statistically similar in incidence of adverse events; however, serious adverse events were more prevalent in 10-day arm patients after adjustment of baseline clinical status. interpretation of remdesivir efficacy based on this study is limited by the lack of placebo group.in a cohort study, grein et al. analyzed the available data of 53 patients (15) . median duration of illness before remdesivir therapy and median follow up time were 12 (iqr 9-15) and 18 days (iqr 13-23), respectively. of 53 patients, 34 needed invasive oxygen support and the other 19 needed noninvasive oxygen support. 59% of patients in invasive oxygen support group had improvement in category of oxygen support as compared to 89% in patients in the other group by the end of the follow-up. mortality rate was higher in invasive group (18% vs. 5%). participants in invasive group experienced more adverse events (65% vs. 53%). for entering this study, patients' physicians had to apply to receive remdesivir. this limits the generalizability of the results. besides, lack of control group and insufficiency of follow up time are also other sources of bias in this study. (table3). in the other cohort study of 35 patients, median duration of illness before hospitalization and median duration of admission before remdesivir therapy were 7(iqr 5-10) and 4(iqr 3-5) days, respectively (16 mortality all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . figure 3 showed that mortality rates were higher in cohort studies compared to rcts. it suggested the lower mortality rates in controlled situations of rcts compared to real-world situation in cohort studies. besides, remdesivir efficacy in reducing 28-day mortality rate was not significantly lower than its efficacy in reducing 14-day mortality rate (figure 4). forest plot of mortality rates in placebo-control and 10-day vs. 5-day studies is presented in figure s1 . as demonstrated in figure 5 , improvement rates in rcts and cohorts were not significantly different, contrary to mortality rates. as was seen in mortality rate, remdesivir efficacy in increasing improvement rate was not significantly different by day 14 and day 28 ( figure 6 ). figure s2 shows improvement rates in placebo-control and 10-day vs. 5-day studies.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. figure 7 showed remdesivir effects on reducing the time to clinical improvement. it showed that 5day regimen can reduce time to clinical improvement compared to placebo, and continuing remdesivir for another 5 days can even cause more decrease in time to improvement than 5-day regimen.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.20131227 doi: medrxiv preprint all adverse events patients received 10-day remdesivir therapy showed lower adverse events compared to placebocontrol group. besides, patients with 5-day remdesivir regimen experienced lower adverse event rate than the 10-day group. however, both of the above comparisons did not show significant differences between two groups. furthermore, superiority of the 5-day arm to the placebo arm is not notable due to the remarkable overlap between 95% c.i of the odds ratio (figure 8). forest plot of all adverse event rates in rcts and cohort studies is presented in figure s3 . severe adverse events 10-day regimen showed lower severe adverse events rate than the placebo-control group. in addition, 5-day regimen group had lower adverse event rate compared to the 10-day group. contrary to all adverse events, superiority of the 5-day regimen to the 10-day regimen and 10-day regimen to the placebo group are significant for severe adverse events (figure 9). figure s4 shows severe adverse event rates in rcts and cohort studies.figure9 -forest plot of severe adverse event rates in placebo-control and 10-day vs. 5-day rcts all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.20131227 doi: medrxiv preprintafter searching for all the manuscripts evaluating the use of remdesivir in the clinical management of covid-19, 3 rcts and 2 cohort studies were identified. unfortunately, the heterogeneity in study design and definition of clinical outcomes as well as controversial study results make it hard to establish a solid conclusion regarding the clinical efficacy of remdesivir. actt reported that remdesivir is useful in reducing the time to recovery in patients with covid-19 pneumonia (17) . on the other side, wang et al. failed to show a significant benefit associated with the use of remdesivir in terms of clinical outcomes (19) . goldman study revealed that 5-day and 10-day remdesivir therapy does not have significant differences in the terms of clinical outcomes.(18) finally, it is suggested in 2 cohort studies that the use of remdesivir may improve clinical outcomes; although, their results must be interpreted carefully considering the lack of a control group and incomplete understanding of the natural course of the virus (15, 16) .to date, beigel et al. have published the largest rct evaluating the use of remdesivir in patients with lower respiratory tract involvement (17) . large sample size and a well-designed study protocol are the strengths of this study. remdesivir group was superior to the placebo group reducing the time to recovery and increasing rate of recovery. based on this study, remdesivir is safe, however, patients with severe renal impairments were excluded.the report of a rct in 10 hospitals in china demonstrates no benefit in clinical outcomes in using remdesivir for treatment of covid-19 patients with lower respiratory tract involvement (19) . however, the inability to recruit the predetermined study population resulted in study power reduction from 80% to 58%, as wang et al. stated in the manuscript. furthermore, the imbalances in baseline characteristics of remdesivir and placebo groups were also a source of error in this study. low study power and higher severity of illness in remdesivir arm both decreases the probability of detecting remdesivir effectiveness. for example, a separate analysis in a subgroup of patients with less than 10 days from symptom onset to the start of treatment showed lesser time to clinical improvement 1.52 (95% ci, 0.95 to 2.43)and faster rate of sputum viral load reduction in the remdesivir group (0.0672). mentioned outcomes could be statistically significant if this study had higher power and was able to detect smaller effect. as a whole, this study was not in favor of using remdesivir to treat covid-19 patients; although, there was an underestimation toward remdesivir effectiveness.goldman et al. study showed that 5-day course and 10-day course of remdesivir therapy did not have significant difference (18). patients receiving mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation were not enrolled in this study. therefore, less severe patients were evaluated in this study. unlike the 2 other rcts, assessing the efficacy of remdesivir is impossible due to the lack of the placebo control group. baseline clinical characteristics of the patients in two arms were different because of the absence of stratification. after adjustment of baseline imbalances, both 5-day and 10day groups showed near outcomes. although, severe adverse events were more prevalent in the 10day group. furthermore, in patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation after receiving remdesivir for 5 days, continuation of therapy for another 5 days was associated with lower mortality rate. due to the shortage of remdesivir supply (20), indifference between outcomes of these 2 regimes helps us to treat more severe patients.grein et al. stated that remdesivir may be useful in treating severe covid-19 patients (15) . 64% of the patients needed invasive mechanical ventilation and the sample was correctly labeled as severe. this study showed that clinical improvement in milder cases were higher than that of more severe cases. it prompts the need for earlier recognition and initiation of treatment before the disease advances to severe stages. however, the results may be confounded by several reasons. first, receiving previous treatment and differences in length of remdesivir therapy may affect the final results. second, absence of a control group to compare the results with, make it difficult to understand whether the reported improvement rate is due to remdesivir or not. third, authors in this study considered death as a censoring event. reanalysis of the data for correcting this error, showed that estimated improvement rate by kaplan-meier analysis falls from 84% to 70%. lastly, by considering 32 patients who are discharged or died by the end of the study as the denominator, mortality rate rises from 13% to 22% (21).a study of remdesivir therapy in 35 icu and ward patients showed that ward patients benefit more from remdesivir therapy than icu patients and experience fewer adverse events. also, this study reminds the higher efficacy of remdesivir therapy in less severe patients.when we considered mortality as the outcome of interest, effectiveness of remdesivir in treating covid-19 patients was higher than its efficacy; however, this superiority was not observed when improvement rate was chosen as the target outcome. besides, as mentioned previously, remdesivir efficacy in reducing mortality rate and increasing improvement rate by day 28 and day 14 are not much different. therefore, we suggested that most benefits from remdesivir therapy appear in the first 14 days from the start of the treatment and final conditions of the patients are mostly determined by day 14. also, we found that extending remdesivir treatment to 10 days lead to the faster clinical improvement.all adverse events rates were not significantly different between 10-day arm, 5-day arm, and placebo groups. however, severe adverse events rates were lower in 5-day group compared to 10-day group, and the 10-day group showed lower severe adverse events compared to placebo group.it is difficult to answer the question regarding the efficacy of using remdesivir in severe covid-19 patients. so far, there are only 2 studies comparing the efficacy of remdesivir in test arm and placebo control arm, and the results of these two studies were controversial. beigel et al. study results were in favor of using remdesivir. while, wang et al. study could not find significant benefit from remdesivir therapy. we think that remdesivir can be considered as a choice, especially in patients without invasive mechanical ventilation (17) or in patients with less duration of illness (19) . the previous studies revealed that remdesivir is beneficial; however, the magnitude of this benefit is not large enough to make remdesivir monotherapy as an ultimate treatment. further rct studies with similar study designs and large sample sizes evaluating the efficacy of remdesivir as a monotherapy and in combination with other choices should be conducted. moreover, assessing remdesivir efficacy in patients with different clinical subgroups and duration of symptoms are required for optimizing patient selection.our study has three major limitations. firstly, only five articles were eligible to enter our study, at least three of them (15, 16, 19) did not have enough sample sizes in different clinical subgroups. therefore, comparing these subgroups regarding the efficacy of remdesivir was not incontrovertible. second, pooling the data of the original articles was impossible due to heterogeneity in study design and reported outcomes. however, critical review of the study settings and methods and their associations with the reported results have enable us to compare the differences observed in results of these studies. third, lack of control arm in 2 cohort studies (15, 16) and differences in baseline characteristics between test and control arms in 2 rcts (17, 19) , made it difficult to suggest a conclusive statement for the efficacy of remdesivir in treating covid-19.based on the current evidence, 5-day course of remdesivir therapy in covid-19 patients is probably efficacious and safe. remdesivir efficacy differs in different disease severity subgroups and hospitalized patients without invasive mechanical ventilation benefit the most from remdesivir. treatment can be extended to 10 days if satisfactory improvement is not achieved by day 5. most benefits from remdesivir therapy take place in the first 14 days, and patients conditions usually do not change dramatically in the next 14 days. more studies are needed to explore the efficacy of remdesivir monotherapy or combination therapy in different disease severity subgroups.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.20131227 doi: medrxiv preprinti, the submitting author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) uk crown employees; ii) where bmj has agreed a cc-by licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for us federal government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to bmj publishing group ltd ("bmj") its licensees and where the relevant journal is co-owned by bmj to the co-owners of the journal, to publish the work in this journal and any other bmj products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence.the submitting author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by bmj to the submitting author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article publishing charge ("apc") for open access articles. where the submitting author wishes to make the work available on an open access basis (and intends to pay the relevant apc), the terms of reuse of such open access shall be governed by a creative commons licence -details of these licences and which creative commons licence will apply to this work are set out in our licence referred to above.other than as permitted in any relevant bmj author's self archiving policies, i confirm this work has not been accepted for publication elsewhere, is not being considered for publication elsewhere and does not duplicate material already published. i confirm all authors consent to publication of this work and authorise the granting of this licence. reported a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown etiology [1] . the chinese researcher rapidly isolated sever acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) from a patient on 7january 2020 and came out to genome sequencing of the sars-cov-2 [2] . on 9 january 2020, china's communicable diseases control authority announced that 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) had been detected as the causative agent for the epidemics [3] . on [4] [5] [6] .in spite of the global containment on prevention efforts, the spread of covid-19 is continuing to rise with 1.1 million confirmed cases and 60,124 deaths recorded worldwide since 04 april 2020. [7] [8] . the outbreak of covid-19 infection has a significant threat to international health and economy [9] . at present, there is no approved vaccine or treatment for covid-19, so that identifying the drug treatment options as soon as possible is critical agenda to overcome the outbreak [10] [11] .despite the lack of approved drugs and vaccine for covid-19, many scientists are endeavoring to find medicines specific to the virus and they have been looking into repurposing the already approved drugs. as of 29 march 2020, there has been 209 clinical trials registered in clinicaltrials.gov and estimated to be over 500 [12] . currently, several drugs such as remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, ritonavir+lopinavir, arbidol and interferon are undergoing randomized controlled trials (rcts) to test their efficacy and safety for the treatment of covid-19 in many countries [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . among these investigating drugs remdesivir showed promising results [18] [19] . remdesivir is nucleotide analog prodrug and shows broad spectrum antiviral activity against many rna viruses including sars-cov-2 [20] [21] . remdesivir has been reported as a treatment of covid-19 in united states, china and italy [13, 15, 22] . while results are yet controversial [9] . to bridge this gap, here we aim to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of rcts to compare the effectiveness of remdesivir and placebo in patients with covid-19. the protocol for this systematic review and meta-analysis is submitted in prospero database for registration and we will include the registration number in the revised version of the manuscript.we will search medline/pubmed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/), embase remdesivir, nucleotide-analogue, antiviral drug and randomized controlled trials. all potentially eligible studies will be considered for this review, irrespective of the primary outcomes. manual searching will be performed to find out additional eligible trials from the reference lists of key articles. "nucleotide-analogue" "covid-19'' "randomized controlled trials" or and or and or "remdesivir" "sars-cov-2" "rcts" or "2019 novel coronavirus" or "2019-ncov" study eligibility criteria for this systematic review and meta-analysis will be in accordance with participants, intervention, comparison, outcomes and study designs (picos) descriptions [23] .population: the population will be patients confirmed with covid-19 and with or without other co-morbid conditions in all age groups.the intervention/ experimental group will be any dose of remdesivir comparator: the comparator group will be placebo/ standard of care outcomes: the primary endpoints will be time to clinical recovery and proportion of participants relieved from clinical symptoms defined at the time (in hours) from initiation of the study treatment. the secondary endpoints will be all cause mortality, discharged date, frequency of respiratory progression, oxygen saturation and treatment-emergent adverse events in each groups.study design: only rcts evaluating effectiveness of remdesivir versus placebo for patients with covid-19 will be included.the title and abstract of all searched studies will be examined by two independent review authors.from the title and abstract of all studies identified by the database search, those studies duplicated and not meet the eligibility criteria will be excluded. the full texts of the remaining studies will be further reviewed. disagreements will be resolved by consensus and if persisted, we will be arbitrated through discussion with a third review author. we will follow the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma 2015) guidelines [24] for the design and reporting of the results. two authors will independently extract data according to the pre-designed data extraction tool.the following data will be extracted from each included rcts: first author, year of publication, funding information, setting, mean age of the participant, interventions, comparators, doses, number of participants randomized, duration of treatment, all primary, secondary and other outcome measurements. if any disagreement regarding the data extraction between the two review authors exist, the third author will be consulted and consensus will be made through discussion. the cochrane risk of bias tool [25] will be used to assess the risk of bias for each included study.the risk of bias of each trial will be judged by two independent review authors as "low", "unclear", or "high" based on the critical domains, including random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting and other source of biases. disagreements will be resolved by discussion among all authors. if the disagreements cannot be resolved through discussion, an arbiter will make the final decision.meta-analysis will be carried out using the computer software packages revman 5.3 [26] .continuous outcome data will be reported using a mean difference (md) and a 95% confidence interval (ci). binary outcome data will be summarized using risk ratio (rr) and 95% ci. mantel-haenszel method [27] will be used to pool effect estimates of dichotomous outcomes and inverse variance for continuous outcomes. cochrane q test [28] will be used to assess heterogeneity between studies, and i 2 testing [29] will be done to quantify heterogeneity between studies, with values > 50% representing moderate-to-high heterogeneity. if heterogeneity between study is acceptable, a fixed-effect model will be used to pool the data. on the other hand, if unacceptable heterogeneity detected or if the number of studies are small, a random-effect model will be used to pool the data [30] . subgroup analysis will be carried out to identify possible reasons that may 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   9 cause significant heterogeneity between studies. if we get acceptable heterogeneity after the subgroup analysis, we will perform meta-analysis. otherwise, we will do a narrative description.sensitivity analysis will be conducted to see the robustness of pooled data by removing low quality studies. statistical analysis with a p-value < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.when individual participant's data are initially unavailable, we will review the original source, and/or published trial reports and we will contact the authors to obtain clarification for these data.we will conduct funnel plot and egger test to check any possible reporting bias if a sufficient number of included studies (at least 10 trials) are available in this study [31] .this study does not require ethical approval, because no participant's data will be involved in this systematic review and meta-analysis. the findings of this study will be published in reputable and peer-reviewed journal. all review authors declare that they have no competing interests. the funder has not any role in the design, syntheses and report of the study.this study is supported by center for innovative drug development and therapeutic trials for africa (cdt-africa), college of health sciences, addis ababa university. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 we will search medline-pubmed, embase, cochrane library, clinicaltrials.gov, and google scholar databases for articles published as of 01 may 2020 and we will complete the study on 01 july 2020. we will follow the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma-p) 2015 guidelines for the design and reporting of the results. we will include randomized controlled trials that assessed the efficacy of remdesivir versus placebo or standard of care. the primary endpoint will be time to clinical recovery. the secondary endpoints will be all-cause mortality, discharged date, frequency of respiratory progression, and treatment-emergent adverse events. revman 5.3 software will be used for statistical analysis. random effect model will be carried out to calculate mean differences for continuous outcome data and risk ratio for dichotomous outcome data between remdesivir and placebo or standard of care.there are no ethical considerations associated with this study as we will use publicly available data from previously published studies. we plan to publish results in open-access peer-reviewed journals and present at international and national conferences. remdesivir; treatment; randomized controlled trials; systematic review; meta-analysis; protocol.  this will be the first systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir for covid-19, which is a newly originated deadly disease.  its compliance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses for protocols 2015 (prisma-p 2015) will ensure the quality of reporting.  the use of a combination of multiple electronic databases will include all eligible articles and provide accurate conclusions.  the use of rigorous subgroup and sensitivity analysis will identify possible reasons that may cause significant heterogeneity between studies.  its singular focus on one antiviral treatment may preclude decision making and calls for network meta-analyses once trial results are made available. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 april 2020 [4, 5] . the outbreak of covid-19 infection has a significant threat to international health and the economy [6] . yet, there are no approved vaccines or drugs to make the disease less deadly; implying that therapeutic options are critical issues to overcome the outbreak [7] [8] .studies are strongly underway to discover rapidly drug candidates for covid-19, and studies are looking into repurposing drugs that have been used for the treatment of other diseases. as of 29march 2020, there were 209 clinical trials registered in clinicaltrials.gov for covid-19 therapeutic studies and this number is estimated to go over 500 [9] . currently, several drugs including remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, ritonavir+lopinavir, arbidol, and interferon are under randomized controlled trials (rcts) for efficacy and/or safety evaluations in patients with covid-19 in different countries [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] . remdesivir is among these investigational drugs and some studies reported promising results [15] [16] . remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue intravenous prodrug developed by gilead sciences, inc., an american biopharmaceutical company, for treatment of ebola virus during the 2014 ebola outbreak in western africa.remdesivir shows broad-spectrum antiviral activity against many rna viruses including sars-cov-2 through blocking rna polymerase thereby terminating rna transcription. a recent study led by the us national institutes of health (nih) that involved two groups of six rhesus macaque experiment monkeys, with one group treated with remdesivir, revealed a significantly lowered covid-19 disease progression due to remdesivir [17] . according to a recent report of the u.s centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), in vitro and cell culture studies demonstrated broad-spectrum activity of remedesivir against coronavirus [18] . nucleoside analogues such as remedesivir can have multiple mechanisms of action, including lethal mutagenesis, obligate or nonobligate chain termination, and perturbation of natural nucleotide triphosphate pools via inhibition of nucleotide biosynthesis [19] [20] . remdesivir was among the first treatments used in china as the outbreak emerges and it has been reported as potential treatment options for covid-19 in the united states, china, and italy [10, 12, 21] . some completed trials have evaluated remdesivir as a treatment option for covid-19, while their results are controversial [6] . thus, the proposed systematic review and meta-analysis of rcts aims to synthesize existing evidence on the efficacy of remdesivir in patients with covid-19.we will conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis that will comply with the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma-p) 2015 guidelines for the design and reporting of the results [22] (see checklist in additional file 1). the protocol has been registered at prospero database, id: crd42020177953 [23] .we will search medline/pubmed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/), embase (http://www.embase.com/), the cochrane library (http://www.cochranelibrary.com/), clinicattrials.gov (https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/), and google scholar (https://scholar.google.com/) databases for primary articles published as of 01 may 2020 and we will complete the study by 01 july 2020. we will perform hand search from the reference lists of a key articles to identify eligible rcts and supplement the searching. we will include all potential rcts that evaluated the efficacy of remdesivir versus placebo or standard of care in patients with coivid-19 with no limitations on the geographical location of studies but published in englishlanguage. we will do a rigorous search strategy using the key words including 2019 novel coronavirus, 2019-ncov, coronavirus disease 2019, covid-19, sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2, remdesivir, nucleotide-analogue, antiviral agents, randomized controlled trials and rcts. table 1 summarizes the search strategy that we will applied in pubmed, while details of this strategy that we will also adapt for other databases' searches is described in additional file 2 (table 1 ). "severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2" or "sars-cov-2" "rcts" or "2019 novel coronavirus" or "2019-ncov"we will formulate our participant's eligibility criteria using picos (participants, interventions, comparison, outcomes, and study designs) model [24] . all the retrieved papers will be transferred to endnote 7 and duplicates will be removed. two investigators will independently assess the title and abstract of all the retrieved papers based on the eligibility criteria. the two investigators will independently evaluate the full texts.disagreements between the two investigators will settle through discussion and if persisted, the third investigator will involve as arbitrator. figure 1 summarizes the design that we will use to report the study result in line with the prisma -p 2015 guidelines ( figure 1 ). two authors will independently extract data according to the pre-designed data extraction tool.the following data will be extracted from each included rcts the cochrane risk of bias tool [25] will be used to assess the risk of bias for each included study.the risk of bias of each trial will be judged by two independent investigators as "low", "some concerns", or "high" based on the critical domains, including bias arising from the randomization process, bias due to deviations from intended interventions, bias due to missing outcome data, bias in measurement of the outcome and bias in selection of the reported result. disagreements will be resolved by discussion among the two investigators. if the disagreements persist, the third investigator will chip in as an arbitrator.all statistical analyses will be carried out using the computer software packages revman 5.3 [26].mean differences (mds) with 95% confidence intervals (cis) will be used to measure the effects of treatment for continuous outcome data. we will convert other forms of data into mds using standard conversion formula. for outcome variables reported in different scales, we will use standard mean differences (smds) with 95% cis. the treatment effect of binary outcome data will be summarized using risk ratios (rrs) with 95% cis. other binary outcome data will be converted into rrs. mantel-haenszel method [27] will be used to pool effect estimates of dichotomous outcomes and inverse variance for continuous outcomes. cochrane q test [28] will be used to assess heterogeneity between studies, and i 2 testing [29] will be done to quantify heterogeneity between studies, with values > 50% representing moderate-to-high heterogeneity. a random-effect model will be used to pool the data [30] . subgroup analysis will be carried out between studies with different duration of follow-up, age of participants, severity of the disease, comorbidities, settings, and quality of studies for risk of bias. following the subgroup analysis, we will look at the data for heterogeneity, and if acceptable, we will perform a meta-analysis. if the data is heterogeneous, we will do a narrative description of findings. to see the robustness of pooled data, sensitivity analysis will be conducted between low and high risk of bias, and with or without biased studies.. we will use the gradeprofiler software from cochrane systematic reviews to assess the quality of evidence per outcome and ultimately to create a summary of findings table and evidence profile. all statistical analysis with a p-value < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.when individual participant's data are initially unavailable, we will review the original source, and/or published trial reports, and we will contact the authors to obtain clarification for these data.we will conduct funnel plot and egger test to check any possible reporting bias if a sufficient number of included studies (at least 10 trials) are available in this study [31] .patients and public will not be involved in this systematic review and meta-analysis. however, once our findings are disseminated, it will be shared through social networks.there are no ethical considerations associated with this study as we will use publicly available data from previously published studies. we plan to publish results in open-access peer-reviewed journals and present at international and national conferences.the protocol for this study will be amended as necessary. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 11a describe the mechanism(s) that will be used to manage records and data throughout the review 6selection process 11b state the process that will be used for selecting studies (such as two independent reviewers) through each phase of the review (that is, screening, eligibility and inclusion in meta-analysis) 6 data collection process 11c describe planned method of extracting data from reports (such as piloting forms, done independently, in duplicate), any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators 6 data items 12 list and define all variables for which data will be sought (such as pico items, funding sources), any pre-planned data assumptions and simplifications 6,7outcomes and prioritization 13 list and define all outcomes for which data will be sought, including prioritization of main and additional outcomes, with rationale 614 describe anticipated methods for assessing risk of bias of individual studies, including whether this will be done at the outcome or study level, or both; state how this information will be used in data synthesis 7 15a describe criteria under which study data will be quantitatively synthesised 7 15b if data are appropriate for quantitative synthesis, describe planned summary measures, methods of handling data and methods of combining data from studies, including any planned exploration of consistency (such as i 2 , kendall's τ) 715c describe any proposed additional analyses (such as sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression) 7data synthesis 15d if quantitative synthesis is not appropriate, describe the type of summary planned 7 meta-bias(es) 16 specify any planned assessment of meta-bias(es) (such as publication bias across studies, selective reporting within studies) 817 describe how the strength of the body of evidence will be assessed (such as grade) 8 we will search medline-pubmed, embase, cochrane library, clinicaltrials.gov, and google scholar databases for articles published as of 30 june 2020 and we will complete the study on 30 august 2020. we will follow the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma-p) 2015 guidelines for the design and reporting of the results. we will include randomized controlled trials that assessed the efficacy of remdesivir versus placebo or standard of care. the primary endpoint will be time to clinical recovery (ttcr).the secondary endpoints will be proportion of participants relieved from clinical symptoms defined at the time (in hours) from initiation of the study treatment, all-cause mortality, discharged date, frequency of respiratory progression, and treatment-emergent adverse events. revman 5.3 software will be used for statistical analysis. random effect model will be carried out to calculate mean differences for continuous outcome data and risk ratio for dichotomous outcome data between remdesivir and placebo or standard of care.there are no ethical considerations associated with this study as we will use publicly available data from previously published studies. we plan to publish results in open-access peer-reviewed journals and present at international and national conferences. remdesivir; treatment; randomized controlled trials; systematic review; meta-analysis; protocol. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  this will be the first systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir for covid-19, which is a newly originated deadly disease.  its compliance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses for protocols 2015 (prisma-p 2015) will ensure the quality of reporting.  the use of a combination of multiple electronic databases will include all eligible articles and provide accurate conclusions.  the use of rigorous subgroup and sensitivity analysis will identify possible reasons that may cause significant heterogeneity between studies.  its singular focus on one antiviral treatment may preclude decision making and calls for network meta-analyses once trial results are made available. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 [1] [2] [3] [4] . despite global containment measures to fight the disease, the pandemic continued to rise, rapidly spread across the world, and resulting in 2.6 million confirmed cases and 185,061 deaths worldwide as of 23 april 2020 [5, 6] . the outbreak of covid-19 infection has a significant threat to international health, the economy, psychological stress and mental health worldwide, [7] [8] [9] [10] . yet, there are no approved vaccines or drugs to make the disease less deadly; implying that searching therapeutic options are critical issues to overcome the outbreak [11] [12] .studies are strongly underway to discover rapidly drug candidates for covid-19, and studies are looking into repurposing drugs that have been used for the treatment of other diseases. as of 29march 2020, there were 209 clinical trials registered in clinicaltrials.gov for covid-19 therapeutic studies and this number is estimated to go over 500 [13] . currently, several drugs including remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, ritonavir+lopinavir, arbidol, and interferon are under randomized controlled trials (rcts) for efficacy and/or safety evaluations in patients with covid-19 in different countries [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . remdesivir (gs-5734) is among these investigational drugs and some studies reported promising results [19] [20] . remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue intravenous prodrug developed by gilead sciences, inc., an american biopharmaceutical company, for treatment of ebola virus during the 2014 ebola outbreak in western africa. remdesivir shows broad-spectrum antiviral activity against many rna viruses including sars-cov-2 through blocking rna polymerase thereby terminating rna transcription. a recent study led by the us national institutes of health (nih) that involved two groups of six rhesus macaque experiment monkeys, with one group treated with remdesivir, revealed a significantly lowered covid-19 disease progression due to remdesivir [21] . according to a recent report of the u.s centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), in vitro and cell culture studies demonstrated broad-spectrum activity of remedesivir against coronavirus [22] .nucleoside analogues such as remedesivir can have multiple mechanisms of action, including [23] [24] . in vitro, remdesivir inhibits all human and animal coronaviruses including sars-cov-2, and has shown antiviral and clinical effects in animal models of sars-cov-1 and mers-cov infections [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . remdesivir was among the first treatments used in china as the outbreak emerges and it has been reported as potential treatment options for covid-19 in the united states, china, and italy [14, 16, 30] .following the topline data from the randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial conducted by national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid) [31], the us food and drug administration (fda) has issued an emergency use authorization (eua) of the antiviral drug remdesivir for the trestment of patients with covid-19 [32] . though clinical trials [31, 33] have showed remdesivir as a treatment option for covid-19, while results are controversial. thus, the proposed systematic review and meta-analysis of rcts aims to synthesize existing evidence on the efficacy and safety of remdesivir in patients with covid-19.we will conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis that will comply with the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma-p) 2015 guidelines for the design and reporting of the results [34] (see checklist in additional file 1). the protocol has been registered at prospero database, id: crd42020177953 [35] .we will search medline/pubmed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/), embase table 1 summarizes the search strategy that we will applied in pubmed database, while details of this strategy that we will also adapt for other databases' searches is described in additional file 2 (table 1) . "severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2" or "sars-cov-2" "rcts" or or or "2019 novel coronavirus" "gs-5734" or "clinical trials" "2019-ncov"we will formulate our participant's eligibility criteria using picos (participants, interventions, comparison, outcomes, and study designs) description model [36] . all the retrieved papers will be transferred to endnote 7 and duplicates will be removed. two investigators will independently assess the title and abstract of all the retrieved papers based on the eligibility criteria. the two investigators will independently evaluate the full texts.disagreements between the two investigators will settle through discussion and if persisted, the third investigator will involve as arbitrator. figure 1 summarizes the design that we will use to report the study result in line with the prisma -p 2015 guidelines ( figure 1 ).two authors will independently extract data according to the pre-designed data extraction tool.the following data will be extracted from each included rcts 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 the cochrane risk of bias tool [37] will be used to assess the risk of bias for each included study.the risk of bias of each trial will be judged by two independent investigators as "low", "some concerns", or "high" based on the critical domains, including bias arising from the randomization process, bias due to deviations from intended interventions, bias due to missing outcome data, bias in measurement of the outcome and bias in selection of the reported result. disagreements will be resolved by discussion among the two investigators. if the disagreements persist, the third investigator will chip in as an arbitrator.all statistical analyses will be carried out using the computer software packages revman 5.3 [38] .mean differences (mds) with 95% confidence intervals (cis) will be used to measure the effects of treatment for continuous outcome data. we will convert other forms of data into mds using standard conversion formula. for outcome variables reported in different scales, we will use standard mean differences (smds) with 95% cis. the treatment effect of binary outcome data will be summarized using risk ratios (rrs) with 95% cis. other binary outcome data will be converted into rrs. mantel-haenszel method [39] will be used to pool effect estimates of dichotomous outcomes and inverse variance for continuous outcomes. cochrane q test [40] will be used to assess heterogeneity between studies, and i 2 testing [41] will be done to quantify heterogeneity between studies, with values > 50% representing moderate-to-high heterogeneity. a random-effect model will be used to pool the data [42] . subgroup analysis will be carried out between studies with different duration of follow-up, age of participants, severity of the disease, comorbidities, settings, and quality of studies for risk of bias. following the subgroup analysis, we will look at the data for heterogeneity, and if acceptable, we will perform a meta-analysis. if the data is heterogeneous, we will do a narrative description of findings. to see the robustness of pooled data, sensitivity analysis will be conducted between low and high risk of bias, and with or without biased studies.. we will use the gradeprofiler software from cochrane systematic reviews to assess the quality of evidence per outcome and ultimately to create a summary of findings table and evidence profile. all statistical analysis with a p-value < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.when individual participant's data are initially unavailable, we will review the original source, and/or published trial reports, and we will contact the authors to obtain clarification for these data.we will conduct funnel plot and egger test to check any possible reporting bias if a sufficient number of included studies (at least 10 trials) are available in this study [43] .patients and public will not be involved in this systematic review and meta-analysis. however, once our findings are disseminated, it will be shared through social networks.there are no ethical considerations associated with this study as we will use publicly available data from previously published studies. we plan to publish results in open-access peer-reviewed journals and present at international and national conferences.the protocol for this study will be amended as necessary. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  declarations  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 11a describe the mechanism(s) that will be used to manage records and data throughout the review 7selection process 11b state the process that will be used for selecting studies (such as two independent reviewers) through each phase of the review (that is, screening, eligibility and inclusion in meta-analysis) 7data collection process 11c describe planned method of extracting data from reports (such as piloting forms, done independently, in duplicate), any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators 7 data items 12 list and define all variables for which data will be sought (such as pico items, funding sources), any pre-planned data assumptions and simplifications 7-8outcomes and prioritization 13 list and define all outcomes for which data will be sought, including prioritization of main and additional outcomes, with rationale 6-714 describe anticipated methods for assessing risk of bias of individual studies, including whether this will be done at the outcome or study level, or both; state how this information will be used in data synthesis 8 data synthesis 15a describe criteria under which study data will be quantitatively synthesised 8 15b if data are appropriate for quantitative synthesis, describe planned summary measures, methods of handling data and methods of combining data from studies, including any planned exploration of consistency (such as i 2 , kendall's τ) 815c describe any proposed additional analyses (such as sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression) 8 15d if quantitative synthesis is not appropriate, describe the type of summary planned 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60 strengths and limitations of this study ► this will be the first systematic review and metaanalysis to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir for covid-19, which is a newly originated deadly disease. ► its compliance with the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis for protocols 2015 (prisma-p 2015) will ensure the quality of reporting. ► the use of a combination of multiple electronic databases will include all eligible articles and provide accurate conclusions. ► the use of rigorous subgroup and sensitivity analysis will identify possible reasons that may cause significant heterogeneity between studies. ► its singular focus on one antiviral treatment may preclude decision-making and calls for network meta-analyses once trial results are made available.background despite global containment measures to fight the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , the pandemic continued to rise, rapidly spread across the world, and resulting in 2.6 million confirmed cases and 185 061 deaths worldwide as of 23 april 2020. yet, there are no approved vaccines or drugs to make the disease less deadly, while efforts are underway. remdesivir, a nucleotide-analogue antiviral drug developed for ebola, is determined to prevent and stop infections with covid-19, while results are yet controversial. here, we aim to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials (rcts) to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir in patients with covid-19. method and analysis we will search medline-pubmed, embase, cochrane library, clinicaltrials. gov and google scholar databases for articles published as of 30 june 2020 and we will complete the study on 30 august 2020. we will follow the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (prisma-p) 2015 guidelines for the design and reporting of the results. we will include rcts that assessed the efficacy of remdesivir versus placebo or standard of care. the primary endpoint will be time to clinical recovery. the secondary endpoints will be proportion of participants relieved from clinical symptoms defined at the time (in hours) from initiation of the study treatment, all-cause mortality, discharged date, frequency of respiratory progression and treatmentemergent adverse events. revman v.5.3 software will be used for statistical analysis. random effects model will be carried out to calculate mean differences for continuous outcome data and risk ratio for dichotomous outcome data between remdesivir and placebo or standard of care. ethics and dissemination there are no ethical considerations associated with this study as we will use publicly available data from previously published studies. we plan to publish results in open-access peerreviewed journals and present at international and national conferences. prospero registration number crd42020177953. despite global containment measures to fight the disease, the pandemic continued to rise, rapidly spread across the world, and resulting in 2.6 million confirmed cases and 185 061 deaths worldwide as of 23 april 2020. 5 6 the outbreak of covid-19 infection has a significant threat to international health, the economy, psychological stress and mental health worldwide. 7-10 yet, there are no approved vaccines or drugs to make the disease less deadly; implying that searching therapeutic options are critical issues to overcome the outbreak. 11 12 studies are strongly underway to discover rapidly drug candidates for covid-19, and studies are looking into repurposing drugs that have been used for the treatment of other diseases. as of 29 march 2020, there were 209 "gs-5734" or "clinical trials" "2019-ncov" clinical trials registered in clinicaltrials. gov for covid-19 therapeutic studies and this number is estimated to go over 500. 13 currently, several drugs including remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, ritonavir+lopinavir, arbidol and interferon are under randomised controlled trials (rcts) for efficacy and/or safety evaluations in patients with covid-19 in different countries. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] remdesivir (gs-5734) is among these investigational drugs and some studies reported promising results. 19 20 remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue intravenous prodrug developed by gilead sciences, an american biopharmaceutical company, for treatment of ebola virus during the 2014 ebola outbreak in western africa. remdesivir shows broad-spectrum antiviral activity against many rna viruses including sars-cov-2 through blocking rna polymerase thereby terminating rna transcription. a recent study led by the us national institutes of health (nih) that involved two groups of six rhesus macaque experiment monkeys, with one group treated with remdesivir, revealed a significantly lowered covid-19 disease progression due to remdesivir. 21 according to a recent report of the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), in vitro and cell culture studies demonstrated broad-spectrum activity of remedesivir against coronavirus. 22 nucleoside analogues such as remedesivir can have multiple mechanisms of action, including lethal mutagenesis, obligate or non-obligate chain termination, and perturbation of natural nucleotide triphosphate pools via inhibition of nucleotide biosynthesis. 23 24 in vitro, remdesivir inhibits all human and animal coronaviruses including sars-cov-2, and has shown antiviral and clinical effects in animal models of sars-cov-1 and mers-cov infections. [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] remdesivir was among the first treatments used in china as the outbreak emerges and it has been reported as potential treatment options for covid-19 in the usa, china and italy. 14 16 30 following the topline data from the randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial conducted by national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid), 31 the us food and drug administration (fda) has issued an emergency use authorisation (eua) of the antiviral drug remdesivir for the treatment of patients with covid-19. 32 although clinical trials 31 33 have showed remdesivir as a treatment option for covid-19, results are controversial. thus, the proposed systematic review and meta-analysis of rcts aims to synthesise existing evidence on the efficacy and safety of remdesivir in patients with covid-19.we will conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis that will comply with the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (pris-ma-p) 2015 guidelines for the design and reporting of the results 34 (see checklist in online supplementary additional file 1). the protocol has been registered at pros-pero database, id: crd42020177953. 35 data sources and searches we will search medline/pubmed (http://www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ pubmed/), embase (http://www. embase. com/), the cochrane library (http://www. cochranelibrary. com/), clinicattrials. gov (https://www. clinicaltrials. gov/) and google scholar (https:// scholar. google. com/) databases for primary articles published as of 30 june 2020 and we will complete the study by 30 august 2020. we will perform hand search from the reference lists of a key articles to identify eligible rcts and supplement the searching. we will include all potential rcts that evaluated the efficacy of remdesivir versus placebo or standard of care in patients with covid-19 with no limitations on the geographical location of studies but published in english language. we will do a rigorous search strategy using the key words including 2019 novel coronavirus, 2019-ncov, coronavirus disease 2019, covid-19, sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2, remdesivir, gs-5734, nucleotideanalogue, antiviral agents, randomized controlled trials, open access clinical trials and rcts. table 1 summarises the search strategy that we will applied in pubmed database, while details of this strategy that we will also adapt for other databases searches are described in online supplementary additional file 2 (table 1) .we will formulate our participant's eligibility criteria using picos (participants, interventions, comparison, outcomes, and study designs) description model. 36 all the retrieved papers will be transferred to endnote 7 and duplicates will be removed. two investigators will independently assess the title and abstract of all the retrieved papers based on the eligibility criteria. the two investigators will independently evaluate the full texts. disagreements between the two investigators will be settled through discussion, and if persisted, the third investigator will be involved as arbitrator. figure 1 summarises the design that we will use to report the study result in line with the prisma-p 2015 guidelines (figure 1).open access data extraction two authors will independently extract data according to the predesigned data extraction tool. the following data will be extracted from each included rcts. ► first author. ► year of publication. ► study country. ► funding information. ► patient characteristics (mean age of the participant, sex, comorbid conditions, number of comorbidities, symptom severity). ► interventions (remdesivir, dose of remdesivir and route of administration). ► comparators (remdesivir placebo, standard of care). ► number of participants randomised in each group. ► treatment follow-up period. ► outcomes (primary, secondary and other outcomes).the cochrane risk of bias tool 37 will be used to assess the risk of bias for each included study. the risk of bias of each trial will be judged by two independent investigators as 'low', 'some concerns' or 'high' based on the critical domains, including bias arising from the randomisation process, bias due to deviations from intended interventions, bias due to missing outcome data, bias in measurement of the outcome and bias in selection of the reported result. disagreements will be resolved by discussion among the two investigators. if the disagreements persist, the third investigator will chip in as an arbitrator.all statistical analyses will be carried out using the computer software packages revman v.5.3. 38 mean differences (mds) with 95% cis will be used to measure the effects of treatment for continuous outcome data. we will convert other forms of data into mds using standard conversion formula. for outcome variables reported in different scales, we will use standard mean differences with 95% cis. the treatment effect of binary outcome data will be summarised using risk ratios (rrs) with 95% cis. other binary outcome data will be converted into rrs. mantel-haenszel method 39 will be used to pool effect estimates of dichotomous outcomes and inverse variance for continuous outcomes. cochrane q test 40 will be used to assess heterogeneity between studies, and i 2 testing 41 will be done to quantify heterogeneity between studies, with values >50% representing moderate-to-high heterogeneity. a random effects model will be used to pool the data. 42 subgroup analysis will be carried out between studies with different duration of follow-up, age of participants, severity of the disease, comorbidities, settings and quality of studies for risk of bias. following the subgroup analysis, we will look at the data for heterogeneity, and if acceptable, we will perform a meta-analysis. if the data are heterogeneous, we will do a narrative description of findings. to see the robustness of pooled data, sensitivity analysis will be conducted between low and high risk of bias, and with or without biassed studies. we will use the gradeprofiler software from cochrane systematic reviews to assess the quality of evidence per outcome and ultimately to create a summary of findings table and evidence profile. all statistical analysis with a p value<0.05 will be considered statistically significant.addressing missing data when individual participant's data are initially unavailable, we will review the original source, and/or published trial reports, and we will contact the authors to obtain clarification for these data.reporting bias we will conduct funnel plot and egger test to check any possible reporting bias if a sufficient number of included studies (at least 10 trials) are available in this study. 43 patient and public involvement patients and public will not be involved in this systematic review and meta-analysis. however, once our findings are disseminated, it will be shared through social networks.there are no ethical considerations associated with this study as we will use publicly available data from previously published studies. we plan to publish results in openaccess peer-reviewed journals and present at international and national conferences.the protocol for this study will be amended as necessary.coronaviruses are a cause of respiratory tract infections in humans [1] . a novel coronavirus emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019 [2] , subsequently called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [3] . coronavirus disease is caused by sars-cov-2 [3] and since march 2020 this outbreak has been declared a pandemic by the world health organisation (who) [4] . fever, cough and shortness of breath are the main reported symptoms of covid-19 [5] but it also has a concerning case mortality rate among certain populations, such as older adults and those with underlying health conditions.currently, there is a need to identify effective, safe treatments for covid-19 as quickly as possible, due to the ongoing pandemic. one such proposed treatment is remdesivir, which is an investigational antiviral medicine with proven activity against rna viruses [6, 7] . remdesivir wascovid-19 is a global pandemic, for which remdesivir has been proposed as a possible treatment.preliminary clinical trial results suggest that there may be a favourable benefit-risk profile for remdesivir compared with placebo; however, data is limited at the current time.ongoing clinical trial data can be incorporated into the framework when available to provide an updated benefit-risk assessment. 30, 2020) . it is, however, acknowledged that there is extremely limited data available at this timepoint. the benefit-risk assessment has been designed to be implemented regardless of the quantity of data available, but the intention is that the framework will subsequently be readily available to repeat the assessment as further data arise (e.g. results from new and ongoing clinical trials), allowing for rapid decision making.the objective of this study was to examine the benefit-risk profile of remdesivir in covid-19 patients compared with standard of care, placebo or other treatments.the brat framework was used to assess the overall benefit-risk of using remdesivir as a treatment for covid-19 compared with standard of care, placebo or other treatments. brat uses a six-step iterative process to support the decision and communication of a benefit-risk assessment: define decision context, identify outcomes, identify data sources, customise framework, assess outcome importance and display and interpret key benefit-risk metrics [21] . we identified three settings of interest for use of covid-19 treatments; treatment for severe disease, treatment of milder disease in the community, and prevention in healthcare professionals exposed to the virus. we have focused on the use of remdesivir for the treatment of severe covid-19 disease within this benefit-risk assessment. for the purposes of this study, we considered severe covid-19 to include any patient who was hospitalised as a result of the infection.the population of interest were patients with severe covid-19, while the exposure of interest was remdesivir. the comparators of interest were standard of care, placebo or other treatments for covid-19.regardless of importance, all potential benefits and risks related to remdesivir were initially identified. key benefits and risks were then selected by clinician judgement, which were those considered to drive the benefit-risk balance of remdesivir. the key benefits and risks were used to construct a value tree, ranking benefits and risks in order of considered originally developed for treatment of ebola virus disease and results from the phase iii randomised clinical trial for this indication have been published [8] . it has been shown to have broad spectrum in-vitro activity against several coronaviruses, including sars-cov-2 [6, 9, 10] , in-vivo activity against mers-cov in animal models [11, 12] , and has been made available for patients with covid-19 through compassionate use programmes [13, 14] . several clinical trials are ongoing to examine the effectiveness and safety of remdesivir in covid-19 in humans [15] [16] [17] [18] . most recently, remdesivir was granted an emergency use authorisation in covid-19 by the us food and drug administration [19] . whilst there is considerable interest in the use of remdesivir for covid-19, there has not been a systematic benefit-risk assessment on the use of remdesivir for covid-19 treatment using a structured descriptive framework. a key objective of this study was to provide a platform for a dynamic systematic benefit-risk evaluation, which starts with inevitably limited information (to meet the urgent unmet public health need worldwide), then update the benefit-risk evaluation as more data become available.the ongoing monitoring of the benefit-risk balance for remdesivir in covid-19 treatment is strengthened by use of a systematic assessment. the benefit-risk action team (brat) framework facilitates identification and summarisation of the key benefits and risks of a product in a defined disease context within a structured descriptive framework; further quantitative assessments can then be applied and conducted according to the availability of relevant data at that time [20] . the brat framework was also specifically designed to assist communication with regulatory authorities [21, 22] . the decision-making process is transparent due to the framework design, while any assumptions can be explored further by sensitivity analysis through a quantitative component [20, 23] .this benefit-risk assessment has been conducted based on publicly available publications to date (data-lock april importance. ranking was performed by two clinicians after discussion of the importance of each benefit and risk.we searched pubmed, google scholar and government agency websites to identify suitable data for inclusion. the search strategy for pubmed and google scholar was.remdesivir and (coronavirus or covid* or "sars-cov-2" or "2019-ncov").for government agency websites, we searched for any mention of 'remdesivir' on the national institute of health (nih), us food and drug administration and european medicines agency websites. papers were included if they reported quantitative data on effectiveness and/or safety of remdesivir and a comparator in patients with severe covid-19. case reports were excluded because they did not provide comparative data. results were restricted to english language only (abstracts in english language were acceptable where sufficient data was provided) and peer-reviewed publications (for pubmed and google scholar) since 2019 to 30 april, 2020. where a control group was included, data were extracted for each benefit and risk, for both remdesivir and the comparator (standard of care, placebo or other treatments).we also searched clinicaltrials.gov to identify background information for the manuscript and to identify ongoing clinical trials. since there are no results currently published on clinicaltrials.gov, there were no useable data available for extraction.a summary benefit-risk table was created to allow visualisation of the magnitude of each benefit and risk. risk differences and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (ci) were calculated for each outcome where both numerator (number of events) and denominator (number of patients at risk) were available for both the treatment group (remdesivir) and comparator group.due to paucity of data, a fully quantitative assessment was not undertaken. however, the risks and risk difference per 1000 patients were calculated for each benefit and risk. the outcomes identified in the value tree were ranked so that swing weighting can be applied in future assessments. the weighted net clinical benefit (wncb) can subsequently be calculated using these weights, if sufficient data on both risks and benefits become available in the future [23] [24] [25] . we would propose using the sutton et al. method, where benefits have a positive contribution to the wncb and risks have a negative contribution [25] ; the overall wncb would be considered positive (benefit outweighs the risk) where wncb is > 0. a sensitivity analysis can also be used to examine the robustness of the assigned weights and whether significant changes would alter the benefit-risk profile [22] . analysis using wncb was not undertaken at this time due to the limited release of clinical trial data. figure 1 displays the value tree of the key benefits and risks related to remdesivir treatment in covid-19. the benefits included in the value tree include key endpoints from clinical trial protocols for studies assessing the efficacy of remdesivir in severe covid-19 disease. as remdesivir is currently not approved for use in any condition, it is acknowledged that its safety profile has not been completely characterised. for the purposes of identifying potential risks associated with the use of remdesivir in covid-19 disease for the value tree, safety data has been identified from currently available sources that met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. these include studies reporting its use in the treatment of ebola virus disease [8] , case series documenting the use of remdesivir in covid-19 disease [26] , and safety data included in the study by wang et al. [27] . both the efficacy and safety outcomes have been presented in ranked numerical order according to perceived clinical significance. the key characteristics of clinical trials for remdesivir in any population have been presented in table 1 . as per the brat method, only studies that met the inclusion/exclusion criteria for the current disease context (severe covid-19) were included in the data extraction phase.the benefits listed in the value tree represent key clinical endpoints included in clinical trial protocols. these have been ranked in order of perceived clinical importance, from the clinical endpoint of mortality risk through to the surrogate endpoint of viral clearance. many studies have utilised ordinal scales, which include a spectrum of the clinical status of the patient. the primary endpoint used in the recently published study by wang et al. [27] was time to clinical improvement up to day 28; this was defined as the time (in days) from randomisation to the point of a decline of two levels on a six-point ordinal scale of clinical status (from 1 = discharged to 6 = death) or discharged alive from hospital, whichever came first. the six-point scale was as follows: death = 6; hospital admission for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or mechanical ventilation = 5; hospital admission for non-invasive ventilation or high-flow oxygen therapy = 4; hospital admission for oxygen therapy (but not requiring high-flow or non-invasive ventilation) = 3; hospital admission but not requiring oxygen therapy = 2; and discharged or having reached discharge criteria = 1.the primary endpoint in the multicentre, adaptive, randomized blinded controlled trial of the safety and efficacy of investigational therapeutics for the treatment of covid-19 in hospitalized adults, known as the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial sponsored by the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid) [28] , was time to recovery (time frame: day 1 through day 29). day of recovery was defined as the first day on which the subject satisfied one of the following three categories from the ordinal scale: (1) hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen-no longer requires ongoing medical care; (2) not hospitalized, limitation on activities and/or requiring home oxygen; (3) not hospitalized, no limitations on activities. other key clinical outcomes included duration of ventilation, duration of oxygen support, and duration of hospital stay, in addition to time from randomization to discharge or death. surrogate endpoints assessing viral load clearance are likely to be less robust forms of endpoint data, and accordingly have been ranked lower in terms of clinical importance. as remdesivir is an unapproved medicine in most countries, its safety profile has not yet been fully characterised. known key risks at the current time have been included in the value tree, identified from a variety of sources, including recently published clinical trial data in the context of covid-19 [27] . these have also been ranked according to perceived seriousness. cardiovascular outcomes including hypotension and arrhythmias have been documented following the use of remdesivir [8, 26, 29] ; however, the risk of cardiovascular outcomes with remdesivir remains largely unknown [30] . hypotension was reported in one patient in the phase iii study investigating remdesivir in the context of ebola virus disease; this patient subsequently suffered a cardiac arrest, although the manuscript states that this death could not readily be distinguishable from underlying fulminant ebola virus disease itself [8] . cardiac arrest was also reported in a further patient in the remdesivir group reported in the covid-19 study by wang et al. [27] . multiple organ dysfunction, septic shock, acute kidney injury and hypotension have also been reported as adverse events amongst patients provided with remdesivir either on a compassionate-use basis, or in a clinical trial [26, 27] . respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome has been cited as an adverse event in patients taking remdesivir [27, 31] , and as such has been included here, although it is acknowledged that this may be related to underlying disease (covid-19), rather than to remdesivir. elevations in liver transaminases and gastrointestinal events, including diarrhoea, have also been reported with the use of remdesivir [8, 13, 26, 32] , in addition to reports of haemorrhage of the lower gastrointestinal (gi) tract [27, 33] .where available, clinical trial data relating to any efficacy or safety outcomes included in the value tree for both remdesivir and a comparator group in the context of severe covid-19 were extracted and included in table 2 . based on this data, summary metrics including risks per 1000 patient years and risk differences are presented in table 3 . we identified 68 papers through literature searching from pubmed and 384 papers from google scholar. we also identified results from one clinical trial on the niaid website. after initial review, one paper [27] and results from one clinical trial on the niaid website [28] were included in the final benefit-risk assessment.in the wang et al. trial, the benefit of time to clinical improvement was not statistically significant (21 vs 23 days, hr 1.23, 95% ci 0.87-1.75). in the niaid trial, a statistically significant shorter time to recovery in patients treated with remdesivir was observed (11 vs 15 days; p < 0.001), with non-significant reduced mortality risk (8% vs 12%; p = 0.059). other non-significant benefit data were identified from the wang et al. trial, including invasive ventilation and oxygen use at day 28 (1% vs 4% and 12% vs 17%, respectively).risk data were only available from the wang et al. trial, which reported fewer serious adverse events in patients taking remdesivir (18%) compared with the placebo group (26%); however, more patients in the remdesivir group discontinued treatment as a result of an adverse event compared with those patients receiving placebo (12% vs 5%).a serious adverse event is any event that results in death, is life-threatening, requires hospitalisation or prolongation of existing hospitalisation, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or is a birth defect.this benefit-risk assessment presented the currently known key benefits and risks for the use of remdesivir for severe covid-19 disease. the value tree provides a visual summary of these key benefits and risks, which have been ranked according to perceived clinical importance. as remdesivir is currently unlicensed in most countries, these include endpoints used in remdesivir clinical trials, and risks identified from available data sources. a literature search (including government agency websites) identified relevant numerical data for these outcomes for both remdesivir and comparator groups. recently, the first results from a randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled clinical trial studying remdesivir in the context of covid-19 have been published [27] . the primary outcome suggested a reduction in the median time to clinical improvement, although this difference was nonsignificant (21 vs 23 days, hr 1.23, 95% ci 0.87-1.75). however, the planned sample size of 453 patients (151 on placebo and 302 on remdesivir) was not reached due to difficulties in enrolment, and therefore this study may have been underpowered to detect significant differences. nevertheless, multiple additional endpoints were included in this study, and these data have been presented in table 1 . whilst no statistically significant differences were observed between the remdesivir and placebo group [27] , the study reported generally improved outcomes in the remdesivir group compared with placebo, including reductions in the risk of invasive and non-invasive ventilation, and need for supportive oxygen at day 28.data has also been presented for remdesivir and the placebo group included in the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial [28] . as of 29 april, 2020, limited data has been made available on the nih website [28] and suggested a statistically significant reduction in time to recovery from a median 15 days (placebo group) to 11 days (remdesivir group) (p < 0.001). further study results provided suggested a non-significant reduced mortality risk amongst remdesivir patients (8.0%) versus patients given placebo (11.6%) (p = 0.059), which equates to 40 fewer deaths per 1000 patients treated with remdesivir. a decision was recently made by niaid to end this trial early because it was deemed to have been unethical to continue given the beneficial effect of remdesivir on the primary endpoint of the study shown at interim analysis [34] . key risks have been identified and included based on currently available evidence; however, it is acknowledged that the safety profile of remdesivir has not been fully characterized. from risk data currently available, key risks were identified and ranked according to seriousness. the cardiovascular side effects of remdesivir are largely unknown; one patient in the study by wang et al. was noted to have had a cardiac arrest. individual cases of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and septic shock were also reported in this study [27] , whilst reports were also identified in patients receiving remdesivir on a compassionate use basis [26] . in the latter case, reports of these events occurred in patients who were on invasive ventilation. whilst there were multiple reports of liver enzyme abnormalities in patients who received remdesivir in the study by wang et al. [27] , three patients discontinued treatment as a result of liver enzyme elevation (two reports of raised alanine aminotransferase, one report of increased total bilirubin). reports of acute respiratory distress syndrome have also been reported as adverse events in patients taking remdesivir [27, 31] . sixteen patients experienced this outcome during treatment in the study by wang et al. [27] , which led to discontinuation in seven patients. finally, whilst fewer patients experienced an adverse event classified as serious in the remdesivir group (18%) compared with the placebo group (26%), a higher number of patients discontinued remdesivir as a result of an adverse event (12% vs 5%) [27] . the difference in incidence rates observed for adverse events should be interpreted with caution, as causality cannot be inferred and results may have been observed due to chance alone given the underpowered study sample size. based on the currently available data, it would appear that remdesivir improves time to recovery and may also reduce mortality compared with patients on placebo, which suggests improved clinical outcomes with remdesivir. currently, there would appear to be favourable efficacy results from patients treated with remdesivir in the context of severe covid-19 disease from these preliminary data available. the data in the study by wang et al. [27] did not include any statistically significant results, although it is acknowledged that the study was underpowered. primary endpoint data available from the adaptive covid-19 trial [28] have also suggested a shorter time to recovery in patients treated with remdesivir, with non-significant reduced mortality risk. there is limited safety data available at the current time, although it is expected that this will increase as more clinical trial safety data becomes available. from the limited clinical trial safety data, it is unclear whether reports of serious adverse events are a function of the underlying severe covid-19 disease, or attributable to treatment with remdesivir. it is anticipated that both the efficacy and the safety profile will be further strengthened in the coming months with the availability of additional clinical trial data.sample sizes for each outcome were limited to those available in the original studies and may not have adequate power to detect differences in risk between groups, especially where the outcomes examined were not the primary outcome of interest. the benefit-risk assessment is limited by the availability of data, which currently consists of two studies within severe covid-19. the generalisability of these results to other populations is unknown; for example, application of the wang et al. results outside of china [27] . however, this assessment can be subsequently updated once further data from clinical trials are available. in addition, given the public health urgency of the covid-19 pandemic, it is important to provide a systematic assessment of the benefits and risks of remdesivir treatment with evidence available to date and establish a framework that can be used to rapidly update the assessment once further data become available.data quality is not reflected in this benefit-risk assessment, though all data was extracted from peer-reviewed manuscripts, with the exception of data included from the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial. these data were obtained from the niaid website (a government agency website), and included time to recovery and mortality data. safety data have not been published on the website at this time. since the full results of this clinical trial were not made available at the time of datalock (april 30, 2020), a wncb analysis was not undertaken because there was a concern that only including efficacy outcomes from the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial may bias the wncb results. it is anticipated that such an analysis can be undertaken in the future when results are made available, to provide further evidence on the benefit-risk profile. our conclusion is based on a qualitative assessment of the available data and subject to change based on further data availability.confirmation of causality was not a requirement for inclusion of data in the brat assessment. patients may have been on other concomitant medications or had other medical conditions at the time of remdesivir treatment. finally, we considered hospitalisation of patients to reflect severe covid-19, but we acknowledge that severity of disease may vary regardless of hospitalisation.preliminary clinical trial results suggest that there may be a favourable benefit-risk profile for remdesivir compared with placebo in severe covid-19 infection and further data on benefits would strengthen this evaluation. there is limited safety data for remdesivir which should be obtained in further studies. the current framework summarises the key anticipated benefits and risks for which further data are needed. ongoing clinical trial data can be incorporated into the framework when available to provide an updated benefit-risk assessment.author contributions md assisted with study design, identified outcomes of interest, constructed the value tree, assisted with data extraction, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. vo assisted with study design, data extraction, writing the manuscript, and wrote the study proposal. sd assisted with study design, identified outcomes of interest and assisted with the construction of the value tree and writing the manuscript. dr, sl and ae assisted with study design, literature searching and writing the manuscript. saws assisted with the concept, study design and manuscript revisions. all authors reviewed, contributed to revisions and approved the manuscript and accept full responsibility for its overall content.funding the drug safety research unit (dsru) is an independent academic institution that works in association with the university of portsmouth. no funding was received for this project.the drug safety research unit is an independent charity (no. 327206) that works in association with the university of portsmouth. it receives unconditional donations from pharmaceutical companies. the companies have no control over the conduct or the publication of the studies conducted by the dsru. gilead is providing support for an unrelated methodological project led by the dsru as part of a large group of pharmaceutical companies, unrelated to remdesivir or any other gilead product. they were not aware of our decision to undertake this project and provided no financial support or input on the manuscript methods and content. miranda davies, vicki osborne, samantha lane, debabrata roy, sandeep dhanda, alison evans and saad shakir have no other conflicts of interest to declare.ethics approval this study was conducted in accordance with international ethical guidelines. ethics approval was not required for this study.availability of data and material (data transparency) data used in this analysis are available from the references supplied.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by-nc/4.0/.coronaviruses are a cause of respiratory tract infections in humans [1] . a novel coronavirus emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019 [2] , subsequently called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [3] . coronavirus disease is caused by sars-cov-2 [3] and since march 2020 this outbreak has been declared a pandemic by the world health organisation (who) [4] . fever, cough and shortness of breath are the main reported symptoms of covid-19 [5] but it also has a concerning case mortality rate among certain populations, such as older adults and those with underlying health conditions.currently, there is a need to identify effective, safe treatments for covid-19 as quickly as possible, due to the ongoing pandemic. one such proposed treatment is remdesivir, which is an investigational antiviral medicine with proven activity against rna viruses [6, 7] . remdesivir wascovid-19 is a global pandemic, for which remdesivir has been proposed as a possible treatment.preliminary clinical trial results suggest that there may be a favourable benefit-risk profile for remdesivir compared with placebo; however, data is limited at the current time.ongoing clinical trial data can be incorporated into the framework when available to provide an updated benefit-risk assessment. 30, 2020) . it is, however, acknowledged that there is extremely limited data available at this timepoint. the benefit-risk assessment has been designed to be implemented regardless of the quantity of data available, but the intention is that the framework will subsequently be readily available to repeat the assessment as further data arise (e.g. results from new and ongoing clinical trials), allowing for rapid decision making.the objective of this study was to examine the benefit-risk profile of remdesivir in covid-19 patients compared with standard of care, placebo or other treatments.the brat framework was used to assess the overall benefit-risk of using remdesivir as a treatment for covid-19 compared with standard of care, placebo or other treatments. brat uses a six-step iterative process to support the decision and communication of a benefit-risk assessment: define decision context, identify outcomes, identify data sources, customise framework, assess outcome importance and display and interpret key benefit-risk metrics [21] . we identified three settings of interest for use of covid-19 treatments; treatment for severe disease, treatment of milder disease in the community, and prevention in healthcare professionals exposed to the virus. we have focused on the use of remdesivir for the treatment of severe covid-19 disease within this benefit-risk assessment. for the purposes of this study, we considered severe covid-19 to include any patient who was hospitalised as a result of the infection.the population of interest were patients with severe covid-19, while the exposure of interest was remdesivir. the comparators of interest were standard of care, placebo or other treatments for covid-19.regardless of importance, all potential benefits and risks related to remdesivir were initially identified. key benefits and risks were then selected by clinician judgement, which were those considered to drive the benefit-risk balance of remdesivir. the key benefits and risks were used to construct a value tree, ranking benefits and risks in order of considered originally developed for treatment of ebola virus disease and results from the phase iii randomised clinical trial for this indication have been published [8] . it has been shown to have broad spectrum in-vitro activity against several coronaviruses, including sars-cov-2 [6, 9, 10] , in-vivo activity against mers-cov in animal models [11, 12] , and has been made available for patients with covid-19 through compassionate use programmes [13, 14] . several clinical trials are ongoing to examine the effectiveness and safety of remdesivir in covid-19 in humans [15] [16] [17] [18] . most recently, remdesivir was granted an emergency use authorisation in covid-19 by the us food and drug administration [19] . whilst there is considerable interest in the use of remdesivir for covid-19, there has not been a systematic benefit-risk assessment on the use of remdesivir for covid-19 treatment using a structured descriptive framework. a key objective of this study was to provide a platform for a dynamic systematic benefit-risk evaluation, which starts with inevitably limited information (to meet the urgent unmet public health need worldwide), then update the benefit-risk evaluation as more data become available.the ongoing monitoring of the benefit-risk balance for remdesivir in covid-19 treatment is strengthened by use of a systematic assessment. the benefit-risk action team (brat) framework facilitates identification and summarisation of the key benefits and risks of a product in a defined disease context within a structured descriptive framework; further quantitative assessments can then be applied and conducted according to the availability of relevant data at that time [20] . the brat framework was also specifically designed to assist communication with regulatory authorities [21, 22] . the decision-making process is transparent due to the framework design, while any assumptions can be explored further by sensitivity analysis through a quantitative component [20, 23] .this benefit-risk assessment has been conducted based on publicly available publications to date (data-lock april importance. ranking was performed by two clinicians after discussion of the importance of each benefit and risk.we searched pubmed, google scholar and government agency websites to identify suitable data for inclusion. the search strategy for pubmed and google scholar was.remdesivir and (coronavirus or covid* or "sars-cov-2" or "2019-ncov").for government agency websites, we searched for any mention of 'remdesivir' on the national institute of health (nih), us food and drug administration and european medicines agency websites. papers were included if they reported quantitative data on effectiveness and/or safety of remdesivir and a comparator in patients with severe covid-19. case reports were excluded because they did not provide comparative data. results were restricted to english language only (abstracts in english language were acceptable where sufficient data was provided) and peer-reviewed publications (for pubmed and google scholar) since 2019 to 30 april, 2020. where a control group was included, data were extracted for each benefit and risk, for both remdesivir and the comparator (standard of care, placebo or other treatments).we also searched clinicaltrials.gov to identify background information for the manuscript and to identify ongoing clinical trials. since there are no results currently published on clinicaltrials.gov, there were no useable data available for extraction.a summary benefit-risk table was created to allow visualisation of the magnitude of each benefit and risk. risk differences and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (ci) were calculated for each outcome where both numerator (number of events) and denominator (number of patients at risk) were available for both the treatment group (remdesivir) and comparator group.due to paucity of data, a fully quantitative assessment was not undertaken. however, the risks and risk difference per 1000 patients were calculated for each benefit and risk. the outcomes identified in the value tree were ranked so that swing weighting can be applied in future assessments. the weighted net clinical benefit (wncb) can subsequently be calculated using these weights, if sufficient data on both risks and benefits become available in the future [23] [24] [25] . we would propose using the sutton et al. method, where benefits have a positive contribution to the wncb and risks have a negative contribution [25] ; the overall wncb would be considered positive (benefit outweighs the risk) where wncb is > 0. a sensitivity analysis can also be used to examine the robustness of the assigned weights and whether significant changes would alter the benefit-risk profile [22] . analysis using wncb was not undertaken at this time due to the limited release of clinical trial data. figure 1 displays the value tree of the key benefits and risks related to remdesivir treatment in covid-19. the benefits included in the value tree include key endpoints from clinical trial protocols for studies assessing the efficacy of remdesivir in severe covid-19 disease. as remdesivir is currently not approved for use in any condition, it is acknowledged that its safety profile has not been completely characterised. for the purposes of identifying potential risks associated with the use of remdesivir in covid-19 disease for the value tree, safety data has been identified from currently available sources that met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. these include studies reporting its use in the treatment of ebola virus disease [8] , case series documenting the use of remdesivir in covid-19 disease [26] , and safety data included in the study by wang et al. [27] . both the efficacy and safety outcomes have been presented in ranked numerical order according to perceived clinical significance. the key characteristics of clinical trials for remdesivir in any population have been presented in table 1 . as per the brat method, only studies that met the inclusion/exclusion criteria for the current disease context (severe covid-19) were included in the data extraction phase.the benefits listed in the value tree represent key clinical endpoints included in clinical trial protocols. these have been ranked in order of perceived clinical importance, from the clinical endpoint of mortality risk through to the surrogate endpoint of viral clearance. many studies have utilised ordinal scales, which include a spectrum of the clinical status of the patient. the primary endpoint used in the recently published study by wang et al. [27] was time to clinical improvement up to day 28; this was defined as the time (in days) from randomisation to the point of a decline of two levels on a six-point ordinal scale of clinical status (from 1 = discharged to 6 = death) or discharged alive from hospital, whichever came first. the six-point scale was as follows: death = 6; hospital admission for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or mechanical ventilation = 5; hospital admission for non-invasive ventilation or high-flow oxygen therapy = 4; hospital admission for oxygen therapy (but not requiring high-flow or non-invasive ventilation) = 3; hospital admission but not requiring oxygen therapy = 2; and discharged or having reached discharge criteria = 1.the primary endpoint in the multicentre, adaptive, randomized blinded controlled trial of the safety and efficacy of investigational therapeutics for the treatment of covid-19 in hospitalized adults, known as the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial sponsored by the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid) [28] , was time to recovery (time frame: day 1 through day 29). day of recovery was defined as the first day on which the subject satisfied one of the following three categories from the ordinal scale: (1) hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen-no longer requires ongoing medical care; (2) not hospitalized, limitation on activities and/or requiring home oxygen; (3) not hospitalized, no limitations on activities. other key clinical outcomes included duration of ventilation, duration of oxygen support, and duration of hospital stay, in addition to time from randomization to discharge or death. surrogate endpoints assessing viral load clearance are likely to be less robust forms of endpoint data, and accordingly have been ranked lower in terms of clinical importance. as remdesivir is an unapproved medicine in most countries, its safety profile has not yet been fully characterised. known key risks at the current time have been included in the value tree, identified from a variety of sources, including recently published clinical trial data in the context of covid-19 [27] . these have also been ranked according to perceived seriousness. cardiovascular outcomes including hypotension and arrhythmias have been documented following the use of remdesivir [8, 26, 29] ; however, the risk of cardiovascular outcomes with remdesivir remains largely unknown [30] . hypotension was reported in one patient in the phase iii study investigating remdesivir in the context of ebola virus disease; this patient subsequently suffered a cardiac arrest, although the manuscript states that this death could not readily be distinguishable from underlying fulminant ebola virus disease itself [8] . cardiac arrest was also reported in a further patient in the remdesivir group reported in the covid-19 study by wang et al. [27] . multiple organ dysfunction, septic shock, acute kidney injury and hypotension have also been reported as adverse events amongst patients provided with remdesivir either on a compassionate-use basis, or in a clinical trial [26, 27] . respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome has been cited as an adverse event in patients taking remdesivir [27, 31] , and as such has been included here, although it is acknowledged that this may be related to underlying disease (covid-19), rather than to remdesivir. elevations in liver transaminases and gastrointestinal events, including diarrhoea, have also been reported with the use of remdesivir [8, 13, 26, 32] , in addition to reports of haemorrhage of the lower gastrointestinal (gi) tract [27, 33] .where available, clinical trial data relating to any efficacy or safety outcomes included in the value tree for both remdesivir and a comparator group in the context of severe covid-19 were extracted and included in table 2 . based on this data, summary metrics including risks per 1000 patient years and risk differences are presented in table 3 . we identified 68 papers through literature searching from pubmed and 384 papers from google scholar. we also identified results from one clinical trial on the niaid website. after initial review, one paper [27] and results from one clinical trial on the niaid website [28] were included in the final benefit-risk assessment.in the wang et al. trial, the benefit of time to clinical improvement was not statistically significant (21 vs 23 days, hr 1.23, 95% ci 0.87-1.75). in the niaid trial, a statistically significant shorter time to recovery in patients treated with remdesivir was observed (11 vs 15 days; p < 0.001), with non-significant reduced mortality risk (8% vs 12%; p = 0.059). other non-significant benefit data were identified from the wang et al. trial, including invasive ventilation and oxygen use at day 28 (1% vs 4% and 12% vs 17%, respectively).risk data were only available from the wang et al. trial, which reported fewer serious adverse events in patients taking remdesivir (18%) compared with the placebo group (26%); however, more patients in the remdesivir group discontinued treatment as a result of an adverse event compared with those patients receiving placebo (12% vs 5%).a serious adverse event is any event that results in death, is life-threatening, requires hospitalisation or prolongation of existing hospitalisation, results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or is a birth defect.this benefit-risk assessment presented the currently known key benefits and risks for the use of remdesivir for severe covid-19 disease. the value tree provides a visual summary of these key benefits and risks, which have been ranked according to perceived clinical importance. as remdesivir is currently unlicensed in most countries, these include endpoints used in remdesivir clinical trials, and risks identified from available data sources. a literature search (including government agency websites) identified relevant numerical data for these outcomes for both remdesivir and comparator groups. recently, the first results from a randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled clinical trial studying remdesivir in the context of covid-19 have been published [27] . the primary outcome suggested a reduction in the median time to clinical improvement, although this difference was nonsignificant (21 vs 23 days, hr 1.23, 95% ci 0.87-1.75). however, the planned sample size of 453 patients (151 on placebo and 302 on remdesivir) was not reached due to difficulties in enrolment, and therefore this study may have been underpowered to detect significant differences. nevertheless, multiple additional endpoints were included in this study, and these data have been presented in table 1 . whilst no statistically significant differences were observed between the remdesivir and placebo group [27] , the study reported generally improved outcomes in the remdesivir group compared with placebo, including reductions in the risk of invasive and non-invasive ventilation, and need for supportive oxygen at day 28.data has also been presented for remdesivir and the placebo group included in the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial [28] . as of 29 april, 2020, limited data has been made available on the nih website [28] and suggested a statistically significant reduction in time to recovery from a median 15 days (placebo group) to 11 days (remdesivir group) (p < 0.001). further study results provided suggested a non-significant reduced mortality risk amongst remdesivir patients (8.0%) versus patients given placebo (11.6%) (p = 0.059), which equates to 40 fewer deaths per 1000 patients treated with remdesivir. a decision was recently made by niaid to end this trial early because it was deemed to have been unethical to continue given the beneficial effect of remdesivir on the primary endpoint of the study shown at interim analysis [34] . key risks have been identified and included based on currently available evidence; however, it is acknowledged that the safety profile of remdesivir has not been fully characterized. from risk data currently available, key risks were identified and ranked according to seriousness. the cardiovascular side effects of remdesivir are largely unknown; one patient in the study by wang et al. was noted to have had a cardiac arrest. individual cases of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and septic shock were also reported in this study [27] , whilst reports were also identified in patients receiving remdesivir on a compassionate use basis [26] . in the latter case, reports of these events occurred in patients who were on invasive ventilation. whilst there were multiple reports of liver enzyme abnormalities in patients who received remdesivir in the study by wang et al. [27] , three patients discontinued treatment as a result of liver enzyme elevation (two reports of raised alanine aminotransferase, one report of increased total bilirubin). reports of acute respiratory distress syndrome have also been reported as adverse events in patients taking remdesivir [27, 31] . sixteen patients experienced this outcome during treatment in the study by wang et al. [27] , which led to discontinuation in seven patients. finally, whilst fewer patients experienced an adverse event classified as serious in the remdesivir group (18%) compared with the placebo group (26%), a higher number of patients discontinued remdesivir as a result of an adverse event (12% vs 5%) [27] . the difference in incidence rates observed for adverse events should be interpreted with caution, as causality cannot be inferred and results may have been observed due to chance alone given the underpowered study sample size. based on the currently available data, it would appear that remdesivir improves time to recovery and may also reduce mortality compared with patients on placebo, which suggests improved clinical outcomes with remdesivir. currently, there would appear to be favourable efficacy results from patients treated with remdesivir in the context of severe covid-19 disease from these preliminary data available. the data in the study by wang et al. [27] did not include any statistically significant results, although it is acknowledged that the study was underpowered. primary endpoint data available from the adaptive covid-19 trial [28] have also suggested a shorter time to recovery in patients treated with remdesivir, with non-significant reduced mortality risk. there is limited safety data available at the current time, although it is expected that this will increase as more clinical trial safety data becomes available. from the limited clinical trial safety data, it is unclear whether reports of serious adverse events are a function of the underlying severe covid-19 disease, or attributable to treatment with remdesivir. it is anticipated that both the efficacy and the safety profile will be further strengthened in the coming months with the availability of additional clinical trial data.sample sizes for each outcome were limited to those available in the original studies and may not have adequate power to detect differences in risk between groups, especially where the outcomes examined were not the primary outcome of interest. the benefit-risk assessment is limited by the availability of data, which currently consists of two studies within severe covid-19. the generalisability of these results to other populations is unknown; for example, application of the wang et al. results outside of china [27] . however, this assessment can be subsequently updated once further data from clinical trials are available. in addition, given the public health urgency of the covid-19 pandemic, it is important to provide a systematic assessment of the benefits and risks of remdesivir treatment with evidence available to date and establish a framework that can be used to rapidly update the assessment once further data become available.data quality is not reflected in this benefit-risk assessment, though all data was extracted from peer-reviewed manuscripts, with the exception of data included from the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial. these data were obtained from the niaid website (a government agency website), and included time to recovery and mortality data. safety data have not been published on the website at this time. since the full results of this clinical trial were not made available at the time of datalock (april 30, 2020), a wncb analysis was not undertaken because there was a concern that only including efficacy outcomes from the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial may bias the wncb results. it is anticipated that such an analysis can be undertaken in the future when results are made available, to provide further evidence on the benefit-risk profile. our conclusion is based on a qualitative assessment of the available data and subject to change based on further data availability.confirmation of causality was not a requirement for inclusion of data in the brat assessment. patients may have been on other concomitant medications or had other medical conditions at the time of remdesivir treatment. finally, we considered hospitalisation of patients to reflect severe covid-19, but we acknowledge that severity of disease may vary regardless of hospitalisation.preliminary clinical trial results suggest that there may be a favourable benefit-risk profile for remdesivir compared with placebo in severe covid-19 infection and further data on benefits would strengthen this evaluation. there is limited safety data for remdesivir which should be obtained in further studies. the current framework summarises the key anticipated benefits and risks for which further data are needed. ongoing clinical trial data can be incorporated into the framework when available to provide an updated benefit-risk assessment.author contributions md assisted with study design, identified outcomes of interest, constructed the value tree, assisted with data extraction, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. vo assisted with study design, data extraction, writing the manuscript, and wrote the study proposal. sd assisted with study design, identified outcomes of interest and assisted with the construction of the value tree and writing the manuscript. dr, sl and ae assisted with study design, literature searching and writing the manuscript. saws assisted with the concept, study design and manuscript revisions. all authors reviewed, contributed to revisions and approved the manuscript and accept full responsibility for its overall content.funding the drug safety research unit (dsru) is an independent academic institution that works in association with the university of portsmouth. no funding was received for this project.the drug safety research unit is an independent charity (no. 327206) that works in association with the university of portsmouth. it receives unconditional donations from pharmaceutical companies. the companies have no control over the conduct or the publication of the studies conducted by the dsru. gilead is providing support for an unrelated methodological project led by the dsru as part of a large group of pharmaceutical companies, unrelated to remdesivir or any other gilead product. they were not aware of our decision to undertake this project and provided no financial support or input on the manuscript methods and content. miranda davies, vicki osborne, samantha lane, debabrata roy, sandeep dhanda, alison evans and saad shakir have no other conflicts of interest to declare.ethics approval this study was conducted in accordance with international ethical guidelines. ethics approval was not required for this study.availability of data and material (data transparency) data used in this analysis are available from the references supplied.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by-nc/4.0/.since its discovery in december 2019, the novel coronavirus-related pneumonia covid-19 has continued to disseminate, with the current case count close to 1,214,466 cases, and more than 67,767 deaths according to the world health organization (who) as of 7 april 2020 [1, 2] . epidemiological studies suggest that the incubation period was estimated to be 1-14 days, whereas the serial interval was estimated to be 4-8 days. it takes about 3-7 days for the epidemic to double in the number of infections [3] . in addition, recent study demonstrated that there was about 5% of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) among other patients with mild influenza-likethe coronavirus (cov) family has a large homogeneous "spike protein". this spike protein (s protein) is responsible for interacting with the host cells, such as the pulmonary and parabronchial epithelial cell, and helps the coronavirus get through the epithelial cell membrane [26] . in addition, the alveolar epithelial cells have abundant expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is targeted by the virus. the recognition of ace2 by the s protein of the virus enables the invasion of the coronavirus into the human circulation system [27] . recent study demonstrates that ace2 is the sars-cov-2 receptor, which is required for cell entry [28] . single-strand rna (ssrna) viruses such as the coronavirus family replicate the virus genomes by taking advantage of host cells. for example, after coronavirus approaches the ribosome of the epithelial cells or other host cells, it uses the ribosome of the host cell to replicate polyproteins. the replication and subsequent processes of precursor polyproteins can occur in the epithelial cells [29] . after the coronavirus' polyproteins are expressed, two enzymes -specifically, coronavirus main proteinase (3clpro) and the papain-like protease (plpro) -are thought to be involved in cleaving the polyproteins into smaller products used for replicating new viruses [30] . in order to generate the daughter rna genome, the coronavirus expresses an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), which is a crucial replicase that catalyzes the synthesis of a complementary rna strand using the virus rna template as shown in figure 1 [31] . although genome replication and transcription are well known to be regulated by the viral rdrp, several host factors have been implicated in this process. rna chaperones are usually nonspecific nucleic acid binding proteins, which have long disordered structures that promote rna molecules to adjust conformational changes. for example, coronavirus nucleoproteins (n protein) have rna chaperone activity and function as an rna chaperone, which could help template switching [32] [33] [34] . in addition, recent studies demonstrate that glycogen synthase kinase 3 (gsk3) phosphorylates the n protein of sars-cov and further inhibition of gsk3 can effectively inhibit viral replication in vero e6 cells infected with sars-cov [35] . furthermore, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a1 (hnrnp a1) is involved in the pre-mrna splicing in the nucleus and translation regulation in the host cells. importantly, it has been shown that the nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov had binding ability to human hnrnp a1 with high affinity by using kinetic analyses with a surface plasmon resonance (spr) approach. these studies suggest that hnrnpa1 is able to bind to sars-cov n protein to form a replication/transcription complex and control viral rna synthesis [36] .in addition, several virus proteins and host factors are essential for the assembly and release of coronavirus. homotypic interaction of m protein serves as the scaffold for the virus assembly and morphogenesis in the infected cells, specifically, both the interaction between the membrane (m) and s protein and the interaction between m and n protein promote the recruitment of structural components to the assembly location of host cells [37, 38] . for example, both envelope (e) protein and n proteins are required to be co-expressed with m protein for the formation and release of virus-like particles (vlps) after transfection of vero e6 cells. two crucial structural proteins, the m protein and e protein, play important roles in the coronavirus assembly. in addition, the e protein is involved in particle assembly by binding with m and further inducing membrane curvature [39] . subsequently, coronavirus particles can be budded into the er-golgi intermediate compartment (ergic) of host cells, then trafficked in a smooth-wall vesicle and transported through the secretory pathway for assembly and release by exocytosis [40, 41] .there are two subunits of s protein, including the s1 subunit with a receptor-binding domain that engages with the host cell receptor ace2, and the s2 subunit involved in regulating fusion between the viral and host cell membranes [42] . the s protein plays important roles in the induction of neutralizing-antibody and leads to t cell responses, so it is involved in protective immunity during infection with sars-cov [42] . vaccines can be developed to specifically recognize the spike protein for sars and ace2 receptor [42] . however, mutations of the virus gene and the antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) effect might affect the efficacy of previously developed biological vaccines, or even spur a counterproductive immune response, although spike protein sequences in sars-cov-2 and sars exhibit some overlap [43] [44] [45] . although it is of importance to develop vaccines and biological therapeutics to prevent the expansion of the sars-cov-2, a careful evaluation of possible immune complications is required before applying the vaccine to the public. therefore, it may take several months or a few years to generate effective vaccines to prevent outbreak. recent study demonstrates that sars-cov-2 has very similar genome sequence identity with severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (sars-cov) and there is more than 90% sequence similarity in several essential enzymes, such as rna-dependent rna polymerase, papain-like proteinase (plpro), 3cl-protease (3cl-pro) and spike glycoproteins [31] . dissecting the structure of rdrp may provide new insights into the mechanisms of rna replication as shown in figure 2 [23] . several drug candidates including ribavirin, lopinavir-ritonavir, and favipiravir, have been used previously to treat sars or mers, and these compounds may have potential in treating patients with sars-cov-2 from this current outbreak [31] . . chain a is shown as green, chain b is shown as red, chain c is highlighted in cyan, chain d is highlighted in pink, chain e is highlighted in blue, chain f is highlighted in yellow, chain g is highlighted in purple, chain p is highlighted in magenta and chain t is highlighted in orange. the structures demonstrate the interaction between the nucleotide substrates shown in pink and the conserved residues during the rdrp initiation, and the coordinated conformational changes preceding the elongation stage during replication.researchers have posted the genome sequence information of sars-cov-2 isolated from pneumonia patients on the uscs genome browser [10, 46] . this helps scientists to establish a realtime reverse transcription pcr (real time rt-pcr) diagnostic assay [47] . it is of importance to detect nucleic acids of sars-cov-2 in clinical diagnostics and biotechnology. clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) technology, a simple and powerful tool, was initially developed to edit the genome of mammalian cells. development of rapid, low-cost, and sensitive rna detection may enhance point-of-care virus detection, genotyping, and disease progression monitoring. the rna-targeting clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) effector cas13a/c2c2 displays an unintentional effect of promiscuous ribonuclease activity along with specific rna gene target recognition. recently, a crispr-based diagnostic assay, that makes use of nucleic acid pre-amplification and crispr-cas enzymology targeting either spike gene or orf1ab gene, was established to specifically recognize desired rna sequences [48] . effective crispr guide rnas (grna) and isothermal amplification primers can be designed to specifically target spike gene and orf1ab gene. in the specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking (sherlock) assays, coronavirus rna can be amplified by using recombinase-mediated polymerase amplification with isothermal primers to boost the sensitivity at 37-42 °c. subsequent cas13a-mediated recognition of nucleic acid of coronavirus then cleaves the fluorescent rna probe to separate a fluorophore from its quencher after cas13a/c2c2 finds its target coronavirus rna [49] . the cleaved fluorescent . chain a is shown as green, chain b is shown as red, chain c is highlighted in cyan, chain d is highlighted in pink, chain e is highlighted in blue, chain f is highlighted in yellow, chain g is highlighted in purple, chain p is highlighted in magenta and chain t is highlighted in orange. the structures demonstrate the interaction between the nucleotide substrates shown in pink and the conserved residues during the rdrp initiation, and the coordinated conformational changes preceding the elongation stage during replication.researchers have posted the genome sequence information of sars-cov-2 isolated from pneumonia patients on the uscs genome browser [10, 46] . this helps scientists to establish a real-time reverse transcription pcr (real time rt-pcr) diagnostic assay [47] . it is of importance to detect nucleic acids of sars-cov-2 in clinical diagnostics and biotechnology. clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) technology, a simple and powerful tool, was initially developed to edit the genome of mammalian cells. development of rapid, low-cost, and sensitive rna detection may enhance point-of-care virus detection, genotyping, and disease progression monitoring. the rna-targeting clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) effector cas13a/c2c2 displays an unintentional effect of promiscuous ribonuclease activity along with specific rna gene target recognition. recently, a crispr-based diagnostic assay, that makes use of nucleic acid pre-amplification and crispr-cas enzymology targeting either spike gene or orf1ab gene, was established to specifically recognize desired rna sequences [48] . effective crispr guide rnas (grna) and isothermal amplification primers can be designed to specifically target spike gene and orf1ab gene. in the specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking (sherlock) assays, coronavirus rna can be amplified by using recombinase-mediated polymerase amplification with isothermal primers to boost the sensitivity at 37-42 • c. subsequent cas13a-mediated recognition of nucleic acid of coronavirus then cleaves the fluorescent rna probe to separate a fluorophore from its quencher after cas13a/c2c2 finds its target coronavirus rna [49] . the cleaved fluorescent products can be readily detected and measured. this rapid crispr diagnostic assay can provide specific results in 1 h and will provide timely virus rna detection with super-high sensitivity and the ability of single-base pair mismatch [48] . therefore, development of rapid and robust diagnostic assay to measure the nucleic acid of sars-cov-2 is crucial for the accurate diagnosis of moderate and severe patients and screening of asymptomatic patients, especially under the current serious health care situation.currently, there is no effective drug for treating covid-19 although there was one case reported as having been treated successfully with compassionate use of remdsivir in the us. recent studies have found that small molecules of remdesivir and chloroquine effectively suppress the replication of sars-cov-2 in vitro [24] . according to comparison of genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with sars sequence, the catalytic domains of enzymes such as rdrp are highly conserved in these coronaviruses as shown in figures 3 and 4 . more importantly, it is predictable that the protein sequence of the drug binding pocket of the enzymes is highly conserved [56] . therefore, these enzymes and spike protein could be very promising drug targets for developing a therapeutic approach for covid-19 as shown in table 1 [57, 58] . rdrp, also known as nsp12, which catalyzes the synthesis of coronavirus rna, is an essential enzyme of the coronaviral replication/transcription machinery complex. recent study revealed the structure of sars-cov-2 full-length nsp12 in complex with cofactors nsp7 and nsp8 using cryo-em [59] . remdesivir (gs-5734, gilead) was initially developed to examine its effect on inhibition of ebola virus (ebov) replication [60] . rdrp can incorporate remdesivir, which resembles an rna building block atp, into new rna strands. after binding of remdesivir, rdrp stops being able to incorporate rna subunits. this puts a stop to the coronavirus genome replication. enzyme kinetics demonstrated that ebov rdrp incorporated atp and remdesivir-tp with comparable efficiencies. the selectivity of atp for ebov rdrp is four times against remdesivir-tp. in comparison, purified human mitochondrial rna polymerase (h-mtrnap) effectively distinguished against remdesivir-tp with a selectivity value of about 500-fold [60] .structure of sars-coronavirus rna polymerase nsp12 complex with nsp7 and nsp8 cofactors (pdb: 6nur). chain a is highlighted in light sea green, chain b is shown as blue, chain c is highlighted in cyan, chain d is highlighted in purple.structure of sars-cov-2 rna polymerase nsp12 complex with nsp7 and nsp8 co-factors (pdb: 6m71). chain a is highlighted in light sea green, chain b is shown as blue, chain c is highlighted in cyan, chain d is highlighted in purple.remdesivir has been recently developed as a potential antiviral drug candidate against a wide array of rna virus such as sars-cov and mers-cov5 infections in both in vitro cell experiment and preclinical studies with mice and nonhuman primate (nhp) models [61] . recent study examined the efficacy of the broad-acting antiviral remdesivir in the rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection. interestingly, it was found that administration of remdesivir initiated 24 h prior to inoculation completely restrained mers-cov−caused respiratory disease, remarkably suppressed mers-cov virus replication in the respiratory system and abolished the progression of lung lesions [62] . these results demonstrated that remdesivir was a potential antiviral therapeutic against mers and its efficacy could be further examined in clinical trials. subsequently, recent study has tested the lopinavir, protease inhibitors that may inhibit the viral proteases: 3clpro or plpro. darunavir inhibits the proteolysis activity of 3-chymotrypsin-like protease.[50]main protease 3clproteinase, 3clproa protease for the conversion of viral polyprotein into functional proteinlopinavir, protease inhibitors that may inhibit the viral proteases: 3clpro or plpro. [51, 52] s protein and tmprss2a viral surface protein for binding to host cell receptor ace2. tmprss2, a host cell-produced protease that primes s protein to facilitate its binding to ace2arbidol can prevent s protein/ace2 interaction and inhibit membrane fusion of the viral envelope by preventing the binding of viral envelope protein to host cells and preventing viral entry to the target cell. camostat mesylate inhibits tmprss2 and viral cell entry [28, 53] ace2 a viral receptor protein on the host cells which binds to viral s protein chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can inhibits vial entry and endocytosis by increasing endosomal ph, interfere with ace2 glycosylation as well as host immunomodulatory effects [54, 55] remdesivir has been recently developed as a potential antiviral drug candidate against a wide array of rna virus such as sars-cov and mers-cov5 infections in both in vitro cell experiment and preclinical studies with mice and nonhuman primate (nhp) models [61] . recent study examined the efficacy of the broad-acting antiviral remdesivir in the rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection. interestingly, it was found that administration of remdesivir initiated 24 h prior to inoculation completely restrained mers-cov−caused respiratory disease, remarkably suppressed mers-cov virus replication in the respiratory system and abolished the progression of lung lesions [62] . these results demonstrated that remdesivir was a potential antiviral therapeutic against mers and its efficacy could be further examined in clinical trials. subsequently, recent study has tested the efficacy of remdesivir on inhibition of sars-cov-2 replication in vitro [24] . vero e6 cells were infected with sars-cov-2. different doses of the indicated antivirals were added to treat cells for 48 h. the viral yield from the cell supernatant was then detected by qrt-pcr. it is worth noting that two compounds, remdesivir significantly abolished virus infection at high affinity [24] . this also suggests the possibility that remdesivir has efficacy for related coronaviruses such as the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 [62] . more importantly, administration to patients with covid-19 of remdesivir has been shown to be effective in treating one patient for the purpose of compassionate use in the us, and there was no adverse event observed in association with infusion of remdesivir.due to the covid-19 pandemic and global health concern, it is urgent to develop effective broad-spectrum virus replication inhibitors to manage patients with covid-19. drug targets among coronaviruses include the main protease 3cl(pro) and papain-like protease(plpro). these proteinase play essential roles in processing polyproteins and viral replication. the structures of the unliganded sars-cov-2 m(pro) and its complex with an alpha-ketoamide inhibitor have been recently revealed [52] . comparison of genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with sars sequence indicates that the catalytic domains of proteinase are highly conserved in these coronaviruses. therefore, it is plausible to repurpose the compound library for treatment of sars-cov for developing potential therapeutics for sars-cov-2. computational analysis was also used to screen the effective and potent cysteine protease inhibitors for malaria and sars infection [63] [64] [65] . recently, a series of n-(tert-butyl)-2-(n-arylamido)-2-(pyridin-3-yl) acetamides (ml188) were identified as potent noncovalent small molecule inhibitors targeting sars-cov 3cl protease [66, 67] . in addition, the analogues of keto-glutamine were developed as potent inhibitors for treatment of sars infection [68, 69] . furthermore, recent study has shown that compounds containing electrophilic arylketone moiety were designed and synthesized as new sars-cov 3cl protease inhibitors [70] . the anilide derived from 2-chloro-4-nitroaniline, l-phenylalanine and 4-(dimethylamino)benzoic acid was found to be a competitive inhibitor of the sars-cov 3cl protease with k(i) = 0.03 um by using a fluorogenic tetradecapeptide substrate [70, 71] . it is demonstrated that trioxa-adamantane-triols (tats) (bn, ibnca, vanba, eubn), trivially termed bananins, were identified to be effective inhibitors of sars-cov nsp10/nsp13 rna/dna helicase/ntpase protein atpase enzymatic function. bananin (bn) effectively suppresses both sars-cov rna/dna helicase nucleic acid unwinding function and sars-cov rna-viral replication in cell culture [72] . in addition, high-throughput screening (hts) approaches were used to screen potent inhibitors of the sars-cov main proteinase [73, 74] . recent computational studies found that lopinavir, oseltamivir and ritonavir are able to bind with sars-cov-2 protease [75] . potential therapeutic options targeting the main protease 3clpro were identified for sars-cov-2, including covalent drugs (approved or clinically tested). there were at least six hits among the total of 11 potential hits identified by using the scar protocol [76] . therefore, it will be intriguing to determine whether these compounds might be effective for inhibiting the activity of proteinase of sars-cov-2 in vitro and reducing the replication of the virus in treating novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 infection.no therapies specific or effective for human coronavirus sars-cov-2 have been approved by food and drug administration (fda). β-d-n4-hydroxycytidine (nhc, eidd-1931) was initially synthesized as an orally bioavailable ribonucleoside analog with broad-spectrum antiviral activity against various rna viruses such as ebola [77] . recent study discovered that nhc effectively inhibited mers-cov and newly emerging sars-cov-2 replication using antiviral assays in the human lung epithelial cell line calu-3 2b4 ("calu3" cells) [78] . nhc has shown potent antiviral activity with an average half-maximum effective concentration (ic50) of 0.15 µm for cells with a recombinant mers-cov expressing nanoluciferase (mers-nluc), and there is no observed cytotoxicity. in addition, nhc was potently antiviral with an ic50 of 0.3 µm and cc50 of >10 µm when using a clinically isolated strain of sars-cov2 infected african green monkey kidney (vero) cells [78] . furthermore, nhc is highly effective for preventing the virus replication of sars-cov-2, mers-cov as well as sars-cov infection in primary human airway epithelial cell cultures [78] . more importantly, nhc inhibited the replication of remdesivir (rdv)-resistant virus and multiple distinct zoonotic cov [77] . eidd-2801, an orally bioavailable prodrug of nhc (β-d-n4-hydroxycytidine-5 -isopropyl ester) designed for improved in vivo pharmacokinetics, remarkably reduced sars-cov replication and pathogenesis, significantly decreased mers-cov infectious titers, and reduced viral rna and pathogenesis under both prophylactic and early therapeutic conditions in mice [78] . these studies indicate that eidd-2801 could not only provide effective treatment of sars-cov-2 infection, but also enable the prevention of the spread of sars-cov-2 and control future outbreaks of other emerging coronaviruses. it is worth noting that animal experiments and human clinical trials are needed to examine its efficacy for treatment of covid-19.under the current outbreak of covid-19, it is necessary to repurpose natural products to manage patients with covid-19. recent studies have shown that hydroxychloroquine can improve the outcomes of covid-19 patients in small clinical trials although it should be used with caution on humans due to its toxicity. there are a large number of natural products with known safety profiles, such as isoflavones and artemisinin. recent study has shown that several isoflavones and related flavonoid compounds have potent antiviral properties. in this regards, natural products that have been repurposed for broad-spectrum anti-viral therapy can offer safe and inexpensive platforms for discovery of efficient and novel agents for treatment of sars-cov-2. it will be of significance if these fda-approved drugs could be repurposed for treatment of covid-19.recent studies found that naturally occurring flavonoids exhibit a broad-spectrum of antiviral effects against rna virus such as polio-virus type 1, parainfluenza virus type 3 (pf-3), and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) by inhibiting their replication [79] . computational drug design methods were used to identify chymotrypsin-like protease inhibitors from fda approved natural and drug-like compounds [80] . it has been shown that two natural compounds including flavone and coumarine derivatives were identified as promising hits of proteinase inhibitors of sars-cov-2 [80] . in addition, recent study has shown that hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug, significantly abolished sars-cov-2 infection [77] . consistent with this, hydroxychloroquine in combination with azithromycin treatment improved the outcomes of covid-19 patients in a small clinical study although it should be cautious due to its adverse effects. [81] . quinine bark was one of the most extensively used therapeutic approached for malaria during the mid-1800s, which provides evidence that chemical compounds from natural products can be used successfully to treat an infectious disease [82, 83] . in addition, 36 alkaloids, alcohol extracts and chloroquine are effective in blocking the polymerization process in parasites. one of the main derivatives of quinine, mefloquine, was discovered to suppress the uptake of chloroquine in infected cells by blocking ingestion of hemoglobin to prevent parasite infection [82, 83] . previous study demonstrated that chloroquine inhibited the replication of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus in vitro [84] . because there is no effective treatment of covid-19, the extensive outbreak of constant human to human transmission prompts us to apply broad-spectrum anti-viral natural products to prevent or improve the condition of patients with sars-cov-2 [43, 85] .recent study revealed that the protein sequence of the drug binding pocket of the enzymes is highly homogeneous between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [86] . much progress has been made in the application of natural products and the development of novel therapy for sars infection [87] [88] [89] [90] , for example, a new type of effective inhibitor was identified for inhibition of sars-cov proteinase by using substrate specificity profiling [72, 91, 92] . in addition to chloroquine, an anti-malaria natural product artemisinin has anti-viral activity although the mechanism of artemisinin to in inhibiting virus infection is unknown [93] [94] [95] . natural products tordylium persicum boiss & hausskn extract have also been identified for treatment of hiv [96] . consistent with this, cuscuta campestris crude extracts have been demonstrated to be effective for inhibition of hiv replication [97] . cell-based screening assay has been developed to screen virus-specific and broad-spectrum inhibitors for treatment of coronavirus infection [98] [99] [100] . therefore, it is necessary to examine the efficacy of artemisinin and other natural products on covid-19 replication and infection. another study has shown that the administration of hydroxychloroquine reduced the morbidity of covid-19 pneumonia [101] [102] [103] . chloroquine in clinical trials with a large number of patients will be further examined for treatment of covid-19 [104] . some traditional chinese medicines such as polygonum cuspidatum that may consist of components with efficacy against covid-19 have been examined in clinical trials [105] . the pro-inflammatory metabolites of arachidonic acid (aa) and eicosapentaenoic acid (epa) such as leukotrienes and thromboxanes promote inflammation, whereas lipoxins, resolvins, protectins and maresins derived from aa, epa and dha facilitate wound healing, promote phagocytosis of macrophages and other immunocytes and decrease microbial load [106] . it is implicated that these unsaturated fatty acids and pro-inflammatory metabolites may serve as endogenous anti-viral compounds. it is intriguing to determine the efficacy of the metabolites on prevention of sars-cov-2 infection [107] . in addition, using structure-based drug selection for identification of sars-cov-2 protease inhibitors, old drugs such as macrolides were predicted to be effective against covid-19 [108] . therefore, treatments with macrolides alone or in combination with other drugs may be promising and provide the possibility of a new strategy to fight this emerging sars-cov-2 infection.revealing the structural-functional relationships of the s protein of sars-cov-2 will provide new insights into inhibition of interactions between s protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) to develop novel therapeutic approaches for coronavirus. more studies are focused on investigating the mechanism of coronavirus invasion into host cells. similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 is armed with a large "spike protein", which is used to interact with host cells and then gain entry through the cell membrane [109, 110] . recent study has discovered the structure of mers-cov spike glycoprotein in complex with sialoside attachment receptors (pdb: 4kr0) [111] . mers-cov spike glycoprotein is composed of an n-terminal s1 subunit, which is assembled as four domains (a-d) and controls attachment to dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (dpp4, the host receptor), and a c-terminal s2 subunit that combines the viral and cellular membranes to initiate infection, as shown in figure 5 [111] .angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is required for coronavirus invasion into host cells. the viral spike glycoprotein utilizes ace2 as a host protein receptor and mediates merging of the viral and host membranes. this allows viral entry into host epithelial cells and host species tropism [112] . given that the structure of s protein (pdb id:6vsb) of sars-cov-2 is revealed [30, 86] , more computational analysis and virtual screening could be performed to identify the potential inhibitors of s protein and ace2 interaction as shown in figure 6 . in addition, recent study has shown that s-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (skp2) is necessary for lysine-48-linked poly-ubiquitination of beclin 1, leading to its proteasomal degradation. suppression of skp2 promotes autophagy and decreases mers coronavirus replication [113] . recent study demonstrate that sars-cov-2 uses the sars-cov receptor ace2 for invasion and the transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) for s protein priming [28] . a clinically proven protease inhibitor, camostat mesylate, has been demonstrated to inhibit calu-3 infection with sars-cov-2 and prevent sars-2-spike protein (s protein)-mediated entry into primary human lung cells [28] . in addition, recent study demonstrated that a neutralizing antibody cr3022 targets a highly conserved epitope, distal from the receptor-binding site, that enables cross-reactive binding between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. the structure of cr3022 in complex with the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the sars-cov-2 spike (s) protein has been revealed. the modeling study further proved that the binding epitope can only be targeted by cr3022 when the conformational changes with two rbd on the trimeric s protein are in the "up" orientation. this provides a molecular mechanism in the binding of the antibody with s protein of sars-cov-2 [114] . in line with this result, recent study demonstrates a highly potent pan-coronavirus fusion inhibitor targeting its spike protein that harbors a high capacity to mediate membrane fusion, and inhibited sars-cov-2 infection [115] . the molecular mechanisms of coronavirus invasion into host cells will provide new insights into the development of therapeutic approaches for covid-19 by targeting spike proteins and ace2 [116] [117] [118] .sars-cov-2 infection.revealing the structural-functional relationships of the s protein of sars-cov-2 will provide new insights into inhibition of interactions between s protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) to develop novel therapeutic approaches for coronavirus. more studies are focused on investigating the mechanism of coronavirus invasion into host cells. similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 is armed with a large "spike protein", which is used to interact with host cells and then gain entry through the cell membrane [109, 110] . recent study has discovered the structure of mers-cov spike glycoprotein in complex with sialoside attachment receptors (pdb: 4kr0) [111] . mers-cov spike glycoprotein is composed of an n-terminal s1 subunit, which is assembled as four domains (a-d) and controls attachment to dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (dpp4, the host receptor), and a c-terminal s2 subunit that combines the viral and cellular membranes to initiate infection, as shown in figure 5 [111] .structures of mers-cov spike glycoprotein in complex with sialoside attachment receptors (pdb: 4kr0). mers-cov spike glycoprotein is composed of an n-terminal s1 subunit, which is assembled as four domains (a-d) and controls attachment to dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (dpp4, the host receptor), and a c-terminal s2 subunit that combines the viral and cellular membranes to initiate infection. spike glycoprotein is highlighted in pink, dpp4 is highlighted in blue and the ligand neu5ac is highlighted in green. the outbreak of covid-19, and previous devastating sars and mers-cov, highlight the importance for developing effective approaches for treatment of human coronavirus infections (sars coronavirus anti-infectives). this will decrease risk of disease dissemination, ameliorate disease progression, and bring down the need for intensive supportive care. furthermore, treatments for moderate cases to decrease the time span of illness and infectivity may also be of significance for preventing covid19 from becoming more wide-spread. recent study demonstrated that there was no observed benefit with lopinavir-ritonavir treatment in hospitalized adult patients with severe covid-19 [119] . future trials in patients with severe illness may help to confirm or exclude the possibility of treatment benefit. we mainly compare two ongoing clinical trials with remdesivir for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. the first one targets mild/moderate patients, the second severe cases with sars-cov-2 infection. because there is no specific antiviral treatment for covid-19 infection, the widely investigated small molecule compound remdesvir could be a potential antiviral agent, based on pre-clinical studies in sars-cov and mers-cov infections. remdesivir is a 1 -cyano-substituted adenosine nucleotide analogue prodrug that can be metabolized into its active form to exhibit broad-spectrum antiviral activity against coronavirus as shown in figure 7 . a phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was designed to examine the efficacy of remdsivir in adult patients with mild/moderate covid-19 respiratory disease. the inclusion criteria include: (1) laboratory rt-pcr confirmed patients infected with sars-cov-2; (2) lung involvement confirmed with ct imaging. the exclusion criteria include: patients with sao2/spo2≤94% in room air condition; severe liver disease and severe renal impairment; and patients with any experimental treatment for covid-19 (off-label, compassionate use, or trial related). 308 participants have been recruited and the clinical trial outcome will be released at the end of april 2020. there are no therapeutics proven effective for the treatment of severe illness caused by sars-cov-2, so a phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was designed to examine the efficacy of remdsivir in adult patients with severe covid-19 respiratory disease. the clinical trial there are no therapeutics proven effective for the treatment of severe illness caused by sars-cov-2, so a phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was designed to examine the efficacy of remdsivir in adult patients with severe covid-19 respiratory disease. the clinical trial is sponsored by capital medical university and china-japan friendship hospital. the inclusion criteria include: (1) confirmation of covid-19 by using laboratory rt-pcr; (2) less than 12 days since symptom;(3) lung involvement confirmed with ct chest imaging; (4) patients with a sao2/spo2 ≤ 94% in room air condition. the exclusion criteria include: severe liver disease and severe renal impairment; and patients with any experimental treatment for covid-19 (off-label, compassionate use, or trial related). 452 participants will be recruited and the clinical trial outcome will be released in may 2020. in adults presenting with hypoxic respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) from covid-19, invasive mechanical ventilation, a conservative fluid strategy over a liberal fluid strategy, and intermittent boluses of neuromuscular blocking agents (nmba) to facilitate protective lung ventilation are necessary for supporting treatment [120] . for severe ards cases, the routine use of inhaled nitric oxide is recommended [120] . a randomized, controlled clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the investigation of antiviral remdesivir in hospitalized patients with covid-19 has also initiated at the university of nebraska medical center (unmc) in omaha. these clinical trials will be of significance for therapy involving severe cases of covid-19 after completion of examining the efficacy of remdesivir to treat covid-19.recent studies have shown that sars-cov-2 receptor ace2 and transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) are primarily expressed in bronchial transient secretory cells, which provides the rationale that supporting treatment on lung should be emphasized [121] . the expression of ace2 can be upregulated by smoking in humans [122] , therefore, smoking status should be included for information of identified cases of covid-19. in addition, it is crucial to manage patients with inherited arrhythmia syndromes such as long qt syndrome and short qt syndrome in the setting of the covid-19 pandemic [123] . patients with inherited arrhythmia may be susceptible to pro-arrhythmic factors of covid-19 such as use of antiviral drugs, fever, stress, and electrolyte imbalance [123, 124] . the current studies on potential therapeutic agents, such as lopinavir/ritonavir, favipiravir, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, interferon, ribavirin, tocilizumab and sarilumab are important for management of covid-19 [51, 125] . more clinical trials are being conducted for further confirmation of the efficacy and safety of these agents in treating covid-19 [126] .several host factors regulate the replication of coronavirus and induce dramatic changes in the host cellular structure and function, simultaneously. induction of critical signaling proteins is crucial for the pathogenesis of cov and is also involved in the activation of the innate immune response during cov infection. neutrophils are the first immune cells recruited to sites of viral infection. recent studies demonstrate that excessive recruitment of neutrophils and formation of neutrophil extracellular traps results in acute lung injury of influenza pneumonitis [127] . in addition, neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase (mpo) serves as a potent tissue damage factor and also contributes to influenza pneumonia in mice infected with influenza virus [128] [129] [130] [131] . in addition, coronavirus infection is able to induce stress response, autophagy, apoptosis, and activate innate immunity [40] . host cell apoptosis caused by cov infection has been extensively studied, for example, sars-cov and mers-cov infect and induce apoptosis in a variety of tissues including lung, spleen, thyroid tissues, and a variety of cell types, such as respiratory epithelial cells, neuronal cells, primary t lymphocytes, and dendritic cells [132, 133] . in addition, overexpression of sars-cov s was shown to induce a potent er stress response, and the re-arrangement of dmv production and membrane alteration for the assembly of the virus may contribute to endoplasmic reticulum (er) stress during cov infection [40] . unfolded protein response (upr) -mediated signaling pathway was induced to maintain er homeostasis [134, 135] . the ire1 branch of upr promotes cell survival during cov infection and cov infection activates jnk to modulate apoptosis induction [136, 137] . induction of cell apoptosis provided the possible explanations for the fact that lymphopenia was observed in some patients with cov infection, such as sars-cov and sars-cov-2. immune cell apoptosis may lead to the suppression of host immune response and promote the occurring of ards.coronavirus infection promotes the activation of inflammasome in host cells and activates innate immunity [138, 139] . in macrophages, orf8b provides a potent signal 2 required for activation of inflammasome and activates the nlrp3 (nod-, lrr-and pyrin domain-containing protein 3) to form the inflammasome complex. specifically, orf8b is able to interact directly with the leucine rich repeat (lrr) domain of nlrp3 and bind with apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a card (asc) in cytosolic dot-like structures [140] . orf8b induces cell apoptosis and pyroptotic cell death in macrophages, while in those cells lacking nlrp3, accumulating orf8b cytosolic substances lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, activation of inflammasome and caspase-independent cell death [140, 141] . recent genome-wide and transcriptome-wide complementary network analysis of sars-cov-2/human interaction provided a new network of host proteins affected by the sars-cov-2 infection [141] . it has been shown that ace2 is downregulated in the presence of viral infection, therefore application of recombinant ace2 has been shown to be effective in treating severe pulmonary infections and acute respiratory distress syndrome [142] . recent studies demonstrate that soluble forms of ace2 are beneficial to sars patients, due to its competitive binders of sars-cov spike proteins, preventing binding to the host cell ace2 [143] .recent study indicate that there is a substantial number of undocumented infections and this facilitates the rapid dissemination of sars-cov2 [144] . these findings explain the rapid geographic spread of sars-cov2 and indicate containment of this virus will be particularly challenging. it is also informative to help understand the potential for infection by non-symptomatic subjects. therefore, one of the most important strategies of management of covid-19 infection is to effectively reduce the possibility of constant human-to-human viral transmission [145] . keeping social distancing, contact tracing and quarantine are necessary for preventing substantial human to human transmission of covid-19 [146] [147] [148] . recent study demonstrated that the affinity of the sars-cov-2 s protein with ace2 was 10-to 20-fold higher than the sars-cov s protein as shown in figure 5 [30] , which explains the observations of rapid transmission from human-to-human in covid-19 infection. genetic analyses of hundreds of sars-cov-2 genomes revealed that there were two major types, l type and s type [149] . it seems that the l type (∼70%) was more dominant than the s type (∼30%). the l type was more common in the early stages of the outbreak in china. artificial intervention may have put selective pressure on the l type, which might be more susceptible to mutate and spread more widely [149] . it is very challenging to makes an effective vaccine because of the rapid mutation of ssrna and the antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) effect [149] . therefore, it is urgent to develop effective medicine for treatment of moderate and severe patients with low spo2. remdsivir may be potentially developed for treatment of covid-19 after completing the phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to examine its efficacy in patients with covid-19. in addition, better understanding of the mechanisms of coronavirus invasion into host cells could accelerate discovery of new inhibitors of interaction of spike glycoproteins and ace2 and promote the development of therapeutic approaches for covid-19. finally, by drawing lessons from mechanisms of replication of sars-cov-2 rna-dependent rna polymerase, development of potent and effective rdrp inhibitors will provide new insights required for putting rdrp targeted therapeutics into full gear. the authors declare no conflict of interest. a novel coronavirus emerging from wuhan in china, in december 2019 has now spread to over 213 countries/territories across the globe (https://www.who.int/emergencies/ diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019). the virus, originally named 2019-ncov, has now been renamed by taxonomists as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) owing to its genomic and structural similarities with the earlier severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov). 1e3 the disease caused by this virus has been named by the world health organizationas coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , and the outbreak was declared a pandemic on 11th march, 2020.as of april 27 (2020), the virus has affected over 2883603 people and killed more than 198842, and the figures are increasing rapidly. today, the covid-19 pandemic has become the largest global health crisis, a burden on healthcare systems, and is affecting global trade and economy. so far, there exists no specific drug or vaccine for the treatment of covid-19. because de novo drug discovery is a timeconsuming venture, researchers have suggested drug repurposing as a strategy to find a therapeutic against the virus. the approved drugs against other viruses, including the similar sars-cov, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), and hepatitis c virus (hcv), have been suggested for further evaluation and clinical studies. 1e8 in addition, the knowledge gained through studies of these related viruses has been vital in designing therapeutics against sars-cov-2.structural biology approaches have deciphered the structures of different proteins/enzymes of the sars-cov-2, and at least three of them such as rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), papain-like protease, and the main protease are important drug targets. 5, 6 rdrp is the key enzyme which replicates the viral rna genome and is thus the most promising drug target. the rdrp of the sars-cov-2 shares 96% sequee identity with the sars-cov, 9 and thus, the compounds or drugs effective against the rdrp of sars-cov are surmised to be effective against the novel cov as well. this makes the rdrp the most important therapeutic target against sar-cov-2. recent studies have suggested several known rdrp-inhibiting antivirals, other fda-approved drugs, and phytochemicals for repurposing against sars-cov-2 using molecular docking studies. 7 some of the commonly repurposed drugs include ritonavir/lopinavir, remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, ribavirin, and so on. in view of the previously mentioned fact, the present study investigates the relative efficacy of the known rdrp inhibitors, as well as other drugs/compounds which have been predicted to have rdrp-inhibiting potential, using computational modeling.the drug target for the present study is rdrp of sars-cov-2. the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme in complex with cofactors was obtained from the research collaboratory for structural bioinformatics (rcsb) protein data bank (www. rcsb.org/pdb), bearing pdb id 6m71. the structure was determined using electron microscopy, at resolution of 2.90 a, by gao et al, 10 and deposited to the database on march 16, 2020. the structure bears three non-structured proteins (nsps) such as one nsp7 and two nsp8 as cofactors. the chain a is the nsp12, which is the rdrp, and it contains 851 amino acids. the structure was downloaded from the database in .pdb format.thirty compounds were selected from the available literature as test drugs. the list includes known rdrp inhibitors, as well as other drugs/compounds which have been predicted to inhibit the drug target ( table 1 ). the three-dimensional conformers of the compounds were obtained from the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) pubchem compounds database (www.pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and were downloaded in .sdf format.molecular docking is a powerful computational modeling tool which determines the affinity of binding of any compound with the active site of a receptor/enzyme. the molecular docking also determines the orientation of binding of the compound at the active site of the enzyme. the amount of energy thus liberated, which is a negative value, determines the stability of the ligandereceptor complex and is referred to as a docking score. a compound with a higher (i.e. more negative) docking score forms a more stable ligandeprotein complex and is surmised to be a better inhibitor. 11, 12 furthermore, when a compound shows higher affinity for the active site of an enzyme compared with the natural substrate, it interferes with the activity of the enzyme and may bring about competitive inhibition. in the present study, the molecular docking was performed using molegro virtual docker software 6.0 (mvd), following standard procedures. 11, 12 mvd is one of the most widely used and powerful tools in determining ligandeprotein interactions and has higher accuracy (87%) than many other similar tools. 13 briefly, the structure of the enzyme was loaded into the software with all the cofactors. this was followed by addition of the structures of the test compounds into the workspace. docking was performed between the ligands and the active site of the receptor/enzyme, with grid resolution of 0.30 a, moldock scoring function, and including amino acids within a radius of 20 a around x: 122.74, y: 106.69, z: 155.25 as the active site residues. once the docking scores were obtained, the best pose in terms of the rerank score for each compound was retained, and the binding geometry or conformation was assessed.while performing docking, incorporation of remdesivir as a test ligand for the present study has two implications. first, it was included to see its relative affinity compared with the other compounds for the active site of the enzyme and thereby predict its relative efficacy as an inhibitor of rdrp of sars-cov-2. second, the drug, being a nucleoside analog, interacts at the active site of the enzyme and thus serves as a reference ligand. in the present study, all the test compounds (except cortisone) were found to interact at the same active site or binding pocket (fig. 1a) as that of the remdesivir (fig. 1b) . this demonstrates that all the compounds have the potential to interact at the same active site of the enzyme and may interfere with the activity of the enzyme.binding or interaction of the ligands at the active site of an enzyme implicates that the ligands would interfere with the activity of the enzyme, thereby bringing about inhibition of the enzyme. the free energy of binding or the docking score implicates the efficacy, with which the inhibition is affected. chlorhexidine was found to have the highest affinity among all the studied compounds for the active site of rdrp, followed by remdesivir, novobiocin, ceftibuten, and ribavirin ( table 1 ). the docking score of chlorhexidine (à132.85) was found to be 1.16-fold higher than that of remdesivir (à114.47), while the hydrogen bond score of chlorhexidine (à7.996) was found to be 1.42-fold higher than that of remdesivir (à5.644). furthermore, the docking score of remdesivir was found to be 1.04-fold, 1.11-fold and 1.13-fold higher than that of novobiocin, ceftibuten, and ribavirin, respectively (table 1) . among all the compounds, cortisone was found to have a positive rerank score. this indicates that the compound may not be able to interact with and inhibit the rdrp.using molecular docking studies, researchers have identified several known and novel compounds as inhibitors of different drug targets of the sars-cov-2. for the viruses using rdrp for replication of their genetic material (rna), including covs and hiv, inhibition of rdrp is one of the most crucial therapeutic strategies, which is primarily affected by nucleoside analogs. the rdrp of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have 97% sequence identity, while the active site of the rdrp of most covs and rna viruses is highly conserved. 5 this has been the basis for drug repurposing against sars-cov-2, using those compounds which are known to inhibit the rdrp of related viruses.the present study reveals that remdesivir has the highest potential in binding and therefore competitively inhibiting rdrp of sars-cov-2, among all known rdrp inhibitors ( table 1 ). the inhibitory potential of the same on the rdrp has also been reported from other molecular modeling studies. 7, 14 remdesivir is an adenosine analog, and its incorporation into the growing viral rna leads to termination of the rna replication. high affinity of the compound for the active site of rdrp of the sars-cov-2 indicates that the compound would compete with the natural substrates (ribonucleotides) of the rdrp and get incorporated into the growing rna chain. remdesivir has been suggested by several researchers for use in patients with covid-19 to reduce viral load. 1e7 the compound has already been reported to inhibit replication of the virus in vitro in vero e6 cells. 15 remdesivir has earlier been reported to inhibit a spectrum of human rna viruses, including sars-cov, mers-cov, marburg virus, hendra virus, nipah virus, ebola virus, and hiv. 2,16e21 remdesivir was used for successful treatment of the first covid-19 case of the us. 22 a large number of clinical trials are going on in different countries to evaluate the effectiveness of this compound in patients with covid-19.in the present study, chlorhexidine has been found to have highest affinity for the active site of the rdrp of sars-cov-2 (table 1 ; fig. 1c ). the compound was found to bind to the same active site of the rdrp and is therefore predicted to be a promising inhibitor. nevertheless, the mode of inhibition of this compound would be different from that of nucleoside analogs (such as remdesivir). this is because nucleoside analogs mimic the natural substrates of rdrp and act as chain terminators, unlike chlorhexidine. chlorhexidine can not mimic natural substrates of rdrp and will not be incorporated into the viral rna. rather, it may block the active site of the enzyme and thereby inhibit the entry of the substrates (i.e. nucleotides) at the site. this will prevent activity of rdrp, thereby preventing replication of the viral genome, rather than terminating it. this compound has also been predicted by wu et al 7 as an inhibitor of rdrp, using molecular docking approaches. chlorhexidine is one of the most widely used drugs against dental plaques, gingivitis, pharyngitis, candidiasis, and tonsillitis. 23 it is a bactericidal, fungicidal, and virucidal agent and is known to alter membrane potential 24 and inhibit atpase. 25 at concentrations ranging from 0.001% to 2%, the drug is known to inhibit a wide range of viruses, and for coronaviruses, it shows effectiveness at a concentration of 0.01%. 23 however, the concentration at which the drug can inhibit rdrp of sars-cov-2 remains to be determined. while this may be predicted using quantitative structureeactivity relationship (qsar) modeling studies, in vitro, in vivo, and clinical studies would be required to ascertain the same.in addition to remdesivir, other known nucleoside analogs including sofosbuvir, ribavirin, penciclovir, ganciclovir, and favipiravir were found to interact with the active site of rdrp of sars-cov-2 ( fig. 1a ) with high affinities (table 1 ). our findings are in compliance with the study of elfiky, 5 who reported ribavirin, remdesivir, sofosbuvir, galidesivir, and tenofovir as effective inhibitors of sars-cov-2 rdrp, using molecular modeling. in the present study, sofosbuvir was also found to be a potent inhibitor of the enzyme. ribavirin, an fda-approved synthetic guanosine nucleoside, is a widespectrum inhibitor of rna viruses, including sars-cov, mers-cov, and hcv. 26e28 penciclovir is also a synthetic nucleoside analog e acyclic guanine derivative ewhich has been reported to be effective against herpes simplex virus, and varicella-zoster virus. 29 ganciclovir is also an approved nucleoside analog and effective against hiv. 30 favipiravir is an investigational nucleoside analog and inhibitor of rdrp and has been reported to be effective against ebola and influenza a (h1n1) viruses. 31e33 however, the major limitation of the present study is that we have not predicted the inhibitory concentrations of the compounds, and thus, it is suggested that qsar modeling studies are performed to determine the same. furthermore, we recommend that in vitro and in vivo studies are performed to first ascertain the effectiveness of the compounds on sars-cov-2 before proceeding to clinical studies.the present study reports relative efficacy of 30 compounds in interacting with the active site of rdrp of sars-cov-2. in vitro studies and molecular modeling approaches have indicated that some of the broad-spectrum antivirals, including remdesivir, can be effective therapeutics against the virus. while we report chlorhexidine to be the best inhibitor, remdesivir was found to be the most potent among known antivirals. nucleoside analogs (such as remdesivir) mimic the natural substrates of the rdrp and consequently bring about chain termination. however, other compounds including m e d i c a l j o u r n a l a r m e d f o r c e s i n d i a x x x ( x x x x ) x x xcoronaviruses have long been recognized as important veterinary pathogens, causing respiratory and enteric diseases in mammals as well as in birds. they are single-stranded rna viruses that belong to the order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, and subfamily coronavirinae. about twenty-six different species have been identified (cleri et al., 2010) and are classified into four types (alpha, beta, gamma, and delta). they are characterized by different antigenic cross-reactivity and genetic makeup (paules et al., 2020) . from the various species of coronavirus, only six have been reported to cause disease in humans. these include hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) (arabi et al., 2017; skariyachan et al., 2019) . sars-cov and mers-cov are beta coronaviruses, and are among the pathogens included in the world health organization's list of high-priority threats (zumla et al., 2015) . in late 2019, a novel coronavirus initially designated as 2019-ncov was discovered to be the cause of a large and rapidly spreading outbreak of respiratory disease, including pneumonia. according to the isolation and viral genome sequence, coronavirus was identified as a beta-coronavirus belonging to group 2b with at least 70% similarity in genetic sequence to sars-cov (hui et al., 2020) , and thus became the seventh discrete coronavirus species capable of causing human disease.recently, chloroquine, a medication used primarily to treat malaria, is being studied to treat coronavirus. its putative anti-viral effects have been hypothesized to be related to the elevation of endosomal and lysosomal ph in addition to its angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 inhibitory potentials (vincent et al., 2005; gay et al., 2012) . unlike viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus and herpes simplex virus, sendai virus that can fuse the plasma membrane to successfully infect the host, enveloped viruses such as coronaviruses are endocytosed in the endosome and lysosome before fusion aiding its entry into cells (plemper, 2011; boopathi et al., 2020) . lysosomal lumens are the most acidic subcellular structure of the cell, ph $4.5. acidification of the lysosomal lumen activates hydrolytic enzymes which lead to the degradation of endocytic cargo (ishida et al., 2013) . however, changes in the environment of the lysosome such as a decrease in ph could elicit conformational changes of viral glycoproteins and proteolytic activation of viral glycoproteins by endosomal proteases leading to virions maturation and viral fusion with the host membranes changes (huotari & helenius, 2011; richards & jackson, 2012; park et al., 2014) . acidification of the lysosomal lumen could enhance the cellular entry of coronavirus. thus, intracellular extrusion of the proton through modulations of the functions of membrane proton pumps could enhance the elevation of endocytic ph and inhibit viral fusion and subsequent replication in the host.proton pumps that have been implicated in endocytic acid-base balance include vacuolar proton-translocating atpase (v-atpase) and na/h exchangers (nhe). v-atpase is a membrane-bound protein that is required to pump protons into the lysosomal lumen and maintain an acidic luminal ph. inhibition of the host v-atpase has been shown to result in a decrease of lysosomal acidification (slesiona et al., 2012) . conversely, nhe modulates the luminal ph and na þ homeostasis by transporting protons out of the lysosomal lumen in exchange for cations, hence increasing the luminal ph (nakamura et al., 2005; prasad & rao, 2015) . regulation of nhe is mediated by protein kinase a through phosphorylation to sustained intracellular acidosis (zhao et al., 1999; haworth et al., 2003) . therefore, endocytic acidification could be dissipated through inhibition of protein kinase a.moreover, binding of the s1 domain of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is a key event in the cellular entry of sars-cov-2 (li et al., 2003) . ace2 is a type i integral membrane glycoprotein with an n-terminal extracellular domain comprising 2 a-helical lobes, which has a catalytic site with a coordinated zinc ion between the lobes (li et al., 2003) . increasing numbers of proteases have been demonstrated to participate in viral infection of host cells in mechanisms where they do not act as receptors. these proteases are reported to be involved not only in the adaptation of the virus to innate immune response but also in proteolytic processing of the s protein.coronaviruses always produce two types of cysteine proteases, a chymotrypsin-like main protease and papain-like proteases (pl1pro and pl2pro) which are generally important for viral entry and replication (elmezayen et al., 2020; khan et al., 2020a; muralidharan et al., 2020) . the fusion of coronavirus requires proteolytic priming of its spike protein in the endosomal system. besides, inhibition of lysosomal proteases had been hypothesised to prevent coronavirus fusion as shown in a study using mouse hepatitis virus (mhv) a safe model of coronavirus (de haan et al., 2004; hasan et al., 2020; joshi et al., 2020) . various studies had been reported using computational approaches in investigating putative compounds that could be repurposed or repositioned as drugs against coronavirus (aanouz et al., 2020; elfiky & azzam, 2020; enayatkhani et al., 2020; enmozhi et al., 2020; gupta et al., 2020; khan et al., 2020b; sarma et al., 2020) . several classes of compounds that had been proposed include phytochemicals and peptides (aanouz et al., 2020; pant et al., 2020) .in a quest to identifying potential treatment for the novel coronavirus infection, this study demonstrated the putative repurposing of some selected clinically approved drugs (lopinavir, remdesivir, oseltamir, azithromycin, ribavirin, and chloroquine recently discovered) as inhibitors of v-atpase, protein kinase a, human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and viral proteases through in silico analyses.the toxicity risks of azithromycin, chloroquine, lopinavir, oseltamivir, remdesivir, and ribavirin were predicted based on their admet profile. the admet (absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination, and toxicity) studies were predicted using pkcsm tool (http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/pkcsm/prediction) (pires et al., 2015) . the smile molecular structures of the compounds were obtained from pubchem (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).the crystal structures of papain-like protease (plpro), chymotrypsin-like protease (3clpro), sars coronavirus spike glycoprotein-angiotensin converting enzyme 2 complex (sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex), cyclic amp-dependent protein kinase a (camp-pka) and v-atpase with pdb ids 2fe8, 2alv, 2ajf, 4uj1, and 5i1m respectively were retrieved from the protein databank (www.rcsb.org) (berman et al., 2000) . all the crystal structures were prepared individually by removing existing ligands and water molecules, while missing hydrogen atoms were added using autodock v4.2 program, scripps research institute. thereafter, non-polar hydrogens were merged while polar hydrogen where added to each enzyme. the process was repeated for each protein and subsequently saved into pdbqt format in preparation for molecular docking.the sdf structures of azithromycin, chloroquine, lopinavir, oseltamivir, remdesivir, and ribavirin were retrieved from the pubchem database (www.pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (kim et al., 2019) . the compounds were converted to mol2 chemical format using open babel (o'boyle et al., 2011) . polar hydrogens were added while non-polar hydrogens were merged with the carbons and the internal degrees of freedom and torsions were set. the protein and ligand molecules were further converted to the dockable pdbqt format using autodock tools.docking of the ligands to various protein targets and determination of binding affinities was carried out using autodockvina (trott & olson, 2010) . pdbqt format of the receptors, as well as those of the ligands, was dragged into their respective columns and the software was run. the binding affinities of compounds for the three protein targets were recorded. the compounds were then ranked by their affinity scores. molecular interactions between the receptors and compounds with most remarkable binding affinities were viewed with discovery studio visualizer, biovia, 2016. the respective binding free energy was calculated by the molecular mechanics/generalized born surface area (mm/ gbsa) using hawkdock server (http://cadd.zju.edu.cn/hawkdock/) (chen et al., 2016) .the conformational stability of the protein-ligand interactions was evaluated using molecular dynamics simulations analysis performed through imods server (http://imods.chaconlab. org) by normal mode analysis (nma) predicting properties such as deformability, mobility profiles, eigenvalues, variance, co-variance map and elastic network of the protein-ligand interactions (l opez- blanco et al., 2014) .the results of the predicted pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics properties of the azithromycin, chloroquine, lopinavir, oseltamivir, remdesivir, and ribavirin are presented in tables 1-5. the prediction was carried out as a methodological virtual screening of the drugs. it was included as a substitute to in vivo studies which are important complements in drug discovery. the molecular properties of the drugs based on the computed partition coefficient (log p) showed that the drugs had relatively good lipophilicity as the logp values were less than 5 (lipinski et al., 1997; hughes et al., 2008) (table 1) . however, a negative ribavirin logp value means the ribavirinis a hydrophilic drug that could negatively impact permeability. since high lipophilic drugs which are insoluble in aqueous layers could be poorly absorbed and hydrophilic drugs could also contribute to poor permeability, all the screened drugs except ribavirin could be maintained in the system at appropriate concentrations. moreover, the observed lipophilicities correlated negatively with water solubility potentials of the drugs but had an association with caco2 permeability. this corresponds to the observation of yazdanian et al. (1998) that there was no correlation between the lipophilicity and drug permeability measured using the human colon adenocarcinoma (caco-2) cell line assay. caco2 permeability and intestinal absorption (hia) indices are factors that determine the ultimate bioavailability of the drug. the drugs had relatively low caco2 permeability potential (<8 â 10 à6 cm/s) and could be absorbed through the human intestine (larregieu & benet, 2013) . however, the drugs that have their subcellular localization in the lysosome are remdesivir, azithromycin, and chloroquine as predicted by admetsar1 (cheng et al., 2012) . lopinavir, remdesivir, azithromycin, and chloroquine were predicted to be substrates of p-glycoprotein, an efflux membrane transporter and a member of the atp-binding cassette transporter found primarily in epithelial cells. however, lopinavir, remdesivir, and azithromycin were also predicted as p-glycoprotein inhibitors. thus, lopinavir, remdesivir, and azithromycin could modulate the physiological functions of p-glycoprotein in limiting the active uptake and the distribution of drugs (srivalli & lakshmi, 2012) .the prediction through the volume of distribution calculated using a steady-state volume of distribution (vdss) showed that lopinavir, azithromycin, and ribavirin had lower theoretical dose required for uniform distribution in the plasma than remdesivir, oseltamivir, and chloroquine while the degree of diffusing across plasma membrane increases in this order lopinavir < remdesivir < chloroquine < azithromycin < oseltamivir < ribavirin measured as the fraction that is in the unbound state ( table 2 ). the predictive assessment of the distribution of the drugs through the nervous system showed that lipophilicity of the drugs correlates to the tendency to permeate the blood-brain barrier and the central nervous system passively. moreover, the moderate levels of the lipophilicity imply the drugs would have no negative effect on nervous system exposure.furthermore, a group of enzymes that play significant roles in drug metabolism is the cyp isozymes. oseltamivir and ribavirin showed low cyp promiscuity while lopinavir, remdesivir, azithromycin, and chloroquine are substrates of cyp3a4 (table 3 ). the lipophilicity of the drug appears to correlate negatively to metabolism-related toxicity. lopinavir has the highest cyp promiscuity as it inhibits cyp2c19, cyp2c9, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4. this shows that lopinavir could be involved in drug-drug interaction (cheng et al., 2011) . however, it could also alleviate the generation of oxidative species cyp2c9, cyp2c19, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4 and could initiate oxidative stress (williams et al., 2004) .also, only chloroquine was a substrate of renal organic cation transporter while other drugs are possibly cleared through other available routes such as bile, breath, faces, and sweat. it was observed from the results that all the drugs are absorbable via oral prescription (table 4 ). the bacterial mutagenic potential of drugs through ames toxicity testing showed that all the drugs except chloroquine could be considered as non-mutagenic agents. however, the toxicities of all the drugs in tetrahymena pyriformis were high. the acute toxicity assessed the predictive toxicity of the ligands and described the adversative effects that could occur within a short period after administration. lopinavir, remdesivir, and chloroquine were also shown to have low toxic dose threshold in humans, inhibit human ether-a-gogo-related gene (herg) and induce hepatotoxicity (table 5) . thus, administration of lopinavir, remdesivir, and chloroquine could result in delayed ventricular repolarisation through inhibition of the herg potassium channel which could lead to a severe disturbance in the normal cardiac rhythm and disrupt hepatic functions (wang et al., 2012; oso et al., 2019) .to comprehend the mechanism of ligand binding and to discover potent inhibitors of vacuolar proton-translocating atpase (v-atpase), cyclic amp-dependent protein kinase a, sars-cov spike glycoprotein human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and viral proteases (3-chymotrypsin like and papain-like protease), a virtual screening and molecular docking was carried out. the in silico studies on the molecular assessment on the possible interactions between drugs and the selected proteins showed that all the drugs had relatively good interaction with the proteins based on their corresponding scoring values as specified by the negative values of the binding free energies (oso & olaoye, 2020) ( table 6 ). the binding free energy by mm/gbsa method is presented in table 7 .lopinavir has the highest binding affinities to the pocket site of sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex, cyclic amp-dependent protein kinase a and 3-chymotrypsin like protease while redemsivir has the highest binding affinities for vacuolar proton-translocating atpase (v-atpase) and papain-like proteins. the observation from this study agrees with the work of nukoolkarn et al. (2008) , who reported that lopinavir showed a high binding ability to the pocket site of sar-cov. it was observed that lopinavir, remdesivir, and azithromycin have the highest docking scores with the highest number of hydrogen bonds formed respectively while ribavirin has the least docking score with the least hydrogen bonds. the calculated binding free energies using the mm/ gbsa scoring showed that all the proposed drugs have favourable conformations as indicated by the empirical binding free energies with all the proteins except sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex.the molecular docking study also predicted the residues at the interacting site of the associated proteins and their vdss ¼ steady-state volume of distribution, bbb ¼ blood-brain barrier, cns ¼ central nervous system. corresponding orientations (adeoye et al., 2019) . the amino acids asp269, leu370, his374, and his345 were predicted to be the key residues for lopinavir binding to human sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex while his378, tyr515, leu73, leu100, phe32 and phe40 for remdesivir and tyr510, phe504, met62, tyr50, and his378 were predicted for azithromycin as the key residues for binding to sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex (figures 1-5 and table 8 ).the results suggest that the high number of hydrogen bond formation could be responsible for the high binding score in lopinavir, remdesivir, and azithromycin (elokely & doerksen, 2013) . moreover, it was also observed that chloroquine which was recently found to be effective in the treatment of novel coronavirus infection has appreciable binding affinities for 3-chymotrpsin-like protease and cyclic ampdependent protein kinase a when compared to oseltamivir and ribavirin. this implies that chloroquine could limit the proliferation of coronavirus by enhancing the activities of na/h exchangers leading to elevation of ph of the lysosomal lumen, and also limiting the effect of the viral proteases. chloroquine could be used in the treatment remedy as it could be an inhibitor of the transporter that could reverse the lysosomal ph gradient by increasing h þ influx and consequent alkalinity. moreover, the amino acids his401, ala348, and his378 were predicted to be the key residues for chloroquine binding to human sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex. analysis of the results of the autodock software revealed that chloroquine has a considerable binding affinity with coronavirus target protease. the results of the molecular dynamics simulation of the docked complexes are presented in figure 6 . the deformability graphs of the complexes illustrated the degree of the capability of the respective molecule to deform shown by the peaks ( figure 6a ). the empirical b-factor graphs of the complexes presented in figure 6b were obtained from the corresponding pdb field and nma mobility. the computed eigenvalues of the docked complexes that characterise the motion stiffness and the movement of the proteins are shown in figure 6c with sars-cov spike glycoprotein/ace-2 complex predicted to having comparatively the least required energy to deform its structure based on the lowest eigenvalue. however, the associated variance is inversely related to the eigenvalue with the individual variance indicated by red coloured bars and cumulative variance indicated by green coloured bars ( figure 6d ) while the coupling between pairs of residues is illustrated by the co-variance map ( figure 6e ) where red colour showed the correlated motion between a pair of residues, white colour indicated uncorrelated motion and the anti-correlated motion was indicated by blue colour. the elastic network model illustrated by the elastic map ( figure 6f ) expresses the connection between the atoms with indicated by 'dot' and the colour gradient of the dot is directly related to their stiffness, thus, darker 'spot' designate stiffer springs (l opez- blanco et al., 2014) .all the antiviral drugs had binding affinities for sars spike glycoprotein-human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and sars-cov main protease. out of the five already established antiviral drugs, lopinavir had the highest binding affinity towards sars-cov protease while ribavirin had the lowest binding affinity. chloroquine recently discovered for the treatment of coronavirus also had a considerable binding affinity to the pocket site of sars spike glycoprotein-human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and sars-cov main protease. binding of these drugs could interfere or inhibit the functions of coronavirus thereby preventing its cellular entry and proliferation. although chloroquine could bind to the selected target proteins/enzymes, the result shows it could not be as effective as others. however, coupling it with metals could improve its binding affinity. oseltamivir, azithromycin, and ribavirin, when compared to chloroquine, showed good drug-likeness based on the predicted pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics properties as revealed by low cyp inhibitory promiscuity and relatively low toxicity. however, further experimental works are recommended to validate the effectiveness of the identified therapeutic agents.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , has caused millions of infections and hundreds of thousands of deaths worldwide. 1 covid-19 has more severe manifestations in older populations with chronic diseases such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. 2 in the absence of an effective vaccine, medication to reduce the severity of covid-19 manifestations is desperately needed. while many drugs are under investigation, no drugs have demonstrated efficacy in randomized controlled trials (rcts) with a reasonable safety profile. 3 the nucleotide analogue, remdesivir, inhibits rna polymerase limiting viral replication. 4, 5 it was originally developed to treat ebola but promising in vitro effects were not translated into acceptable clinical efficacy. remdesivir has shown antiviral effects on coronaviruses in vitro and a recent study in monkeys infected with covid-19 showed that remdesivir significantly reduced pulmonary damage when administered early. 4, 6 on may 1 st 2020, the food and drug administration (fda) issued an emergency use authorization (eua) for remdesivir in severe, hospitalized covid-19 patients; valid for one year. 7 giving this promising designation, we systematically evaluated the human studies assessing the efficacy and safety of remdesivir for the treatment of covid-19.we performed a systematic review of rcts and observational studies (cohort studies, case series) evaluating the effects of remdesivir in adult hospitalized covid-19 confirmed patients.a comprehensive literature search was conducted in pubmed, web of science, scopus, embase and the cochrane library. the search was broadened for preprints at medrxiv.org, and for records of ongoing remdesivir rcts at www.clinicaltrials.gov, www.who.int/ictrp/about/en/, and www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/. a special twitter search was performed using the advanced search setting. databases were searched on may 5 th , 2020 and updated on may 22 nd , 2020.search strategies were adjusted for each engine using the following combination of keywords: remdesivir and (covid-19 or coronavirus or coronavirus disease or coronavirus disease-19 or severe acute respiratory syndrome or sars-cov-2) with no limitations for time or language. the pubmed strategy is included in the supplement. included studies specified remdesivir dosage and duration with at least one efficacy or harm outcome. we excluded studies all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020 assessment of risk of bias was performed independently by two investigators (vp, avh) using the cochrane rob 2.0 tool 8 for rcts, and robins-i tool 9 for cohort studies with a third all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.20109595 doi: medrxiv preprint reviewer (ap) resolving discrepancies when needed. case series lack a control group and cannot evaluate efficacy or harmful effects so risk of bias cannot be conducted.we reported our systematic review according to 2009 prisma guidelines. 10 effects of remdesivir on outcomes from individual studies were reported as hazard ratio (hr) or absolute risk difference (ard) and their 95 confidence intervals (cis) for dichotomous outcomes and mean differences (md) and their 95%cis for continuous outcomes. inverse variance random effect meta-analyses were performed when outcome data was available for at least two studies judged to be homogeneous about study characteristics. between study variance tau 2 was calculated with the paule-mandel method. effects of meta-analyses were reported as rrs and their 95%cis, and heterogeneity of effects among studies was quantified with the i 2 statistic (an i 2 >60% means high heterogeneity of effects).because this was a systematic review of published studies, no patients were involved in setting the research question or the outcome measures; thus, no ethics approval was required.we identified 612 records in our searches. after removing duplicates, 553 articles were screened for eligibility by reviewing titles and abstracts. among the records screened, 544 were excluded and nine full-text articles were further assessed for eligibility ( figure 1 ). review of full text articles led to the exclusion of five articles due to: duplicated data (n=3), remdesivir efficacy or safety was not the main aim of study (n=1), and no outcomes for patients receiving remdesivir (n=1). two rcts (n=1300) and two case series (n=88) were included in the final analysis. 11, 12, 13, 14 one remdesivir rct planned to be performed in china for patients with mild and moderate covid-19 (nct04252664) was suspended on april 15 th 2020 because no eligible patients could be enrolled to the study. 15 characteristics of four included studies are shown in table 1 .all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. remdesivir 200 mg on day one, followed by 100mg iv once-daily for nine more days vs. placebo in adults with rt-pcr confirmed sars-cov-2 infection, pneumonia, and respiratory insufficiency in wuhan, china (table 1) . 11 the primary outcome was the time to clinical improvement within 28 days after randomization or discharged alive from the hospital, whichever came first. clinical improvement was defined as a decline of two points using a 6point ordinal severity scale (table 1 ). this scale was modified from a 7-point ordinal severity scale used by the lopinavir/ritonavir rct by cao et al, 16 which has been used in previous influenza studies by wang. et due to higher occurrence of aes leading to drug discontinuation vs. placebo (12% vs 5%), the trial was stopped early, with 236 recruited patients and a statistical power of 56%. authors mentioned that they followed specific termination criteria, but the criteria are not available in the protocol. 19 some imbalances existed at enrollment between arms, including more patients with hypertension, diabetes, or coronary artery disease in the remdesivir arm. also, more patients in the control group than in the remdesivir arm had been symptomatic for ≤ 10 days at the time of starting remdesivir or placebo treatment.the multicenter beigel et al. actt-1 rct (nct04280705) evaluated remdesivir 200 mg iv on day 1, followed by a 100mg iv once-daily for nine more days vs. placebo in adults with rt-pcr confirmed sars-cov-2 infection, pneumonia, and respiratory insufficiency (table 1) . 12, 20 according to historical changes made to the trial at clinicaltrials.gov, on february 20 th 2020, its primary outcome was the percentage of subjects reporting each severity rating on the aforementioned 7-point ordinal scale from cao et al at 15 days. 16 on march 20 th 2020, the primary outcome was changed to a new 8-point ordinal severity scale, in which a subdivision was made on hospitalized patients (i.e. 5=hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygenrequiring ongoing medical care, and 6=hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen -no longer requires ongoing medical care) ( table 1) . 16 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.20109595 doi: medrxiv preprint on march 22 nd 2020, blinded statisticians recommended changing again the outcome to time to recovery, which was defined as the first day during the 28 days after enrollment on which a patient satisfied category 1, 2 or 3 in the 8-point category scale. 12 this trial was stopped on april 29 th 2020, given that its safety monitoring board decided to release preliminary results, pointing out that the primary efficacy endpoint had been achieved. 21 at that moment, 1063 had been recruited, and 482 recoveries (exceeding the number needed for the trial) and 81 deaths had been entered to the database. 12 no substantial imbalances in baseline characteristics were observed between the remdesivir group and the placebo group.the case series by grein et al 13 was conducted on a multinational basis. all 53 patients received remdesivir 200 mg iv on day one, followed by a 100mg iv once-daily for nine more days as compassionate use in rt-pcr confirmed covid-19 patients, with oxygen saturation <94%, and a follow up of 28 days. clinical improvement (live discharge from the hospital, a decrease of at least two points from baseline on the modified 6-point ordinal severity scale) 18 and key clinical events (changes in oxygen support, aes, discharge, deaths) were recorded. in this study, the mean age was 64 (48 to 71) years and 75% were male. about 60% patients had hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia and asthma and most of patients were either on low flow oxygen support or invasive ventilation (i.e. categories 3 and 5 from the 6-point scale). patients, with oxygen saturation <94% or mechanically ventilated or news2 score ≥ 4. 14 patients received a loading iv dose of 200 mg of remdesivir on day one and then 100 mg iv daily dose through day two to ten to assess changes on patient hospitalization status on day 10 and 28. they used the 7-point ordinal severity scale used by cao et al. 16 in this study, the median age was 63 (51 to 69) years with 74% male, and 9% had diabetes, 34% hypertension, 9% obesity and 3% cancer. eighteen patients were in the icu and 17 patients in an infectious disease ward.we merged the 6-point severity scale used in wang et al. and the 8-point severity scale used in beigel et al. into 5 ordinal categories (outpatient; hospitalized, non-oxygen user; hospitalized, oxygen user non-invasive; hospitalized, invasive ventilation; and death). there was no reduction all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 0.63 to 0.94) ( figure s1 ). in acct-1, sae were present in 21.1% vs. 27% in remdesivir and placebo, respectively. the most common saes were acute respiratory failure, hypotension, viral pneumonia and acute kidney injury, more frequent in the placebo arm. grein et al. reported 23% of sae, most commonly multiple organ failure, septic shock, kidney injury and hypotension with an 8% drug discontinuation rate. 13 there was no effect of remdesivir in hospitalization without oxygen or with oxygen support/noninvasive ventilation in both rcts ( figures s2 and s3 ). there was a higher proportion of discharged patients with remdesivir ( figure s4 ), and there was no different in treatment discontinuation ( figure s5 ). there was no difference in aes in the two rcts (rr 0.94, 95%ci 0.81 to 1.10) ( figure s6 ). no effect of remdesivir was found on specific aes such as anemia, elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia, hypoalbuminemia, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism or renal impairment (figures s7 to s13).antinori et al. reported that 23% of ae led to drug discontinuation but with no further description. 14 grein et al reported 60% for ae and the most prevalent were elevated liver enzymes (23%), diarrhea (9%) and rash (8%). 13 antinori et al. reported elevated liver enzymes in 43% of patients, followed by acute kidney injury (23%) and elevated bilirubin levels (20%). 14 none of the studies documented radiological progression or viral clearance at follow up.the risk of bias of each of the 2 rcts are shown in figure s14 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. in adult, hospitalized, rt-pcr confirmed covid-19 patients with respiratory insufficiency or pneumonia, there was scarce data on efficacy and safety associated with the use of 10-day remdesivir regimens. rcts used a common treatment regimen and a true placebo control. there were substantial differences between the two case series in the magnitude of their outcomes.there were some differences in the scales used to assess outcomes across studies as shown in 12, 13 these scales were strongly correlated, and that allowed us to formally group those scale categories in five in order to perform our metaanalyses.according to the emergency use authorization (eua) by the fda on may 1 st 2020 32 , it was reasonable to believe that remdesivir may be effective in treating covid-19, and that, when used under the conditions described in the eua, the known and potential benefits of remdesivir outweigh the known and potential risks of such products. this eua allows to use remdesivir under the control of the us government, to treat adults and children with suspected or laboratory all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ≤ 94% on room air, requiring supplemental oxygen, mv, or ecmo, in an in-hospital setting intravenously, and in doses described in the authorized fact sheet. 7 we need the 29-day follow up analyses of the actt in order to reach more definitive conclusions. patients may ask specifically for remdesivir therapy because of the eua and feel a failure to do so a substandard practice. similarly, there is a risk that the benefits and harms of remdesivir will remain unknown if other remdesivir rcts vs. placebo are stopped and substituted with trials where remdesivir becomes the standard of care and other experimental drugs are added onto remdesivir versus remdesivir alone.our systematic review has several strengths. we ran a recent and extensive systematic search in several engines and websites, and we did not restrict by language. we found commonalities across studies: all studies were in adult, hospitalized patients with severe covid-19, in particular with pneumonia and respiratory insufficiency. all four studies evaluated the same dose and duration of remdesivir (200 mg iv the first day and then 100mg iv qd for nine more days), and the two rcts were compared to placebo. we also systematically searched for worldwide ongoing rcts and ongoing systematic reviews in prospero that can be found in table 3 .some limitations can be highlighted. first, the number of rcts was scarce, and the reporting of the actt-1 is based on 15-day outcomes of the totality of recruited patients. second, wang et al. rct was stopped early for presence of higher proportion of adverse events leading to drug discontinuation in an unplanned interim analysis 11 .third, our meta-analyses for primary outcomes and secondary outcomes were based only on two rcts; however, we used outcomes similar time points of follow up and re-categorized heterogeneous ordinal outcome scales into five categories. finally, all studies included patients within 10 to 15 days of when symptoms began. remdesivir antiviral activity should be the highest during the first few days of active viral multiplication, as supported by a study performed in monkeys where early administration of remdesivir prevent progression to pneumonia after sars-cov-2 innoculation. 6 there is paucity of adequately powered and fully reported rcts evaluating efficacy and harms of remdesivir use in adult, hospitalized, severely-ill covid-19 patients. one rct was stopped early without a clear description of the reasons and the largest actt-1 altered their primary all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.20109595 doi: medrxiv preprint 1 5 tables   table 1 . description of characteristics of included studies grein et al. 13 antinori et al 14 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. supportive care or other therapeutic methods all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.20109595 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 1 3 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.20109595 doi: medrxiv preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.20109595 doi: medrxiv preprintprevious human coronaviruses, which resulted in high-morbidity (and mortality), such as the acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov or sars-1) in 2003 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012, have driven the development of compounds that could potentially be active against the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) (caused by the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2). [1] [2] [3] [4] approximately 15% of the patients with confirmed covid-19 exhibit severe symptoms and require hospitalization, and many of them requiring hospitalization may need intensive care resources. 5 the current number of cases worldwide is over five million, with over 275,000 deaths reported as of may 2020. 6 case fatality (mortality) rates reported to date based on laboratory confirmed cases are likely to overestimate the actual covid-19 mortality rate as they did not include mild or asymptomatic cases that have recovered. ideally, the infection fatality rate should be reported as comprehensive data is available which would be important to inform planning and response.currently, no treatment nor prophylaxis has proven to be effective in covid-19, and patients receive either symptomatic treatment for milder presentations or more advanced life-support strategies in moderate to severe cases. these include oxygenation strategies in a hospitalized icu setting. severe disease results in a rapid progression of respiratory failure that begins usually right after dyspnea (breathing difficulties) and hypoxemia. a cytokine release storm with elevated blood inflammatory markers is a cardinal feature and progression to severe illness can result in severe organ failure with forms of kidney, liver, and cardiac pathology and injury and indications of coagulopathy and potential shock. as the global community eagerly awaits credible scientific solutions for this pandemic, researchers and scientists are working hard to identify effective therapeutic and preventive strategies for covid-19.recent research findings on the possible therapeutics such as antivirals, antimalarials such as chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, in covid-19 patients have been mostly vague, inconclusive or negative, typically underpinned by very low-quality research methodologies and inadequate reporting.7,8 the very poor methodological quality thus far across the covid-19 research landscape raises many concerns as the medical research community and governments urgently seek an effective prophylactic or therapeutic. the methodologies and reporting in these studies have been suboptimal. the randomized controlled trials (rcts) have been plagued with sub-optimal randomization, a lack of allocation concealment, no or questionable blinding, small sample sizes, small event numbers, and sparse reporting. the observational studies have been confounded, had small sample sizes, small numbers of events, sub-optimal or absent statistical adjustments, matching (propensity score approach), stratification, or any methodological technique that could mitigate the risk of biased estimates of effect. precious time and vast amount of resources are potentially being squandered as the trustworthy, robust, high-quality research that is needed for evidence-informed decision-making and policy decisions is side-lined.this urgency of clinical research has included the repurposing of existing therapies for other diseases based on indirect evidence. for example, the use of corticosteroids in covid-19 is based on the therapeutic benefit seen in randomized controlled trials (rcts) of corticosteroid use in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards)9-11. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20110932 doi: medrxiv preprint initial evidence on the apparent efficacy of remdesivir against middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) and sars-cov-2 from in-vitro models helped remdesivir gain attention as a possible therapeutic agent.12,13 prior to the pandemic, remdesivir was an unapproved investigational product. a recent observational study examining the compassionate use of remdesivir in patients with severe covid-19 revealed that 68% of patients had clinical improvement. 14 in april, the first rct of remdesivir in patients with severe covid-19 was published; however, it was not able to identify clinical benefit and had a small sample size and failed to reach the enrolment target.in early may 2020, the us federal drug administration (fda) authorized the use of remdesivir for the treatment of individuals with severe covid-19 based on preliminary data from the actt-1 study. due to the rapid spread of covid-19 with its concerning morbidity and mortality, it is unlikely we will see further randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials in light of existing data. given the urgency for an effective therapeutic, we conducted a rapid review of the existing medical research literature assessing studies using remdesivir in rcts in patients with covid-19.15, 16 we were alert to and considered all studies published since the global pandemic began in january 2020, while recognizing that the two rcts would likely comprise our final cohort of included studies.medline and embase electronic databases were searched from january 1st, 2020, to may 22nd, 2020, using a mix of keywords such as 'covid-19' and 'remdesivir along with any relevant variants. the search did use an rct filter (see appendix for medline search example). pubmed was also searched daily during this period to rapidly assess any emerging publications. evidence was considered from additional sources, including google scholar and online preprint servers, that pre-publish studies not yet having completed the peer-review process. we also searched the largest clinical medicine preprint repository, medrxiv.org.two reviewers independently and in duplicate, extracted relevant data, and assessed risk of bias using the cochrane risk of bias tool for rcts. 17 we adopted response options for risk of bias to be 'yes', 'probably yes', 'probably no', and 'no', thereby removing the 'unclear' response often reported by reviewers. the use of the 'unclear' response frequently hampers a more definitive interpretation of risk of bias. 18we used fixed-effect (inverse-variance) modeling for all analyses (mantel-haenszel risk ratio (rr) for dichotomous outcomes and mean difference (md) for continuous variables). 19 our intended modelling decision made a priori was based on the potential small number of rcts we would deem all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20110932 doi: medrxiv preprint eligible and thus the decision to model whereby more weight would be given to larger sample sized studies. we would however revert to a random-effects approach should the number of uncovered rcts be high (though we did not anticipate this). when data were reported as medians and interquartile ranges, we would convert them to means and standard deviations for meta-analytical pooling. 20 we also planned to conduct sensitivity analyses based on random and fixed effect modeling.review manager 5.3 was used to conduct the meta-analysis. 21 we assessed heterogeneity by visual inspection of forest plots, a cochrane chi-square statistical test for heterogeneity, and the i2 statistic (with >50% considered as significant heterogeneity warranting exploration and explaining). 22 we report 95% confidence interval (ci) measures of uncertainty with presented estimates of effect. to estimate the baseline risk in computing the absolute effects, we used the control event rate. to compute the absolute effect, we multiplied the baseline risk by the relative effect (and 95% cis).we utilized the grading of recommendations assessment, development, and evaluation (grade) approach to rate the certainty of the evidence for each outcome and the entire body of evidence. 23 this outcome centric approach for rating effect estimate certainty considers the body of evidence via risk of bias, imprecision, inconsistency (heterogeneity), indirectness, and publication bias domains when assessing rcts.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20110932 doi: medrxiv preprint abbreviations used: iqr-interquartile range, sd-standard deviation, serious adverse events a detailed number of patients with serious adverse events footnote: * kaplan-meier estimator was used to calculate the mortality rates due to patients still in follow-up before publication of preliminary results. our decision was guided by the study authors reporting the hazard ratio that was non-significant for mortality, and this did not correspond to the raw mortality data in the outcomes table.the search uncovered two rct citations, and with rapid screening and review, those two were deemed eligible to inform the final review (table 1) .15,16 one was a multicenter study conducted in china, and the second study was an international, multicenter trial lead by the national institutes of health (niaid/nih) of the usa. the ages ranged from 58 years old to 66 years old, and the percentage of males ranged from 56% to 65%. there were 135 deaths out of a total of 1,299 enrolled patients.both rcts were judged to be of a low-moderate risk of biased estimates 15, 16 of effect, despite the study reported by biegel having a change in the primary outcome before unblinding, and the loss of data reported due to publication of preliminary results before full follow-up was completed on all study participants. otherwise, the methodologies were robust, and reporting was adequate. we also all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20110932 doi: medrxiv preprint developed no funnel plots or statistical tests for publication bias due to the limited interpretability when the study number is less than the optimal threshold of 10.24the two studies reported on mortality, but the wang study15 reported 28-day mortality, and the biegel study16 only reported on 14-day mortality. due to the biegel study reporting preliminary results, with many subjects still within the follow-up phase of the trial, the mortality estimates were reported on the kaplan-meier estimator.based on our reading of the reported mortality findings by biegel16 and the pooling of the 14-day mortality from the biegel16 study with kaplan-meier estimates to the wang15 mortality data (n=1,141 patients), there was a significant reduction of mortality in patients who received remdesivir compared to the control group (rr 0·69, 95% ci 0·49 to 0·99), p<0.05; i2 = 52%; fixed-effect modeling, low certainty) (figure 1 ). absolute effects were 35 fewer deaths per 1,000 affected individuals (54 fewer to 1 fewer) (grade evidence profile table 2 ). sensitivity analysis using random-effects modeling and the use of intention to treat (itt) population for biegel16, or the use of the sample size reported as available for analysis, reveals no difference in direction or magnitude of risk estimates. in fact, when the raw mortality data is utilized in fixed-effect modelling with the reported full sample size, we found a more significant reduction in mortality due to remdesivir (rr 0.67, 95% ci 0.47 to 0.96). however, as indicated, we modelled based on the kaplan-meier estimator. two studies (n=1,299) reported on time to clinical improvement and revealed significant improvement of time to clinical improvement in patients who received remdesivir compared to the control group (mean difference (md) -3·95 days, 95% ci -4.05 days to -3.86 days), p=0.11; i2 = 97%; fixed-effect modeling, moderate certainty) (figure 1 ). absolute effects were 3·95 fewer days (4.05 fewer days to 3.86 fewer days) (grade evidence profile table 2 ). sensitivity analysis using random-effect modeling reveals a wider confidence interval but no difference in the direction of risk estimates.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. two studies (n=1,299) reported on the number of patients with adverse events and revealed a significant reduction in serious adverse events in patients who received remdesivir compared to the control group (rr 0·77, 95% ci 0·63 to 0·94), p=0.01; i2 = 0%; fixed-effect modeling, moderate certainty) (figure 3 ). absolute effects were 62 fewer people with adverse events per 1,000 affected individuals (99 fewer to 16 fewer) (grade evidence profile table 2 ). sensitivity analysis using random-effects modeling reveals no difference in the direction of risk estimates.two studies (n=1,299) reported on the number of patients with all adverse events and revealed a significant reduction in serious adverse events in patients who received remdesivir compared to the control group (rr 0·87, 95% ci 0·79 to 0·96), p<0.01; i2 = 68%; fixed-effects modeling, moderate certainty) ( figure 4a ). absolute effects were 79 fewer people with adverse events per 1,000 affected individuals (127 fewer to 24 fewer) (grade evidence profile table 2 ). sensitivity analysis using random-effects modeling reveals a wider confidence interval that crosses into harms ( figure 4b ). (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. c. downgraded once due to inconsistency, elevated i2 of 97%, cochrane q test p<0.00001, ois met (n=400 and above), wide 95% ci but could be explained by the elevated heterogeneity; one downgrade as heterogeneity could be explained in part by locations of trials, and thus variation in methods and conduct, differences in standard of care but the heterogeneity is high and must be considered d. high i2 68%the two randomized-controlled trial studies presented in this systematic review focused on remdesivir use in hospitalized covid-19 patients. our pooled analysis reveals that remdesivir significantly reduces mortality, time to clinical improvement, the number of people with serious adverse events, and the number of people with any adverse events.the grade quality of evidence (also known as certainty or confidence in estimates of effect) reflects the extent of our certainty or confidence that the estimates of an effect are adequate to support a particular decision or recommendation. 23 we found some issues applying grade with indirectness, imprecision, and inconsistency across the body of evidence for the analyzed patientimportant outcomes. we have low certainty or confidence in the range of mortality effects despite reportedly significant benefits of a decrease in mortality, with 37 fewer deaths per 1,000, with a range from 61 fewer to 1 fewer death; the range of mortality absolute risk effect ranges from a 51% reduction to a 1% reduction of risk. the low certainty in the risk of mortality estimates are due to the serious concerns with imprecision due to a small number of events, and indirectness due to the pooling of 14 day and 28-day mortality results. we made the judgement to pool mortality data based on the hazard ratio kaplan-meier data and not simply the raw data reported in table 2 (32 in remdesivir vs 54 in placebo with samples sizes of 538 and 521 respectively; incidentally, mortality reductions would have been even more favourable). we employed a fix-effect model given the small number of studies and a decision to focus more weight on the study with the larger sample size (contributes more information).we are moderately confident remdesivir in patients hospitalized with covid-19 leads to faster clinical improvement, with an important and significant decrease in time to clinical improvement using remdesivir of 3.95 fewer days, ranging from 4.05 fewer to 3.86 fewer days. we are highly confident in an important and significant decrease in severe adverse events with the use of remdesivir in the individuals hospitalized with covid-19, with 62 fewer severe events per 1,000 ranging from 99 fewer to 16 fewer serious adverse events.using random effect modelling did not change the pooled point estimates or confidence intervals appreciably in the context of harms and benefits of the intervention for all reported outcomes, except for all adverse events. for all adverse events, the use of random-effects modeling led to a confidence interval that spanned harms and benefits; with fixed-effect modeling, the confidence interval was wholly in the benefits portion, leading us to be moderately certain in a modest reduction in adverse events. given the reduction in imprecision for all adverse events outcome, the grade assessment was moderate with fixed effect modeling and low with random-effects modeling.our study has several strengths. firstly, we assessed the eligibility of all studies and the risk of bias independently and in duplicate. we intended the summary pooling of the data had we judged that the data was reliable enough to allow a meaningful pooled estimate of effect. additionally, we intended the use of the grade approach to assess the certainty or quality of the evidence. our analysis of the available literature had significant limitations, including the paucity of studies available for analysis. the research evidence on the benefits of remdesivir in covid-19 is however, in our judgement, based on two rigorous multicenter trials.additionally, there was significant heterogeneity in the time to clinical improvement, which could be due to the location of the studies and the differences in standard of care between the studies that were conducted at different periods in the context of the evolving evidence landscape during the pandemic. timing of initiation of remdesivir may also impact clinical outcomes, with patients with more severe disease being less likely to survive as seen in the actt-1 subgroups, however we were unable to pool data according to these subgroups.due to the public health emergency of the covid-19 pandemic, there likely will not be any additional randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial to determine remdesivir's efficacy in patients with covid-19, and instead, it would be incorporated into standard of care. in addition, remdesivir appears to reduce the time to clinical improvement and the number of serious adverse events and can ameliorate the conditions at many overwhelmed hospitals facing the pandemic patient surges.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the primary concern present in the context of the current crisis with continued lack of a viable treatment option in patients suffering from sars-cov-2 life-threatening respiratory failure, indeed persists. we are still left with questions, and clinicians must interpret this pooled evidence with caution, though very promising. further research on the use of other therapeutic agents in covid-19 patients is urgently needed and it is more likely that remdesivir would be of most utility when used in combination with other potential therapeutics (based on hopefully positive findings from ongoing studies). such robust studies should be adequately powered rcts, with longer durations of follow-up, that are methodologically superior, and focuses on harm outcomes.the primary concern present in the context of the current crisis with continued lack of a viable treatment option in patients suffering from sars-cov-2 life-threatening respiratory failure, indeed persists. we are still left with questions, and clinicians must interpret this pooled evidence with caution, though these data are very promising. further research on the use of other therapeutic agents in covid-19 patients is urgently needed and it is more likely that remdesivir would be of most utility when used in combination with other potential therapeutics (based on hopefully positive findings from ongoing studies), or perhaps when used earlier in the disease course. such robust studies should be adequately powered rcts with longer durations of follow-up, sound methodology and with focuses on harm outcomes.in closing, we remind that safety of the patient suffering from covid19 is a key priority to improve the quality of care in the provision of health services. currently, no therapeutic option has been shown to be effective (though remdesivir is presently revealing promise as one option likely in conjunction with another treatment (s)) and that conclusively allows for safe and effective use to mitigate or eliminate the causative agent of covid-19; the very same can be said about prophylaxis whereby approximately 200 therapeutic options or their combinations are being investigated in more than 1,700 clinical trials. severely ill patients with covid-19, frequently older adults and with established comorbidities, are being given multiple concomitant medications and without considering possible adverse events and interactions. this is an area of research that is being overlooked and the potential toxicity due to concomitant treatments must be urgently addressed. we again remind that the use of medications such as chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine (alone or in combination with azithromycin), ivermectin, antivirals, and immunomodulators, among others, should be considered within the context of patient consented, randomized clinical trials that evaluate their safety and efficacy. ensuring the safety of patients with covid-19 requires information and surveillance systems that include standardized procedures in order to report adverse events and interactions according to local settings and public health reporting regulations. if these do not exist, they must be implemented immediately.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. .at first, an unknown case of pneumonia was detected in wuhan, china, and was communicated to the world health organization (who) country office, china, on 31 december 2019. after a thorough examination, it was identified as a coronavirus (cov), a zoonotic virus that causes a range of illnesses including middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). sars, due to sars-cov was initially identified in 2002, while mers emerged in 2012, which was caused by mers-cov infection. the most recent coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), provisionally called 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), was never known to be identified in humans previously. however, the outbreak did not confine to china, rapidly spread to other parts of the world and soon who has recognized 2019-ncov as pandemic on 11 march 2020. besides, it is also the seventh and newest member of the coronavirus which reports to be infectious to humans . currently, 4,647,961 confirmed cases and 308,985 total deaths due to 2019-ncov had been reported worldwide as on 04 may 2020 (who). in india, the latest statistics by the ministry of health and family welfare have reported 85,940 and 30,153 total confirmed cases and deaths respectively (www.mohfw.gov.in).the contagious virus 2019-ncov can spread primarily through the viral droplets of saliva and discharges from the nose of the infected person while coughing or sneezing and also touching contaminated surfaces (pant et al., 2020) . the typical viral infection symptoms of 2019-ncov are dry cough, running nose, fever, shortness of breath in majority of cases. some cases reported severe conditions such as pneumonia, severe acute respiratory distress syndrome, kidney failure with fatal consequences (elfiky, 2020) . however, as of now, there is no vaccine against this virus, which is the cause of the utmost trepidation globally. nevertheless, the scientific fraternity all over the world has commenced with assiduous research work to understand the nature of virus, which may subsequently lead to the discovery of medicine and vaccine. however, several researchers have recognized that to investigate the routes of viral spread among humans, the site of activation must be identified. this led to identify the sites of various viruses including influenza family virus which enable uninterrupted spread of virus (hasan et al., 2020) .the first line of treatment is targeted to treat the symptoms of the disease. most of the symptoms of individuals affected with 2019-ncov were similar to influenza, and both viruses cause respiratory issues. influenza is a communicable disease caused by the influenza virus. this rna virus contains seven genera: influenzavirus a, influenzavirus b, influenzavirus c, influenzavirus d, isavirus, thogotovirus, and quaranjavirus. among these, influenzavirus a, influenzavirus b, influenzavirus c can infect humans. the influenzavirus a virus is the most virulent human pathogens and can cause flu pandemics . in humans, some of the serotypes which are known to cause pandemic deaths are h1n1 (known to cause spanish flu and swine flu), h1n2 (endemic in humans and pigs), h2n2 (asian flu), h3n2 (hong kong flu), h5n1 (bird flu), h7n7 (unusual zoonotic potential), and h7n2 (low pathogenicity avian influenza virus) (hay et al., 2001) .the study on viral composition revealed that the hemagglutinin-esterase (he) glycoprotein gene is found in the beta coronaviruses, and this he gene of coronaviruses have sequence homology with influenza he glycoprotein and may reflect early recombination between the two viruses (luytjes et al., 1988) . additionally, coronavirus spike (s) protiens can get attached to the human cell (especially lungs) surfaces via angiotensin converting enzyme (ace2) receptors. primarily, s1/s2 site in the coronavirus s protein is subjected to proteolytic cleavage by host proteases (trypsin and furin). later, cleavage of s2' site occurs which releases fusion peptide and triggers the activation of membrane fusion mechanism (boopathi et al., 2020) . hence, it can be assumed that the mode of action of the drugs used in the treatment of influenza can work successfully in the same line to treat 2019-ncov. therefore, the clinical trials conducted revealed that most of the drugs inhibit the critical components of the 2019-ncov life cycle. the lifecycle includes viral entry into the host cell, viral replication, and viral rna synthesis (boopathi et al., 2020) . the previous research exertions to develop the anti-viral drugs against the coronaviridae family receptors via, ace2, rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and the main protease (m pro , also called 3clpro) proteins as potential drug targets. among, m pro as an attractive drug target among coronaviruses family which is essential and have a signiant role in processing the polyproteins that are translated from the viral rna (anand et al., 2003; hilgenfeld, 2014; ton et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . however, the m pro protein sequence of 2019-ncov is similar to the sequences of sars-cov and mers-cov proteins, which are mainly involved in the replication cycle (harrison, 2020) . therefore, obstruction in the replication cycle may prove a suitable solution for the drug quest.since no specific therapy for 2019-ncov is at-hand and considering public health priority, an immediate and effectual vaccine/drug is a crucial requisite. gilead sciences, inc., united states (us), has started the first clinical trial to investigate the efficacy of remdesivir, an adenosine analog which can cause pre-mature rna termination of the nascent viral rna. a double-blinded, placebo-controlled study (remdesivir 200 mg intravenously administered for ten days, followed by 100 mg daily during hospitalization) was initiated along with, two phase-3 open-label randomized controlled trials simultaneously (https://www.pulmonologyadvisor.com/home/topics/ $9#lung-infection/clinical-trials-underway-to-test-remdesivir-forcovid-19/;https://www.gilead.com/purpose/advancing-globalhealth/covid-19). however, remdesivir has been accounted for to treat the first case of 2019-ncov in the us effectively (holshue et al., 2020) .various provinces of china and india have initiated trials using chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, known anti-malarial agent, as a heme polymerase inhibitor (rathi et al., 2020) . it functions as a virus blocking agent via augmenting the endosomal, which is required for cell fusion and also by interfering with the glycosylation process of the cellular receptors of sars-cov (vincent et al., 2005) . multiple types of studies (double blind, phase 3, randomized, are at the initiation stage of recruiting study subjects. (http://www.chictr. org.cn/showproj.aspx?proj=48880).favipiravir an antiviral drug, known to effectively inhibit the 2019-ncov infection in vero e6 cells. an open-label nonrandomized control study was conducted in the national clinical research centre for infectious diseases shenzhen, china, to assess the effectiveness of favipiravir in 2019-ncov treatment. the treatment showed significant assistance in terms of health progress by faster viral clearance and with further research, this can be considered as a standard treatment to combat the sars-cov-2 infection (cai et al., 2020) . further, a randomized controlled trial of combined treatment of favipiravir and baloxavir marboxil also carried out in zhejiang, china (http://www.chictr.org.cn/showprojen. aspx?$9#proj=49013). wang et al. (2020) have evaluated seven antiviral drugs against a clinical isolate of 2019-ncov in vitro. among the seven tested drugs, high concentrations of three drugs, i.e. ribavirin, penciclovir, and favipiravir, shown to lower the viral infection. nafamostat, a potent inhibitor of mers-cov, was inhibitive against the 2019-ncov infection since it prevents membrane fusion. nitazoxanide, an anti-protozoal agent having potential antiviral property against a wide range of coronaviruses also inhibited the 2019-ncov at a low-micromolar concentration. further, remdesivir and chloroquine were also found to be potently blocking virus infection at low-micromolar concentration.other antiviral drugs viz., oseltamivir, and zanamivir, which are neuraminidase inhibitors, are also under clinical trials. efficacy of oseltamivir (individually and in combination with other drugs) has been under interventional (phase 3, clinical) trial to treat the 2019-ncov pneumonia in china and thailand (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04261270; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04303299). clinical trials for the various antiviral drugs are ongoing to find an effective treatment for 2019-ncov. however, since the time-period estimated for the completion of the trials is too long, bioinformatics technology used to assess the efficacy of each drug individually at a molecular level and in complex with multiple probabilities. hence, in view of the complex mechanisms associated with various drugs, there is a need to identify the drug which targets viral replication especially on the m pro enzyme of 2019-ncov. the most suitable drug/s predicted using bioinformatics tools and techniques may be used for further trials and may be prescribed for 2019-ncov patients. therefore, the current aim of the study is to dock the antiviral drugs (1) remdesivir (2) chloroquine (3) favipiravir (4) baloxavir marboxil (5) ribavirin (6) penciclovir (7) nafamostat (8) nitazoxanide (9) oseltamivir and (10) zanamivir with m pro to understand their effectiveness against 2019-ncov. the findings of the present study with detailed molecular level empathetic of m pro with potentiality-identified inhibitors might help in rational drug design to combat covid-19.software and program used for the study involved pymol (delano scientific llc, palo alto, california, usa) and schrodinger maestro 2020-1 (academic license) (maestro, schr€ odinger, llc, new york, ny, 2020) to visualize and modify receptor and inhibitor structures. mega x utilized for multiple sequences and phylogenic analyses. autodock 4.2 (the scripps research institute, la jolla, san diego, usa) was used for the preliminary docking program in this study. the inhibitor pdbqt file format was prepared, and the grid box size was determined using autodock tools version 1.5.4 (adt; scripps research institute, la jolla, san diego, usa).according to the centers for disease control and prevention: cdc (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/types.html) and world health organization: who (https://www.who.int/healthtopics/coronavirus) the coronaviruses round outer surface has crown-like spikes. in humans, coronaviruses were first identified in the mid of 1960s (killerby et al., 2018) around the globe and primary sub-groupings of coronaviruses are known as alpha, beta, gamma, and delta. commonly infective human coronaviruses are 229e (alpha), nl63 (alpha), oc43 (beta), and hku1 (beta). in last two decades sars-cov (2002) and mers-cov (2013) have evolved and now in 2019-2020, the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) has emerged as a pandemic outbreak (chen, 2020; lu et al., 2020; yang et al., 2020; yu et al., 2020) . recently, scientific reports have suggested that 2019-ncov was evaluated from sars-cov and to be viewed as a new human-infective beta-coronavirus killerby et al., 2018; yang et al., 2020) .genome sequence comparison is essential to analyses the evolutionary relationship of viral genomes. with the swift growth of sequence and structure databanks, in silico approaches usually enforced to ascertain the functions and structures of unannotated sequences, and to explore the relationships between sequences. in this study, we retrieved seven m pro fasta sequence of coronaviruses (1) 229e: agw80947 (2) nl63: agt51371 (3) oc43: atp16753 (4) hku1: p0c6u4 (5) mers-cov: aum60013 (6) sars-cov: aay88865 and (7) 2019-ncov: yp_009725295 from ncbi viral genome database to discover the evolutionary relationship by phylogenetic tree construction was using mega x tool (felsenstein, 1985; kumar, stecher, et al., 2018) . for in silico analysis the first reported m pro sequence from china, 2019-ncov of yp_009725295 selected as a reference sequence.for the sequence yp_009725295, blastp analysis was performed to find the 3 d structure of the reference 2019-ncov m pro against the protein data bank (pdb). the co-crystal structure of 2019-ncov (pdb id: 6lu7) with an n3 peptide inhibitor (n-[(5-methylisoxazol-3-yl) carbonyl] alanyl-l-valyln$1$-((1r,2z) à4-(benzyloxy) à4oxo-1-f[(3r)-2-oxopyrrolidin-3-yl] methylg but-2-enyl) -l-leucinamide) (jin et al., 2020) with $306 amino acids have 100% identity with 2019-ncov m pro and was chosen as a reference structure for further molecular docking analysis. for validation, the obtained sequence and structure results of a similar sequence were equated with clustalx (higgins & sharp, 1988 ) by performing pairwise sequence alignment with a 6lu7 amino acid sequence. the active-site residues of the 6lu7 m pro complex with n3 were visualized by using pymol.so far, there is no particular antibody and medications against 2019-ncov. specialists are presently taking a shot at various antiviral drugs, immunotherapies, and immunizations that are being researched to discover the potential treatment for 2019-ncov. as of now, countless fda approved antiviral agents are in use for the treatment of 2019-ncov viral infection. however, numerous examples exist in which the utilization of a second antiviral agent would be advantageous because it would permit the choice of either option or a combination therapeutic approach. as 2019-ncov infections have risen, the focus on encoded proteases to discover potent antiviral medications are in progress. recent molecular studies have demonstrated that viral protease's existence pattern depends upon numerous infections by affecting the cleavage/catalyzing process of viral polyprotein antecedents (which are high molecular weight)/essential proteins important for assembly and morphogenesis of virus particles. most of the chosen protease inhibitors are utilized principally for the treatment of herpesvirus, human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), respiratory syncytial infection and flu a viruses, and can also be used for the treatment of 2019-ncov.in this scenario, sequence and structure analysis was performed for 2019-ncov m pro through blast, results revealed that m pro nucleotide sequence has $99% identity and $40% of query coverage with sars-cov. as mentioned in the introduction section, remdesivir, chloroquine, favipiravir, baloxavir marboxil, ribavirin, penciclovir, nafamostat, nitazoxanide, oseltamivir and zanamivir ae chosen for the molecular docking analysis and the same inhibitors retrieved from the pubchem database.molecular docking perceived in silico structure-based strategy is broadly utilized in drug design and discovery approaches. molecular docking empowers to identify novel compounds of therapeutic interest for the emerging pandemic infectious outbreaks by predicting the inhibitor-receptor interactions.even though it initially evolved for assisting to understand the mechanism of molecular binding recognition among small compounds and receptor molecules, in recent years, uses and applications of molecular docking have profoundly changed to help in the rapid development of drug discovery (khandare et al., 2018; munikumar et al., 2019; pradhan et al., 2014) .three-dimensional structure of 2019-ncov m pro with n3 peptide (pdb id: 6lu7) was obtained from the protein data bank (pdb) (jin et al., 2020) for molecular docking analysis. a fully automated docking software tool, autodock 4.2, which is most widely used to study the receptor-ligand binding and interactions, was used for the docking of selected inhibitors with 2019-ncov m pro structure. the receptor and ligand files were denoted in pdbqt file format, a modified pdb format containing atomic charges, atom type definitions for ligands, and topological information (rotatable bonds). receptor molecule was initially fixed by adding polar hydrogen, kollman charges (azam & abbasi, 2013; morris et al., 2009) . selected inhibitor molecules were added with gasteiger charges (sliwoski et al., 2014) . autodock 4.2 allows setting a specific target site with the help of a grid box. the x, y, and z dimensions were set to 40 ã 40 ã 40, the x center, y center, and z center with a grid spacing of 1 å, keeping the receptor rigid and the ligand as a flexible molecule was adjusted by n3 peptide-binding site of the 6lu7 (jin et al., 2020) . the output for each inhibitor's conformations was analyzed using a stochastic lamarckian genetic algorithm (morris et al., 2009) . after characterizing the coupling site and receptor-ligand readiness, docking runs were propelled from the command prompt. the molecular interactions, the energy between every ligand and the receptor, was determined for the binding site, which expressed as affinity (kcal/mol) and favourable conformations. the 3 d visualization of docked structures was performed using a graphical user interface, maestro schrodinger 2020-1 (khandare et al., 2018; munikumar et al., 2019; umamaheswari et al., 2011) . further, molecular dynamics simulations were performed with outmost docked complex and co-crystal structure (native) for the stability was close to biologically relevant characteristics.molecular dynamics (md) simulations were carried out using the desmond 2018-4 simulations module of schr€ odinger llc. to simulate the outmost docked complex and native co-crystal with n3 peptide, a simple point charge (spc) of the hoh molecule model was accounted. alongside, orthorhombic periodic boundary box (x, y, and z-axis) conditions were set up to specify the shape and size of the complex unit buffered at 10 å distances. the docked complex was neutralized with the system electrically, by adding appropriate counter na þ /cl à ions to balance the system charge and were placed randomly in the solvated system. after building the solvated system, protein-ligand complex minimization and relaxation were performed under the constant number of atoms, pressure, temperature (npt) ensemble using desmond's minimization & relaxation protocol that consists of nine stages (vilar et al., 2011) . the stage 1: perceive the initial simulation setup parameters, stage 2: minimization with restraints on the solute, stage 3: minimization without any restraints, stage 4: simulate with berendsen nvt, t ¼ 10 k, small-time step, and restraints on solute heavy atoms, stage 5: simulate with berendsen npt, the parameter was fixed t ¼ 10 k, and restraints on solute heavy atoms, stage 6: solvate pocket, stage 7: simulate with berendsen npt and restraints on solute heavy atoms, stage 8: simulate with berendsen npt and no restraints, and stage 9: production time minimization at 100 ns with the periodic boundary conditions in the npt ensemble using opls 2005 force field parameters and each production of trajectories was configured and observed at 4.8 ps intervals (leimkuhler & sweet, 2004) .the behaviour of each md simulations trajectory files were analysed by using simulation quality analysis (sqa), simulation event analysis (sea) tools of desmond modules for calculating the potential energies, root-mean-square deviation (rmsd), root mean square fluctuation (rmsf), radius of gyration (rgyr), solvent-accessible surface area (sasa), and total intramolecular h-bonds contributing to the structural stability. the sqa and sea are useful parameters to qualitatively validate the complex system stability throughout the 100 ns run and protein changes at the simulated length of chemical time for the given temperature, pressure, and volume of the total simulation box.multiple sequence alignment of the retrieved m pro sequences was performed, and the phylogenetic tree was constructed using mega-x (felsenstein, 1985) . the evolutionary history was inferred by applying the maximum likelihood method and the jtt matrix-based model. it is found that the tree is having the highest log-likelihood of 3.186 ( figure. 1) with selected seven m pro sequences. the construction of initial tree(s) for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by enforcing with neighbor-join and bionj algorithms, and jtt model used for estimating matrix of pairwise distances to select the topology with superior log likelihood value. the constructed phylogeny tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site of sequence. the proportion of each sites in which at least one unambiguous base was present, in at least one sequence for each descendent clade, was shown next to each internal node in the tree. for interim datasets preparation, a total of 7444 pair-wise positions were constituted with seven m pro sequences for phylogeny analysis. the resultant trees were evaluated by 500 bootstrap replicates (felsenstein, 1985) .the alignment shows that amongst the seven m pro protein sequences identical with bat sars-cov, four sequences are from different human coronaviruses isolates, one from mers cov and one from bat sars cov isolate. notably, the 2019-ncov of m pro is identical (100%) with bat sars-cov and distantly related ($34%) to human coronavirus, 229e ( figure 1a ). results suggest that m pro of 2019-ncov was evolved from bat sars-cov.further, phylogenetic analysis is performed with 500 m pro protein sequence from the ncbi viral genome database (till 4 th may 2020) ( figure 1b) . the results show that a minimum of 51% evolutionary relationship was observed among the geographically distributed m pro protein sequences.the 2019-ncov is an enveloped positive-sense single-strand rna virus, infecting primarily respiratory system. it also infects the gastrointestinal epithelial cells, macrophages, and other cell types, thereby triggering the systemic changes and damage to many vital organs for instance lung, heart, liver, kidney and adrenal gland. anti-2019-ncov therapeutics could target several major viral pathogeneses, such as virus-cell interactions, virus entry, intracellular viral replication, and virus assembly and exit (lu, 2020; medhi et al., 2020) . the intracellular replication of 2019-ncov was mediated by "replicase" complex derived from virally coded polyprotein precursor of m pro (306 aa). 2019-ncov and sars-cov-2 m pro proteins share $99% identity in amino acid sequences and $100% binding site ( figure 2a) .importantly, m pro protein of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have a high degree of homology in three domains ( figure  2b ) (1) domain i (residues 8 to 101), (2) domain ii (residues 102 to 184) comprises of two-b-barrel fold similar to that of the chymotrypsin-type serine peptidases and, (3) domain iii (residues 201 to 300) has five a-helices and is connected to domain ii by a long loop (residues 185 to 200) (jin et al., 2020) .to validate the docking protocol docking and superimposing the co-crystal structures of the 2019-ncov m pro and sars cov m pro was done (figures 3 and 4) .at first, the docking was performed with the co-crystal structure of 2019-ncov i.e. m pro with n3 peptide and the docked complex was superimposed with the native co-crystal structure, m pro with n3 peptide complex, the superimposition has 0.923å rmsd, which precisely coincided with each other ( figure 3a) . whereas, n3 peptide have $98% identical interactions in a superimposed complex within a 4å region of molecular binding-site of domains i and ii ( figure 3b) .second, as we have found that 2019-ncov (pdb id: 6lu7) m pro have 100% sequence identity with bat sars-cov (pdb id: 2a5k), to validate the same using co-crystal structures, 2a5k with (5 s,8s,14r)-ethyl 11-(3-amino-3-oxopropyl)-8-benzyl-14-hydroxy-5-isobutyl-3,6,9,12-tetraoxo-1-phenyl-2-oxa-4,7,10,11-tetraazapentadecan-15-oate (aza) peptide (lee et al., 2005) , with docked m pro with n3 peptide complex was taken and superimposed ( figure 4a ). the resulted docked complex was superimposed with the native cocrystal structure, 2a5k with aza peptide, the superimposition has 1.029å rmsd, which precisely coincided with each other ( figure 4b ).third, superimposition has 0.095å rmsd with $100% of conserved binding site residues of docked complex of 6lu7-n3 and co-crystal stricture of 2a5k-aza was observed each other ( figure 3b ). further, validation of m pro binding pocket, we obtained 84 co-crystal protein sequence of 2019-ncov m pro from the pdb (till 4 may 2020) (supplementary figure 1) and performed multiple sequence analysis (msa) by exploring schrodinger software. the results revealed that, binding site residues are 100% conserved amongst the geographically distributed m pro protein sequences of 2019-ncov.the co-crystal m pro with n3 peptide positioned in the cleft between domain i and ii shares nine h-bonds with bond length (1) phe140:3.19å (2) gly143:2.87å (3) cys145:2.32å (4) his163:2.38å (5) his164:2.80å (6) glu166:2.83å (7) glu166:2.98å (8) gln189:2.89å and (9) thr190:2.85å, were observed in both native and docking complexes within 4å radii. the van der waals (vdw) interactions of thr24, thr25, thr26, his41, met49, tyr54, phe140, leu141, asn142, gly143, ser144, cys145, his163, his164, met165, glu166, leu167, pro168, his172, asp187, arg188, gln189, thr190, ala191, and gln192 ( figure 5c ) were also observed in both native and docking complexes within 4å radii (table 1) .the 100% conserved binding sites interactions and significant superimposed rmsd scores of the above docking approaches suggest that the autodock 4.2 software docking protocol could be used for the identification of potent inhibitor (computer-aided drug designing/structure-based drug designing) for the novel drug discovery against 2019-ncov.the docking complex of each m pro inhibitors with 2019-ncov m pro was analysed by the schrodinger maestro 2020-1 visualization tool. the selected anti-viral protease inhibitors led to the better docking score and binding interactions than n3 peptide within the cleft of domain i and domain ii ( figure 2b ). the results revealed that the protease inhibitors were having better molecular docking scores with a strong binding affinity with the m pro of 2019-ncov. the present study results also represented here are starting with better binding score to least binding score: remdesivir > baloxavir marboxil > nafamostat > nitazoxanide > penciclovir > zanamivir > ribavirin > oseltamivir > chloroquine > favipiravir (table 1 and figure 5a and b). thus, the evidence from the molecular docking score and binding affinity suggested that these inhibitors are eminently interacting with 2019-ncov m pro and might be considered for therapeutic interventions of 2019-ncov ( figure 5b ). among the inhibitors, the remdesivir attributed to the best docking score (à8.2 kcal/mol) with greater number of hbond (five) interactions and bond lengths with the following m pro amino acid residues: (1) pro39 (2) cys145 (3) his163 (4) his163 and (5) met165 ( figure 4a ). moreover, his164 formed p-p interaction with 1, 2, 4-triazinan-5-amine group of benzene ring ( figure 5c ). the vdw interaction residues of thr25, thr26, leu27, asn28, gly29, leu30, tyr37, cys38, pro39, his41, met49, cys117, tyr118, asn119, gly120, phe140, leu141, asn142, gly143, ser144, cys145, gly146, ser147, met162, his163, his164, met165 , and glu166 were housed within 4å of remdesivir inhibitor.the conformational stability nature of docked (m pro -remdesivir) and native (m pro -n3 peptide) complex system was entrenched with hoh, volume (v), temperature (t) and pressure (p) observed by md simulation of 100 ns (supplementary figure 2) . each trajectory was analysed for stability conformation through rmsd, rmsf, rgyr, and hbond monitoring ( figure 6 ). the docked and native complexes are depicted the average of total energy (à132446.36 and à99501.23 kcal/mol), potential energy (à162734.98 and à121628.90 kcal/mol) of the system was relatively stable with the average temperature (298.65 kelvin), pressure (1.88 bar), and volume (502884.87 and 362278.77 å 3 ) throughout the simulations run (supplementary figure 2) . the rmsd during the simulations period was analysed for m pro ca -remdesivir complex had an average of 1.48 å and 1.86 å respectively. the average rmsd for native m pro ca -n3 peptide complex was 1.65 å and 19.09 å respectively ( figure 6a ). by contrast, native n3 peptide had largest average rmsd score with native m pro and docked complex was not stable significantly throughout the md simulation run ( figure 6a ). the rmsf plot for the m pro docked and native ca and sidechain showed an average of 0.88 å, 1.39 å, 0.94 å and 1.44 å respectively, which denotes the lower atomic fluctuations in binding residues indicating smaller conformational changes ( figure 6b ). the total energy, potential energy, rmsd and rmsf analysis revealed that the 2019-ncov m pro -remdesivir docking remdesivir formed two intermolecular h-bonds with post dynamics structure of m pro residues gly143, cys-145 were observed to remain stable in all the trajectories during md simulations run ( figure 7b and table 2 ). additionally, glu 166 was formed h-bond and salt bridge with m pro and maintained all trajectories. moreover, four hoh molecules were formed six water-mediated h-bonds with remdesivir compound ( table 2 ). the post md simulations the n3 peptide formed six h-bonds with the native structure residues (5) of gly143, his163, his164, glu166, and thr190 and additionally, leu141 was formed h-bond with m pro of 2019-ncov remained stable throughout the period of 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations.moreover, similar trends were observed when calculating the rgyr of docked and native complexes ( figure 7a ). the rgyr represents the average distance between each atom complexes and the center of mass of the structures and was a useful value to provide a structural measure of the degree of compaction of the studied complexes with md simulations. figure 6c depicts the evolution of the rgyr of each complex over the full md simulations trajectories. the comparison of rgyr average trends towards native and docked depicts 23.66 å and 22.77 å, respectively displayed stable over time, suggesting that both complexes have reached a more compact structure ( figure 6c ). whereas, figure 6d and 6e shows the average sasa of both docked and native has 152.29 å 2 and 161.99 å 2 respectively were observed in 100 ns simulations.many ongoing clinical studies also suggests that remdesivir is much better at inhibiting the sars-cov and mers-cov. remdesivir has shown wide therapeutic index and demonstrated anti-viral activity against rna viruses and also are selective for viral polymerases along with low susceptibility to cause any human toxicity (agostini et al., 2018; sheahan et al., 2020) . drug's delayed chain-termination act is conceived as one of the most crucial mechanisms of action especially in treatment against mers-cov and ebov (siegel et al., 2017; jordan et al., 2018; tchesnokov et al., 2019) . in coronaviruses, remdesivir also exhibited high genetic hurdle resistance and also permits one-time daily dosage because of its extended intracellular half-life (agostini et al., 2018; sheahan et al., 2020) . this in silico study also suggests that remdesivir has a good docking score with strong binding affinity and stable confirmations with the crucial residues cys145, and his164 of m pro , which inhibits the replication and proliferation of 2019-ncov. according to who, the recommended administration of remdesivir for ebola virus (ebov) in single or multiple-dose phase intravenous between 3 mg and 225 mg. the risk for central nervous system, respiratory, or cardiovascular effects was considered low at projected therapeutic exposures and is well tolerated without any evidence of kidney or liver toxicity. moreover, the consistent antiviral activity of remdesivir for filoviruses (ebola zaire, sudan, bundibugyo, and marburg) was observed. similar antiviral activity was observed also against pathogenic coronaviruses (mers and sars cov) and paramyxoviruses (nipah and hendra) discerning for viral polymerases. thus, the present in silico and ongoing clinical studies are also suggesting that the remdesivir is a potent inhibitor against 2019-ncov.the novel human respiratory coronavirus initially called as 2019 -novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and now called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has emphasized the insurgency for therapeutic alternatives to alleviate and stop a novel evolving epidemic of infectious zoonotic diseases. till now no therapeutic vaccine and drugs against 2019-ncov are available. previous epidemics of high-morbidity human coronaviruses, such as sars-cov (2003) and mers-cov in 2012, motivated the characterization of compounds that could be potentially active against the currently emerging pandemic 2019-ncov. the most promising compound, remdesivir currently in clinical trials for treating the ebov infections, also inhibited the replication of sars-cov and mers-cov in tissue cultures, and displayed efficacy in non-human animal models. besides, a combination of the hiv-1 protease inhibitors is shown to be effective in patients infected with sars-cov. this in silico study also suggested that anti-viral protease inhibitor remdesivir has the best docking score and binding activity when compared to selected inhibitors and existing peptides with 2019-ncov of m pro . these inhibitors were tightly bound to the domains i and ii cleft of very crucial key residues of cys145 and his164 of 2019-ncov, which could inhibit the replication and proliferation in the host, the in silico assessment of a single dose with a combination of multiple protease inhibitors against the 2019-ncov of m pro is the limitation of this study. this study will pave the path for the identification of potential personalized medicine by novel drug designing for different genomic mutations of 2019-ncov.since the first described infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-2 cov2) in december 2019, the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has developed into a pandemic, 3 the symptoms of which range from asymptomatic course to pneumonia, acute lung and multi-organ 4 failure and death. in order to develop a meaningful therapy strategy, different medications are used 5 "off label". one of these is remdesivir, a precursor of a nucleotide analogue that inhibits viral rna 6 polymerases. as for ebola, sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), 7 remdesivir appears to be effective in vitro in sars-cov2 (1). good outcomes have been reported in 8 cases report (2;3). many studies are ongoing or already published to demonstrate the efficacy of 9 remdesivir on patient with covid-19, some showing the lack of difference with control arms (4) , 10 some others reporting efficacy but discussed (5-7). treating patients early in disease has always been 11 a crucial issue in treating potentially life-threatening infectious diseases. the aim of this review 12presented below was to evaluate the quality of the published and not yet peer-reviewed trials on 13 remdesivir and to highlight pitfalls to inform readers that a careful analysis of reported data is 14 needed to offer a more accurate interpretation of the results. 15we looks at all scientific paper available as peer and not yet peer reviewed paper in the major 17 literature from data base pub med, web of knowledge, scholar google and biorxiv and medrxiv. the 18 key words were [remdesivir alone or with covid]. we recover 91 articles in medrxiv, 81 in biorxiv 19and 112 in pub med. when we added covid to remdesivir, pubmed recover 79 articles. on web of 20knowledge remdesivir recover 25 articles. in scholar google remdesivir recovered 1480 articles in 21 2020. of them we selected 17 papers responding to the aims of this article. when available we look 22 at the following endpoints: time to improvement at d14 and 28, death, and adverse events. 23as today, 8 studies report the use of remdesivir in covid and are summarized in table 1. the first is a  25 single case, having received remdesivir on the day 11 of disease, and which on day 12 saw condition 26 improve (stopping oxygenation and oxygen saturation at 96%) (8). 27the second is a non-yet peer review paper that reports the first 12 case of covid in the united 28states. it is a descriptive paper in which 3 of the 7 hospitalized patients received remdesivir for 29 compassionate use for a duration of 4-10 days (9) . all hospitalized patient had serial sarscov2 rt 30 pcr testing. when reanalyzed, the mean delay in normalization of nasal rt pcr was 8.6 days in 31 remdesivir patient versus 6.75 days (p=0.85) in untreated patient. 32the third reports a series of 5 cases, 3 of which received at least one dose of remdesivir. in two 33 patients, treatment occurred at the time of the disease's worsening. in one of them, the remdesivir 34 was discontinued after 5 days (alt elevation and rash). in the third patient, the remdesivir was 35 stopped after a single dose due to renal dialysis to avoid the accumulation of cyclodextrin. therefore, 36the authors indicate that they cannot draw any conclusions based on their data as to the potential 37 efficacy of remdesivir in the treatment of covid-19 (3). 38the fourth study analyzes the remdesivir treatment of a single patient on the day 13 of his disease 39(2). at the time of remdesivir administration, the patient was in intensive care, intubated and treated 40 with hydroxychloroquine 400mg/day and azithromycin since 7 days. forty-eight hours after 41 remdesivir initiation or treatment, the patient's condition had improved. the patient was extubated 42 60 hours after treatment and was able to breathe in the ambient air 24 hours later. 43the fifth study is an uncontrolled, prospective, open observational study of patients having received, 44as compassionate used, a 10-day remdesivir therapy with a target follow-up period of 28 days. 45between 25.01.2020 and 07.03.2020, 61 patients were included in the study and received at least 46 one dose of remdesivir, some of which may have been part of previous studies. of those patients, 8 47were excluded of the study which, in an intention to treat analysis should have been considered as 48 failure. finally, data from 53 patients were analyzed of whom one was already published in the study 49 n°3 (lescure et al). of them 40 received the complete 10-day remdesivir therapy, 10 received 5 to 9-50 day therapy and 3 patients received less than 5 days of remdesivir (7) . on average, covid-19 51 symptoms lasted 12 days before remdesivir therapy was initiated. in the median follow-up period of 52 18 days, 36 of the 53 patients (68%) were able to improve under remdesivir. an improvement was 53shown in all patients who were mild receiving no or only low-dose oxygen supplementation (n = 12), 54 or in 5 of the 7 non-invasive ventilated patients. this also raised an ethical comment on the 55 compassionate used of remdesivir in some patients whom were not engaged in short term. of the 53 56 patients followed, 10 were treated while they were on ambient air (2) or low flow oxygen ( 8) time to recovery and death at 28 days and 100 % of patient enrolled end the study and were 76 evaluated in both intention to treat (itt) and per protocol (pp) analysis. serious adverse event or 77 event leading to stop the drug were reported in 18 and 12 % in remdesivir versus 6 and 5% in 78 placebo demonstrating the poor safety of the drug. although no significant difference was noted in 79 other treatment between the two groups, in almost all the rct reporting evaluation of treatment for 80 covid, patient are also treated with several other drugs such as antibiotics (9), among some have 81 demonstrated antiviral efficacy (11) , corticosteroid, antiviral , and anti-inflammatory among which 82 some anti il6 seems promising (12) . this may bias the data such as shown in the hillaker et al study 83cited above. this questioned the multicentric nature of the randomized controlled studies which is 84 needed by the high number of patients to be enrolled. this is a bias which is difficult to control 85 because it is directly related to the "standard of care" of each center likely to be different in term of 86 equipment, protocols, surveillance, and staff skills. consequently, the care of patient might not be 87 comparable in between centers and the outcome biased by the expertise of the team in charged. 88in the preliminary announcement on efficacy of remdesivir on an rct involving 1061 patients , the 89 nih said that preliminary results indicate that patients who received remdesivir had a 31% faster 90 time to recovery than those who received placebo (11 days/15 days) but that the survival benefit on 91 1063 patients was insignificant compared to placebo (p=0.059) concluding that remdesivir has an 92 effect but not a wonder effect. in her commentary, mahase said : ….in time of epidemics… "expedite 93 publication are fine but hinting that results are going to be positive, only benefits the drug companies 94 (6). fast-flowing, conflicting information on remdesivir in the past few weeks has left people reeling. 95recently the paper was released with preliminary reports in the nejm but with different results the 96 survival benefits becoming significant in the overall analyzed population (13). this conclusion is over 97interpreted. in the table 2, as mentioned, the hazard ratio indicates that only mild form of infection 98 benefit from remdesivir but that there is no difference in severe form of covid-19 with placebo. it is 99 noteworthy to notice that results are given in intention to treat but that one third of enrolled patient 100 in both arms only (33.8 / 35.7%) received the complete protocol, 180/531 and 185/518 for 101 remdesivir and placebo respectively. of them 288/ 1049 (27.4%) were discharged because they were 102 cured before the end of treatment and were loss of follow up, the remaining still receiving the 103 treatment or having missing treatment data at time to analyses. while an analysis according to the 104 itt principle aims to preserve the original randomization and to avoid potential bias due to exclusion 105of patients, such a number of loss of follow up is unacceptable because it might modified the 106 benefits of randomization, those loss to follow-up often having a different prognosis than those who 107 complete the study (14). in this study 168 patient were discharged before the end of treatment in 108 the remdesivir arms versus 120 in the placebo, which is significantly different (p<0001). it is likely 109 that those patients had a baseline score of 4 or 5 as they discharge before the end of treatment 110 explaining in part the better outcome in the remdesivir arms. some have suggested that <5% loss 111 leads to little bias, while >20% poses serious threats to validity (15) . nevertheless, a per-protocol (pp) 112 analysis as recommend in the consort guidelines should be reported for all planned outcomes to 113 allow readers to interpret the effect of an intervention (16). 114the last released paper compares 5 days to 10 days treatment for remdesivir with no significant 115 mortality nor improvement of clinical status between the two arms. altogether, any serious adverse 116 event is reported in 27.7% of treated patient among them 4.7% of acute kidney injury. in 7.3% of 117 patient adverse events lead to stop the treatment (17). 118still few studies have been reported on evaluation the new drug remdesivir. in many aspects, data 119 from a case report or series without controls mean little to nothing in the context of evaluating 120 efficacy of an experimental drug. on the other hand, rcts takes time and rarely bring usable 121 information during time of outbreak. three rcts have data available, but two share the same aims 122 and give contradictory data. only one is methodologically adequate with both ipp and pp analysis on 123 a cohort of patient having completed the study demonstrating the absence of difference between 124 drugs and standard of care. 125as today no study convincingly supports the use of remdesivir in severe patients. it is likely that, such 126 as for influenza, the major key for covid-19 outcome is the early treatment of patient at the time of 127 diagnosis. however serious adverse reactions, some leading to interruption of treatment, and the iv 128 route, would probably limit the use of remdesivir in this indication. on 24 march 2020, the who confirmed 375498 cases of infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). sars-cov-2 causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), which has a clinical picture ranging from mild to severe, including death. 1 there is no specific antiviral treatment recommended for covid-19. patients with covid-19 should receive supportive care to help relieve symptoms. 2 therefore, testing the efficacy of existing drugs used for other viruses against sars-cov-2 is a fundamental goal in order to develop a specific therapy rapidly. small molecules, such as nucleoside analogues or protease inhibitors, are candidate drugs as treatments for covid-19. 3 among these nucleoside analogues, remdesivir (gs-5734), a diastereomer monophosphophoramidate prodrug of the adenine nucleoside analogue gs-441524, is under evaluation. gs-441524 undergoes metabolic conversion in cells and tissues into the pharmacologically active triphosphate form (gs-443902) that inhibits viral rna polymerases, but does not affect host rna or dna polymerases. 4 remdesivir showed a broad-spectrum antiviral activity with potent in vitro efficacy against multiple genetically unrelated rna viruses similar to sars-cov-2, such as sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). according to several in vitro studies, remdesivir appears to be the most promising candidate for covid-19 treatment. [5] [6] [7] [8] in vero cells infected with sars-cov-2, remdesivir (molecular weight, 602.6 g/mol) showed an ec 50 of 460 ng/ml. 5 however, for gs-441524 (molecular weight, 291.3 g/mol) ec 50 data from cells infected with sars-cov-2 have not been reported. in humans, remdesivir showed moderate protein binding (80%-90%) and gs-441524 exhibited very low protein binding in plasma (<20%). 9 preliminary data from human healthy donors confirm that remdesivir is extensively metabolized by cytochrome p450 enzyme (cyp) (cyp2c8, cyp2d6 and cyp3a4). specific metabolism data on gs-441524 have not been reported. the half-lives are about 0.89 and 25 h for remdesivir and gs-441524, respectively. remdesivir is mainly excreted in urine (about 74%). the predominant species detected in urine were gs-441524, followed by remdesivir and other metabolites. 9 in clinical practice, a sars-cov-2-infected patient recovered after receiving intravenous remdesivir for compassionate use in the usa. 10 currently, 10 clinical trials (1 suspended, 1 terminated, 8 recruiting) have been initiated to evaluate intravenous remdesivir in adult patients with mild, moderate and severe covid-19 (clinicaltrials.gov). to date, there are no pharmacokinetic (pk) data for sars-cov-2-infected patients. the only published pk data were obtained from observations of ebola treatment in monkeys. 8 the aim of our study was to investigate remdesivir and gs-441524 plasma concentrations in two critically ill covid-19 patients treated with intravenous remdesivir. moreover, compartmental concentrations were evaluated, in bronchoalveolar aspirate (bas) in both patients and in a csf sample from one of them.the study was conducted in accordance with the declaration of helsinki as well as with national and institutional standards. informed consent was obtained from family members. all data were collected anonymously.the two patients were a female (patient 1, pt1) and a male (patient 2, pt2) 66 and 67 years old, respectively. both were residents of the city of wuhan, china, who had travelled to italy.in january, they developed fever with respiratory symptoms. subsequently they were admitted to the national institute of infectious diseases 'lazzaro spallanzani', in rome, italy. nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs from both patients were positive for sars-cov-2 by rt-pcr assay. both patients developed progressive respiratory failure and clinical evidence of severe adult respiratory distress syndrome and required mechanical ventilation support in the icu. 11 as it was recommended for compassionate use, and in the absence of any clinical trial available at that time, we started remdesivir treatment on request from the responsible physicians owing to clinical worsening. gilead science inc. provided remdesivir and instructions for preparation and administration for intravenous administration. the remdesivir dosing regimen was similar to that reported in the ebola clinical trial and therefore was used for 13 days (palm consortium study). 12 the manufacturerrecommended adult dosage and duration of remdesivir were 200 mg loading dose on the first day followed by 12 days of 100 mg once-daily maintenance doses to be administered intravenously over 1 h. both patients concluded 13 days of remdesivir treatment, despite transient renal impairment in pt1. efficacy and safety evaluations were performed during the study and included virology and clinical laboratory tests (haematology, serum chemistry), vital sign monitoring, and physical examinations were evaluated daily. monitoring was performed from baseline until the end of treatment.bioanalytical method and pk assessments of remdesivir and gs-441524blood samples were collected immediately after (c 0 ) and at 1 (c 1 ) and 24 h (c 24 ) after remdesivir intravenous administration on day 3 until day 9 for the determination of plasma concentrations of remdesivir and gs-441524. for compartmental distribution, bas samples were collected on days 4, 7 and 9 from both patients and a csf sample was obtained on day 7 from pt2. immediately after collection, the samples were kept at 4 c and subsequently centrifuged and stored at #20 c until analysis. concentrations of remdesivir and the parent nucleoside analogue gs-441524 were measured in the different matrices using a validated uhplc-ms/ms method. 13 briefly, 50 ll of the sample was mixed with 600 ll of acetonitrile:methanol (50:50, v:v) containing internal standard. three hundred microlitres of supernatant was diluted with 600 ll of hplc-ms grade water and 10 ll was injected into the column (waters acquity uplc hss t3, 1.8 lm, 2.1%50 mm). using this method remdesivir and gs-441524 were measured simultaneously with a limit of quantification (loq) of 5.86 ng/ml for remdesivir and 1.96 ng/ml for gs-441524. in order to decrease the plasma esterase activity all steps were performed on ice.normally distributed continuous data were expressed as mean (sd). the auc from the time of finish of infusion to the next infusion (auc 0-24 ) was calculated by phenix 8.1 with non-compartmental analysis (linear log trapezoidal rule). pharmacokinetic data were compared using the mann-whitney u-test. a p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. statistical analysis was performed using the graphpad prism package, version 8.4.0 (graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa).the characteristics of the two covid-19 patients before, during and after treatment are shown in table s1 (available as supplementary data at jac online). before starting remdesivir treatment in pt1 a transient renal impairment was observed (creatinine 203.3 lmol/l). due to the critical condition of pt1 and the absence of effective alternative treatment, remdesivir was administered at the same dose. moreover, during and after treatment renal function improved in pt1 (creatinine during treatment, 188.2 lmol/l; creatinine after treatment, 123.7 lmol/l). nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs for sars-cov-2 rt-pcr detection were negative for both patients 1 week after completing remdesivir treatment.the mean plasma concentration-time profiles of remdesivir after intravenous administration of remdesivir in pt1 and in pt2 are presented in figure 1 . immediately after remdesivir infusion, peak serum concentrations were observed in both patients. median (sd) c 0 values were 2737 (1985) and 3317 (3280) ng/ml in pt1 and in pt2, respectively; rapid plasma concentration decay was observed 1 h after infusion, to 80.7 (10.7) ng/ml and 171 (75.2) ng/ml, respectively. at 24 h after intravenous administration, the concentrations of remdesivir were below the loq in both patients. auc 24 in pt1 and pt2 was 2915 and 4042 ngáh/ml, respectively. no significant differences in the mean concentrations were observed at any timepoint between the two patients (p > 0.05). remdesivir exposure did not appear to be meaningfully affected by renal impairment. concentrations of remdesivir in all bas samples and in the csf were under the loq.the mean plasma concentration-time profiles of gs-441524 after intravenous administration of remdesivir in pt1 and in pt2 are presented in figure 2 . in pt1, mean (sd) gs-441524 plasma concentrations immediately after and 1 and 24 h after remdesivir infusion were 214 (38.4), 316 (58.5) and 206 (58.1) ng/ml, respectively. in pt2 the gs-441524 plasma concentrations were 113 (6.84), 184 (19.7) and 92.6 (19.6) ng/ml at c 0 , c 1 and c 24 , respectively. data demonstrated that 1 h after remdesivir infusion a gs-441524 peak serum concentration was present in both patients. as shown in figure 2 , significant differences in the mean concentrations were observed between the two patients at all timepoints (c 0 , p = 0.0079; c 1 , p = 0.0286; c 24 , p 0.0001). auc 0-24 was 6131 ngáh/ ml in pt1 versus 3117 ngáh/ml in pt2. gs-441524 auc 0-24 was increased 1.96-fold, c 0 1.89-fold, c 1 1.71-fold and c 24 2.20-fold, comparing pt1 with pt2. therefore, higher concentrations were found in the patient with renal dysfunction.in bas, concentrations of gs-441524 on day 4 were 8.6 versus 9.2 ng/ml, those on day 7 were 2.7 versus 3.3 ng/ml and those on day 9 were 3.0 versus 6.1 ng/ml, and the mean bas/plasma ratio was 2.3% versus 6.4% in pt1 and pt2, respectively. gs-441524 csf concentration in pt2 on day 7 was 22.1 ng/ml, representing a csf/ plasma ratio of 25.7%.remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue rna polymerase inhibitor that showed decreased viral load and improved pulmonary function in an animal model of sars-cov and mers-cov infection. 6, 7 an in vitro study showed that remdesivir inhibited sars-cov-2 virus in a human cell line. 5 these data, together with the addition of human safety profile data for intravenous remdesivir therapy obtained from a randomized trial in the context of ebola virus disease, 12 are the basis for the use of intravenous remdesivir as a treatment for covid-19 patients. 14 we report, for the first time, remdesivir pk data in covid-19 patients. data were obtained from two critically ill chinese patients with severe adult respiratory distress syndrome. 11 after intravenous administration, in both patients remdesivir showed a peak at the end of infusion and a half-life of 1 h, while gs-441524 reached a peak 1 h after infusion and then remained detectable until the next remdesivir administration. similar data have been shown in rhesus monkeys after daily intravenous administration of remdesivir, which was rapidly converted into the nucleoside analogue gs-441524 and appeared to reach sustained intracellular concentrations of the active triphosphate form above its ec 90 for sars-cov. 5, 8, 14 furthermore, we found higher gs-441524 plasma concentrations in the patient with renal impairment, indicating that renal excretion was a major route of elimination. there are no specific studies conducted with remdesivir in patients with renal and/or hepatic impairment; during the palm and meuri protocol no renal or hepatic abnormalities were attributed to remdesivir. 11 given the benefit-risk calculation in patients with severe sars-cov infection and renal impairment, the use of remdesivir should be evaluated. nevertheless, placebo-controlled clinical trials are needed to determine the balance between safety and efficacy in these patients. 15 remdesivir was undetectable in the compartments evaluated, whereas the gs-441524 metabolite was detected in bas, but at a lower concentration compared with csf. compartment differences in drug exposure could be due to different blood supply or protein binding properties (remdesivir has moderate protein binding while gs-441524 exhibits very low protein binding), 9 which are the major factors influencing drug diffusion in cells and tissue. in addition, active efflux by different specific protein transporters in lung and in cns, such as p-glycoprotein (p-gp), could potentially be involved. 9, 16, 17 remdesivir is a substrate for p-gp, while no data are yet available on gs-441524, requiring further studies. another hypothesis could be the different drug uptake and metabolism in lung cells, where a high number of virus-infected cells are present. 18 evaluation of the triphosphate form in lung cells is necessary to confirm this hypothesis.these preliminary observations increase knowledge about the pk and use of remdesivir for treatment of covid-19 patients. however, further studies, with higher numbers of patients, and clinical trials, are needed confirm these preliminary results.the continued emergence of middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) cases with a high case fatality rate stresses the need for the availability of effective antiviral treatments. remdesivir (gs-5734) effectively inhibited mers coronavirus (mers-cov) replication in vitro, and showed efficacy against severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov in a mouse model. here, we tested the efficacy of prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir treatment in a nonhuman primate model of mers-cov infection, the rhesus macaque. prophylactic remdesivir treatment initiated 24 h prior to inoculation completely prevented mers-cov−induced clinical disease, strongly inhibited mers-cov replication in respiratory tissues, and prevented the formation of lung lesions. therapeutic remdesivir treatment initiated 12 h postinoculation also provided a clear clinical benefit, with a reduction in clinical signs, reduced virus replication in the lungs, and decreased presence and severity of lung lesions. the data presented here support testing of the efficacy of remdesivir treatment in the context of a mers clinical trial. it may also be considered for a wider range of coronaviruses, including the currently emerging novel coronavirus 2019-ncov.mers-cov | antiviral | animal model | remdesivir | therapy s ince its discovery in 2012, cases of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) have continued to emerge, with the current case count close to 2,500 cases, and a case fatality rate ∼35% (1). this continuous emergence of mers-cov infections in saudi arabia and its ability to spread through humanto-human transmission has prompted the world health organization to include mers on their list of emerging diseases likely to cause major epidemics and for which countermeasures are urgently needed (2) . through the coalition for epidemic preparedness innovations, mers-cov vaccines are going to advance through preclinical and clinical trials (3), but, despite the urgent need, a similar initiative does not exist for the development and clinical testing of antivirals effective against mers-cov.remdesivir (gs-5734) is a nucleotide prodrug that has broad antiviral activity against viruses from different families in vitro (4) , and therapeutic efficacy in nonhuman primate models of lethal ebola virus and nipah virus infection (5, 6) . studies in human airway epithelial cells showed that remdesivir also inhibits replication of a wide range of coronaviruses, including mers-cov (7) . efficacy studies in mice showed that remdesivir had therapeutic efficacy against severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov and mers-cov in ces1c −/− mice, deficient in a secreted carboxylesterase responsible for poor pharmacokinetics profile of remdesivir in mice, when administered before the peak of virus replication (7, 8) . in vitro studies with mouse hepatitis virus showed that remdesivir inhibits coronavirus replication through interference with the viral polymerase, despite the presence of a viral proofreading exoribonuclease (9) . importantly, coronaviruses partially resistant to inhibition by remdesivir, obtained in vitro following >20 passages in the presence of gs-441524, a parent nucleoside that is metabolized into the same active triphosphate metabolite, were still sensitive to higher concentrations of remdesivir, and fitness was impaired in the resistant viruses as compared to wild-type mers-cov (9) . with these promising data in mind, we tested the prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir treatment in a nonhuman primate model of mers-cov infection, the rhesus macaque (10) .and therapeutic treatment. to assess the efficacy of remdesivir to alleviate clinical signs of mers-cov infection, 18 rhesus macaques were randomly assigned to three groups of six animals. three animals in the control group were treated with 1 ml/kg vehicle solution 24 h before mers-cov inoculation, and three animals were treated at 12 h post mers-cov inoculation. another group of six rhesus macaques was treated prophylactically 24 h before mers-cov inoculation with 5 mg/kg remdesivir, and one group of six animals was treated therapeutically at 12 h postinoculation with mers-cov with 5 mg/kg remdesivir. treatmentmiddle east respiratory syndrome, caused by the mers coronavirus (mers-cov), continues to cause severe respiratory disease with a high case fatality rate. to date, potential antiviral treatments for mers-cov have shown limited efficacy in animal studies. here, we tested the efficacy of the broad-acting antiviral remdesivir in the rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection. remdesivir reduced the severity of disease, virus replication, and damage to the lungs when administered either before or after animals were infected with mers-cov. our data show that remdesivir is a promising antiviral treatment against mers that could be considered for implementation in clinical trials. it may also have utility for related coronaviruses such as the novel coronavirus 2019-ncov emerging from wuhan, china. data deposition: all data discussed here will be made available to readers upon request. 1 to whom correspondence may be addressed. email was continued once daily until 6 d postinoculation (dpi), when animals were euthanized and necropsied (fig. 1 ).after inoculation with mers-cov on day 0, all animals were closely observed for signs of disease, and clinical scores were assigned according to a previously determined scoring sheet. all vehicle-treated animals displayed signs of disease, starting as early as 1 dpi, such as decreased appetite and ruffled fur; all vehicle-treated animals had respiratory signs such as increased respiration for 4 (n = 1) or 5 (n = 5) d after inoculation. the animals treated prophylactically with remdesivir did not show any respiratory signs of disease, but decreased appetite, possibly due to daily anesthesia, was noted in five of six animals. the animals treated therapeutically with remdesivir all displayed reduced appetites, and five out of six animals had increased respiration rates at 2 (n = 2), 3 (n = 2), or 4 (n = 1) d after inoculation. these observations are reflected in the clinical scores of the animals, with clinical scores in the prophylactically treated animals being statistically significantly lower than in vehicletreated control animals at 2 to 6 dpi, and in the therapeutically treated animals at 2 to 4 dpi ( fig. 2a) .on days 0, 1, 3, 5, and 6, clinical examinations were performed on the animals, and respiration rates were determined on anesthetized animals. there was a clear increase in respiration rates in the vehicle-treated animals ( fig. 2b ), while respiration rates in prophylactically treated animals remained normal throughout the study. although respiration rate was increased in therapeutically treated animals at 1 dpi, respiration was statistically significantly lower than in vehicle-treated controls at 3 and 6 dpi (fig. 2b ). on examination days, radiographs were collected from all animals and analyzed for the presence of infiltrates; from 3 dpi onward, lung infiltrates became visible on x-ray (si appendix, fig. s1 ). at 6 dpi, there was statistically significantly less infiltration in the lungs of animals treated both prophylactically and therapeutically with remdesivir as compared to vehicle-treated control animals (fig. 2c ).at 6 dpi, all animals were euthanized, and respiratory tissues were collected for quantitative analysis of the levels of viral rna by qrt-pcr. compared to vehicle-treated control animals, prophylactic remdesivir treatment resulted in significantly lower levels of mers-cov replication in the lungs, with lung viral loads 2.5 to 4 logs lower in each lung lobe (fig. 3a) . although lung viral loads were, on average, lower in individual lung lobes after therapeutic treatment, this was statistically significant in only a few lung lobes, due to larger variation between animals in the therapeutically treated group (fig. 3a) . however, when all lung lobes were combined, the lung viral load in therapeutically treated animals was clearly lower than in vehicle-treated animals (fig. 3b ). additionally, viral loads were significantly lower in trachea, bronchi, tonsils, and mediastinal lymph nodes of animals treated prophylactically and therapeutically with remdesivir than in vehicle-treated control animals ( fig. 3c and si appendix, fig. s2 ); viral rna was not detected in kidney tissue samples (si appendix, fig. s2 ).treatment. upon necropsy, the area of each lung lobe affected by gross lesions was estimated by a board-certified veterinary pathologist. gross lung lesions were present in several lung lobes of all of the vehicle-treated control animals (fig. 4a ). in contrast, gross lung lesions were completely absent in the lungs of animals that received prophylactic remdesivir treatment. in animals treated therapeutically with remdesivir, there were obvious gross lesions present in five out of six animals; however, the total area of lungs affected by gross lesions was statistically significantly smaller than in vehicle-treated control animals (fig. 4a ).in addition, the severity of histologic lung lesions was assessed by assigning a score for each lung lobe. the resulting cumulative lung histology score was compared between treatment groups to assess differences in the severity of histologic lesions. cumulative lung histology scores were significantly lower in animals treated prophylactically with remdesivir (fig. 4b) . the large variation between animals in the therapeutically treated group meant that the lower average histology score did not reach statistical significance (fig. 4b) .histologically, all of the vehicle-treated control animals developed some degree of pulmonary pathology when inoculated with mers-cov. lesions were multifocal, frequently centered on terminal bronchioles, and consisted of minimal to marked, interstitial pneumonia, characterized by thickening of alveolar septae by edema fluid and fibrin and small to moderate numbers of macrophages and fewer neutrophils. alveoli contained moderate numbers of pulmonary macrophages and neutrophils. in areas with moderate to marked changes, there was abundant alveolar edema and fibrin with multifocal formation of hyaline membranes, as well as abundant type ii pneumocyte hyperplasia. perivascular infiltrates of inflammatory cells multifocally within and adjacent to affected areas of the lung were also observed (fig. 4c ). in contrast, all animals treated prophylactically with remdesivir had essentially normal pulmonary tissue with no evidence of coronavirus infection (fig.  4c ). animals treated with remdesivir therapeutically demonstrated various levels of severity of coronaviral pneumonia. in two out of six animals, no histologic evidence of pneumonia was detected. in three animals, multifocal, minimal to moderate interstitial pneumonia was observed like that described for the control animals; however, the lesions were less severe than in the controls and not as widely distributed throughout the lung lobes. only one out of six animals had moderate interstitial pneumonia that was indistinguishable from the vehicle-treated control animals in severity and distribution.immunohistochemical analysis for the presence of mers-cov antigen showed small numbers of antigen-positive type i pneumocytes in all vehicle-treated control animals and in five out of six animals treated therapeutically with remdesivir; there was no difference in number or distribution of antigen-positive cells in animals where antigen was detected. mers-cov antigen could not be detected in any of the animals treated prophylactically with remdesivir (fig. 4d ).prophylactic remdesivir treatment prevented mers-cov−induced clinical disease and lung lesions in rhesus macaques inoculated with mers-cov, and strongly inhibited mers-cov replication in respiratory tissues. since nosocomial transmission accounts for approximately one-third of mers-cov cases (11) , prophylactic remdesivir treatment of patients, contacts of patients, and healthcare personnel with high-risk exposure to a diagnosed mers patient and at high risk of developing severe mers due to underlying conditions (12) could be considered. therapeutic remdesivir treatment also provided a clear clinical benefit, with a reduction in clinical signs and virus replication, and the absence of lung lesions in two out of six remdesivir-treated animals and a reduction in lesion severity in three additional animals. absence of histologic lung lesions, as seen in two out of the six animals with therapeutic remdesivir treatment, has so far rarely been observed in studies testing the efficacy of mers-cov antivirals in nonhuman primate models (13) (14) (15) (16) ; it has only been shown once before in one out of three common marmosets treated with hyperimmune plasma at 6 h after inoculation (17) . thus, although it is hard to compare different studies due to the fact that different species were used and treatment was initiated at different time points after inoculation, remdesivir appears to be one of the most promising antiviral treatments tested in a nonhuman primate model to date.therapeutic remdesivir treatment was administered at 12 h after inoculation with mers-cov, and, although this may seem relatively early after inoculation, it is close to the peak of mers-cov replication in the rhesus macaque model (10) . a drug that inhibits virus replication may be of little use once virus replication has reached its peak, as was shown in vitro (9) . however, in a considerable number of severe cases of mers, viral rna and infectious virus can still be detected in respiratory tract samples several weeks after the onset of symptoms (18, 19) , with this prolonged virus replication most likely due to the presence of underlying conditions such as diabetes mellitus (18) . likewise, an increase in virus replication over a longer period of time was observed in immunocompromised rhesus macaques (20) . thus, remdesivir treatment could not only be of benefit to patients diagnosed with mers early after symptom onset but may also improve recovery in those patients with severe cases of mers where prolonged virus replication occurs.human safety data are available for remdesivir. it has been used on a compassionate basis in several unique cases of ebola virus disease (21, 22) , as well as on a large scale in the ongoing ebola virus outbreak in the democratic republic of congo (23), with around 400 treated patients. in addition, its efficacy is currently being tested in a clinical trial in ebola virus disease survivors with prolonged virus shedding (24, 25) . although the efficacy of remdesivir was lower in the ebola virus trial than that of the different antibody treatments tested, survival was increased as compared to overall survival rate in this outbreak.taken together, the data presented here on the efficacy of remdesivir in prophylactic and therapeutic treatment regimens, the difficulty of coronaviruses to acquire resistance to remdesivir (9) , and the availability of human safety data warrant testing of the efficacy of remdesivir treatment in the context of a mers clinical trial. our results, together with replication inhibition by fig. 2 . clinical findings in rhesus macaques inoculated with mers-cov and treated with remdesivir. three groups of six rhesus macaques were inoculated with mers-cov strain hcov-emc/2012; one group was i.v.-administered 1 ml/kg vehicle solution (vehicle control; gray circles), one group was administered 5 mg/kg remdesivir starting at 24 h before inoculation (prophylactic remdesivir; black squares), and one group was administered 5 mg/kg remdesivir starting at 12 h after inoculation (therapeutic remdesivir; red triangles). after inoculation, the animals were observed twice daily for clinical signs of disease and scored using a predetermined clinical scoring system (a). on 0, 1, 3, 5 and 6 dpi, clinical examinations were performed during which respiration rate was determined (b), and radiographs were taken. radiographs were used to score individual lung lobes for severity of pulmonary infiltrates by a clinical veterinarian according to a standard scoring system (0: normal; 1: mild interstitial pulmonary infiltrates; 2: moderate pulmonary infiltrates perhaps with partial cardiac border effacement and small areas of pulmonary consolidation; 3: serious interstitial infiltrates, alveolar patterns and air bronchograms); the cumulative x-ray score is the sum of the scores of the six individual lung lobes per animal; scores shown are from 6 dpi (c). asterisks indicate statistically significant difference in a two-way (a and b) or one-way (c) anova with dunnett's multiple comparisons; black asterisks indicate statistical significance between the vehicle control and prophylactic remdesivir groups, and red asterisks indicate statistical significance between the vehicle control and therapeutic remdesivir groups. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. ethics and biosafety statement. all animal experiments were approved by the institutional animal care and use committee of rocky mountain laboratories, nih and carried out by certified staff in an association for assessment and accreditation of laboratory animal care international accredited facility, according to the institution's guidelines for animal use, and followed the guidelines and basic principles in the united states public health service policy on humane care and use of laboratory animals, and the guide for the care and use of laboratory animals. rhesus macaques were housed in adjacent individual primate cages allowing social interactions, in a climate-controlled room with a fixed light−dark cycle (12-h light/12-h dark). animals were monitored at least twice daily throughout the experiment. commercial monkey chow, treats, and fruit were provided twice daily by trained personnel. water was available ad libitum. environmental enrichment consisted of a variety of human interaction, commercial toys, videos, and music. the institutional biosafety committee (ibc) approved work with infectious mers-cov strains under bsl3 conditions. sample inactivation was performed according to ibc-approved standard operating procedures for removal of specimens from high containment.study design. to evaluate the effect of remdesivir treatment on mers-cov disease outcome, we used the rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection that results in transient lower respiratory tract disease (10) . rhesus macaques were chosen because of the requirement of daily anesthesia and intravenous (i.v.) injections that were perceived to be problematic in the alternative nonhuman primate model of mers-cov infection, the common marmoset (27), due to their small size. all animals were randomly assigned to groups and inoculated as described previously with a total dose of 7 × 10 6 tcid50 of mers-cov strain hcov-emc/2012 via intranasal, oral, ocular (1 × 10 6 tcid50 each), and intratracheal (4 × 10 6 tcid50) routes (10) . in the first experiment, the efficacy of prophylactic remdesivir treatment was tested in one group of six rhesus macaques (all males; female rhesus macaques were not available from the supplier at the time of this study) treated with 5 mg/kg remdesivir in vehicle solution (5 mg/ml 12% sulfobutylether-β-cyclodextrin in water and hydrochloric acid, ph3.5) and three control rhesus macaques (all males) who received the same volume (1 ml/kg) of vehicle solution. this 5 mg/kg dosing in rhesus macaques is roughly equivalent to the 100-mg daily dosing used in humans in the ebola virus clinical trials. treatment was initiated at 24 h before virus inoculation and continued once daily until 6 dpi. after observing good efficacy of remdesivir upon prophylactic treatment, a second experiment was performed to assess its therapeutic efficacy. one group of six rhesus macaques (all males) was treated with 5 mg/kg remdesivir, and three control rhesus macaques (all males) received the same volume of vehicle solution. due to the acute nature of the mers-cov model in rhesus macaques, therapeutic treatment was initiated at 12 h after inoculation with mers-cov and continued once daily until 6 dpi. treatment was delivered as a slow i.v. bolus injection (total dose delivered over ∼5 min) administered alternatingly in the left or right cephalic and saphenous veins. the animals were observed twice daily for clinical signs of disease, using a standardized scoring sheet as described previously (28); the same person, who was blinded to the group assignment of the animals, assessed the animals throughout the study. the predetermined endpoint for this experiment was 6 dpi. clinical examinations were performed at 0, 1, 3, 5, and 6 dpi on anesthetized animals. on examination days, clinical parameters such as body weight and respiration rate were collected, as well as dorsal−ventral and lateral chest radiographs. chest radiographs were analyzed by a board-certified clinical veterinarian blinded to the group assignment of the animals. after euthanasia at 6 dpi, necropsies were performed. the percentage of gross lung lesions were scored by a board-certified veterinary pathologist blinded to the group assignment of the animals, and samples of the following tissues were collected: conjunctiva, nasal mucosa, mandibular lymph node, tonsil, pharynx, trachea, all six lung lobes, mediastinal lymph node, liver, spleen, kidney, and bladder. histopathological analysis of tissue slides was performed by a board-certified veterinary pathologist blinded to the group assignment of the animals. -administered 1 ml/kg vehicle solution (vehicle control; gray circles), one group was administered 5 mg/kg remdesivir starting at 24 h before inoculation (prophylactic remdesivir; black squares), and one group was administered 5 mg/kg remdesivir starting at 12 h after inoculation (therapeutic remdesivir; red triangles). treatment was continued once daily until 6 dpi, when all animals were euthanized and necropsies were performed. at necropsy, tissue samples were collected from all six lung lobes, rna was extracted, and viral load was determined as tcid50 equivalents per gram tissue. individual animals and lung lobes are indicated (a), and averages and sds per group (b). similarly, viral loads were determined in additional tissues from the respiratory tract of each animal (c). r: right; l: left. asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in a two-way anova with dunnett's multiple comparisons. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001.qpcr. tissues (30 mg) were homogenized in rlt buffer, and rna was extracted using the rneasy kit (qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. for detection of viral rna, 5 μl of rna was used in a one-step real-time rt-pcr upe assay (29) using the rotor-gene probe kit (qiagen) according to instructions of the manufacturer. in each run, standard dilutions of a titered virus stock were run in parallel, to calculate tcid50 equivalents in the samples.histopathology and immunohistochemistry. histopathology and immunohistochemistry were performed on rhesus macaque tissues. after fixation for 7 d in 10% neutral-buffered formalin and embedding in paraffin, tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (h&e). to detect hcov-emc/2012 antigen, immunohistochemistry was performed using an in-house rabbit polyclonal antiserum against hcov-emc/2012 (1:1,000) as a primary antibody. stained slides were analyzed by a board-certified veterinary pathologist blinded to the group assignment of the animals.statistical analysis. statistical analyses were performed using graphpad prism software version 7.04. for analysis, the three vehicle control animals from the first and second experiment were combined to form one group of six animals.data availability statement. all data discussed here will be made available to readers upon request. fig. 4 . pathological findings in the lungs of rhesus macaques inoculated with mers-cov and treated with remdesivir. three groups of six rhesus macaques were inoculated with mers-cov strain hcov-emc/2012; one group was i.v.-administered 1 ml/kg vehicle solution (vehicle control; gray circles), one group was administered 5 mg/kg remdesivir starting at 24 h before inoculation (prophylactic remdesivir; black squares), and one group was administered 5 mg/kg remdesivir starting at 12 h after inoculation (therapeutic remdesivir; red triangles). treatment was continued once daily until 6 dpi, when all animals were euthanized and necropsies were performed. at necropsy, the percentage of each lung lobe affected by gross lesions was estimated by a board-certified veterinary pathologist (a). lung samples were collected and stained with h&e and analyzed for the presence of lesions by a board-certified veterinary pathologist. each lung was given a score from 0 to 4 based on the abundance of lesions; the cumulative histology score is the sum of the scores of the six individual lung lobes per animal (b). one representative h&e image was chosen for each group (magnification: 100×) (c). lung samples were also stained with a polyclonal α-mers-cov antibody; one representative image was chosen for each group (magnification: 200×) (d). images in c and d were chosen as representative images of lung lesions and antigen expression, respectively, rather than being images from consecutive tissue slides. asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in a two-way anova with dunnett's multiple comparisons. **p < 0.01; ****p < 0.0001.in december 2019, wuhan city, hubei province experienced an outbreak of pneumonia of unknown cause. on 7 th january 2020, a previously unidentified betacoronavirus, later named sars-cov-2 virus (or the disease named covid- 19) , was identified by the chinese center for disease control and prevention (china cdc) as the aetiological agent [1] . the sars-cov-2 probably derived originally from bats, and amongst coronaviruses known to infect humans, is most closely related to, but distinct from, the sars coronavirus. the clinical manifestations of covid-19 virus infection include asymptomatic infection, mild upper respiratory symptoms, severe viral pneumonia with respiratory failure, and even death. although the risk of severe illness is not yet clear, hospitals in areas with significant community transmission have experienced a major increase in the number of hospitalized pneumonia patients, with the frequency of severe disease in hospitalized patients being as high as 30% [2] [3] [4] . the progression from prodromes (usually fever, fatigue, and cough) to severe pneumonia requiring oxygen support, mechanical ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) is most commonly seen in the second week following onset of symptoms of a viral infection [2] . the kinetics of viral replication in the respiratory tract has not been well characterized, but this relatively slow progression provides a potential time window and opportunity for antiviral therapies to influence the course of the disease.remdesivir (gs-5734) is a monophosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine analogue (gs-441524) and has broad action against a range of rna viruses [5] . it has been identified as the most promising therapeutic agent for evaluation in the treatment of covid-19 by an expert committee convened by the who r&d blueprint [6] . the primary mechanism of action is the intracellular incorporation of the pharmacologically active nucleoside triphosphate form into nascent rna chains by the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase, causing premature rna chain termination [7] [8] [9] . in vitro experiments have shown that remdesivir inhibits bat coronaviruses, endemic human coronavirus (oc43, 229e), and the human pathogenic coronaviruses mers-cov, sars-cov, and covid-19 [10] [11] [12] [13] . remdesivir has shown preventive and therapeutic effects in a mouse model of sars-cov [10] . in a mers-cov mouse model, prophylactic and therapeutic administration of remdesivir improved lung function, decreased lung viral load, and reduced severe lung pathological findings [14] . remdesivir has also shown prophylactic efficacy in mers-cov-infected indian rhesus monkeys (personal communication: gilead sciences, inc.).evaluation of intravenously administered remdesivir tolerance and safety in 94 healthy adult volunteers has found it to be generally well tolerated and to have an acceptable safety profile. the only significant adverse effects were transient grade 1 or grade 2 increases in aspartate transaminase (ast) and alanine transaminase (alt) (personal communication: gilead sciences, inc.). further clinical experience was obtained through a randomized controlled trial in patients with ebola virus disease. in this trial 175 patients received intravenous remdesivir with a loading dose on day 1 (200 mg in adults, and adjusted for body weight in pediatric patients), followed by a daily maintenance dose (100 mg in adults) starting on day 2 and continuing for 9 to 13 days. the only reported serious adverse event (sae) was that of one patient who experienced hypotension that resulted in cessation of the remdesivir loading dose, followed rapidly by cardiac arrest. however, the cause of death could not be distinguished from the patient's underlying severe ebola virus disease [15] .given the in vitro and in vivo effectiveness of remdesivir against a range of pathogenic human coronaviruses and the acceptable tolerance and safety in humans, we developed this trial with the objective of evaluating the safety and efficacy of intravenous remdesivir in adults with severe covid-19.the trial objective is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of intravenous remdesivir combined with standard of care compared with standard care alone in adult patients with severe covid-19.this is a phase 3, parallel group, randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, superiority, multicentre trial. the allocation ratio is 2:1 in favour of remdesivir to maximize learning about the experimental treatment whilst allowing a wider pool of patients access to the experimental treatment in order to support recruitment. exclusion criteriathe exclusion criteria are as follows:1. physician makes a decision that trial involvement is not in patient's best interest, or patient has any condition that does not allow the protocol to be followed safely 2. known severe liver disease (e.g. cirrhosis, alt > 5 × upper limit of normal (uln), or ast > 5 × uln) 3. patients who are pregnant or breastfeeding, or positive pregnancy test in women of childbearing age 4. patients with known severe renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate ≤ 30 ml/min/ 1.73 m 2 ), or patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy, haemodialysis, or peritoneal dialysis 5. will be transferred to any other hospital which is not a study site within 72 h 6. receipt of any investigational treatment for covid-19 within 30 days prior to screening.informed consent will be obtained from eligible patients or their substitute decision-makers (for patients lacking decision-making capacity) by study physicians or other trial staff with delegated responsibility.additional consent provisions for collection and use of participant data and biological specimens {26b}the consent form includes provisions for research data and samples and residual clinical blood samples to be stored for future scientific research on covid-19.the active arm is intravenously administered remdesivir in addition to routine supportive care. remdesivir was chosen for evaluation because of its in vitro activity against sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2, and its in vitro activity against sars-cov and mers-cov. there are safety data for remdesivir in healthy human volunteers and individuals with ebola virus disease. these data suggest that remdesivir is generally well tolerated and has an acceptable safety profile. it has been identified as the most promising therapeutic agent for treatment of covid-19 by the who r&d blueprint [6] . the dose of remdesivir was selected on the recommendation of gilead sciences, inc., based on known pharmacokinetics and dose-ranging studies in healthy volunteers. the control arm is placebo in addition to routine supportive care. there are no proven antiviral therapies for sars-cov-2 to include as an active control comparator.the intervention is described as follows for the experimental and control groups: criteria for discontinuing or modifying allocated interventions {11b}the discontinuation/modification criteria are as follows:1. any serious or intolerable adverse event (ae) which, in the investigators' judgement, requires withdrawal of the subject from the study. this may include drug intolerance or an unacceptable ae; any severe grade 4 ae, regardless of whether the ae is considered likely related to the study drug or not; significant results of laboratory tests which may require withdrawal of the participant, at the discretion of the researchers and the clinician; allergic reactions (including oropharyngeal oedema, severe rash, bronchospasm, and immediate-type allergic reactions); acute hepatitis; 1 stage iii or above acute kidney injury 2. investigator request for the subject to be withdrawn from the study.this item is not applicable, since active agent and placebo are administrated intravenously by healthcare professionals.this study seeks to evaluate the effect of remdesivir in addition to standard of care alone, rather than an effect that might be altered by other experimental treatments. therefore, all concomitant care and interventions are permitted other than concomitant receipt of any other experimental treatment.no special arrangements for post-trial care are anticipated.primary outcome measurethe primary outcome measure is time to clinical improvement (ttci) (censored at day 28). ttci is defined as the time (in days) from randomization of study treatment (active or placebo) until a decline of two categories on a six-category ordinal scale of clinical status (1 = hospital discharge; 2 = hospitalization, not requiring supplemental oxygen; 3 = hospitalization, requiring supplemental oxygen (but not non-invasive mechanical ventilation [niv]/high-flow nasal cannula [hfnc] therapy); 4 = hospitalization, requiring niv and/or hfnc therapy; 5 = hospitalization, requiring ecmo and/or invasive mechanical ventilation [imv]; 6 = death) or live hospital discharge, whichever comes first. table 1 shows the timeline of participant assessments/ interventions.the primary outcome is ttci (censored at day 28). an interim analysis for futility and efficacy is planned at the midpoint of the trial. at this point the sample size may also be re-assessed. a one-sided type i error of 2.5% across the two stages of the trial and a power of 80% if the hazard ratio comparing remdesivir to placebo is 1.4 is used. this hazard ratio corresponds to a reduction in ttci to 15 days on remdesivir if the ttci on standard of care was 21 days. triangular boundaries [16] are used to account for the multiple looks at the data, and allowance for the 2:1 randomization in favour of remdesivir is made. under these assumptions, the total number of events required in this study is 325.assuming an 80% event rate within 28 days across both arms and a dropout rate of 10% implies that approximately 453 patients are to be recruited for this trial (151 on placebo and 302 on remdesivir).patients will be recruited from the designated hospitals for patients with covid-19 virus.a permuted block (30 patients per block) randomization sequence, including stratification, is prepared by a statistician not involved in the trial using sas software, version 9.4 (sas institute). patient randomization is stratified based on respiratory support methods at the time of enrolment: (1) no oxygen support, oxygen support with nasal duct or mask; (2) high-flow oxygen, niv, imv/ecmo.eligible patients were allocated to receive medication in individually numbered packs according to the sequential order provided by the randomization centre (jin yin-tan hospital central pharmacy). remdesivir and placebo are pre-blinded and stored in a secure area in the pharmacy at a temperature strictly controlled according to the protocol. an independent pharmacist is assigned to dispense the study drug in waterproof, sealed, opaque bags.patients will receive medication in individually numbered packs according to the sequential order provided by the randomization centre. opaque envelopes were provided for emergency unblinding events. the allocation sequence was generated by the institutes of materia medica, chinese academy of medical sciences & peking union medical college. participants are enrolled by the investigators of each study site. a pharmacist in the central pharmacy assigns participants to interventions.this is a double-blind trial. trial participants, investigators, care providers, outcome assessors, and data analysts are all blinded. treatment allocation will only be unblinded after database lock.unblinding is permissible when investigators believe that there is a very strong need to know the study drug allocation in order to perform any agent treatment/action. whenever possible, unblinding will only be conducted after discussion with the study principal investigator. the procedure for revealing a participant's allocated intervention is as follows: (1) investigators confirm that the patient meets the criteria of unblinding according to the protocol; (2) the independent pharmacist opens the sealed envelope and informs the investigators of the allocation; (3) information about the date, time, and reason of unblinding will be recorded in the electronic data capture (edc) system and the envelope; (4) the envelope must be sealed again as soon as possible and securely stored along with the primary files of the subject.plans for assessment and collection of outcomes {18a}investigators are responsible for assessment and collection of outcome, baseline, and other trial data, and the data are double checked by the clinical research coordinators and clinical research associates as well as data managers. nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs, lower respiratory tract specimens (sputum/tracheal aspirate/ bronchial alveolar lavage fluid), feces/anal swabs, and pharmacokinetic samples (whole blood) will be sent to a central laboratory, where tests will performed according to laboratory standard operating procedures (sops). data collection forms can be found at https://edc.clinflash.net/login.for the efficacy outcome measures, two scales (six-category ordinal scale of clinical status and news2) are used. investigators will be trained to use these scales.subjects may voluntarily withdraw from the trial at any time. this decision must be communicated with and reviewed by investigators. staff at study sites should explain to these subjects the importance of staying in the study for the full duration of follow-up of this trial. for any withdrawal from this trial, investigators must fill in the withdrawal reason in the electronic case report form (ecrf) and try to complete all remaining assessments up to day 28 after randomization. for subjects who withdraw due to aes, investigators should closely follow up their aes until the aes disappear, return to the baseline state, or the ae condition is stable. if subjects are lost to follow-up, existing data collected up until the time of loss to follow-up will be used. investigators may request for subjects to be withdrawn from receiving the study drugs for clinical or other reasons. in this case, subjects should remain in the trial after terminating the trial treatment and be followed up for all scheduled visits and the corresponding data recorded.the edc system will be used for data management, including data entry, query, coding, security, and storage. the data manager built the database according to the protocol, and at the same time made logical verification settings for data validity, so as to verify the data. the data of each enrolled subject (including discontinued subjects) will be recorded into the database/ecrf rapidly, completely, and accurately. each completed ecrf will be reviewed and signed (electronically) by the investigators. the data manager will check the data and ask investigators to resolve any queries identified. the data administrator will proofread and modify the data according to investigators' answers. the data are securely stored in the edc system, with the server located in zhejiang province, china.subjects' data collected in crfs will be identified by a study subject id only. samples collected through the study will also be identified by a study subject id only. the log linking the study subject id with the patient identifying information will be held at each recruitment site. in the emergent or rare event that, for safety or regulatory reasons, it may be necessary to identify a subject, the sponsor and investigators were bound to keep this information confidential.plans for collection, laboratory evaluation, and storage of biological specimens for genetic or molecular analysis in this trial/future use {33} nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs, lower respiratory tract specimens (sputum/tracheal aspirate/bronchial alveolar lavage fluid), feces/anal swabs, and pharmacokinetic samples (whole blood) will collected by investigators or designees, marked with the study subject id, and then immediately sent to the central laboratory for coronavirus nucleic acid detection or remdesivir/active metabolites concentration detection. sample collection, handling, labelling, storage, shipping, processing, etc. will be performed according to the requirements of the operation manual in the central laboratory, teddy clinical research laboratory (shanghai) ltd.the primary outcome is ttci up to day 28 of patients on remdesivir compared to patients receiving placebo. patients will be randomized at a ratio of 2:1 to receive either remdesivir or placebo. all reporting will adhere to the consolidated standards of reporting trials (con-sort) guideline as well as the corresponding extension for adaptive clinical trials [17, 18] .the final analysis of the primary endpoint will use a cox proportional hazards model following the intentionto-treat principle. the final analysis will be conducted once a total of 325 events have occurred across both treatment groups. under the assumption of an 80% event rate within 28 days and accounting for 10% dropout, this means that the maximum number of patients to be recruited is approximately 453. a standardized test statistic is then found on the basis of this model-if this test statistic exceeds 2.095, then it will be concluded that remdesivir is significantly better than placebo. median unbiased effect estimates and confidence intervals accounting for the interim analysis will be reported [19] . analysis of secondary endpoints will use a logistic model for binary variables such as mortality and a cox proportional hazards model for time-to-event endpoints. a statistical analysis plan (sap) providing all details of the analyses to be undertaken will be completed before any data analysis will be conducted.an interim analysis for efficacy and lack of benefit will be undertaken once a total of 163 events have been observed across all treatment group. for the interim analysis the primary endpoint will be analysed using a cox proportional hazards model using the intention-to-treat principle. a standardized test statistic is then found on the basis of this model and if this test statistic falls below 0.741, the trial will be stopped for lack of benefit of remdesivir. if the test statistic exceeds 2.222, the trial will terminate with the conclusion, that remdesivir is significantly better than control. if the test statistics falls between 0.741 and 2.222, the trial continues to the second stage and a sample size re-estimation on the basis of the observed event rate will take place. the interim analysis is to be conducted by an independent statistician and reviewed by the dsmc. should the trial stop for futility or efficacy the median unbiased estimate as well as confidence intervals accounting for the interim analysis will be reported [19] .separate supporting analysis will be undertaken for gender and age groups (<60 and over 60 years of age at randomization). these analyses will use a cox proportional hazards model of the primary endpoint. additionally, mortality will be analysed for each of these subgroups using a logistic regression model.multiple imputation will be used for missing data. the primary analysis will use the intention-to-treat principle and a per protocol analysis will be undertaken to assess the robustness of the findings. the trial operation committee consists of yeming wang and fei zhou of china-japan friendship hospital, and ying liu, shunan ruan, and wen liu of jin yin-tan hospital.trial monitoring is performed by hangzhou tigermed consulting co., ltd.the data management team is hangzhou tigermed consulting co., ltd.the clinical research organization is hangzhou tigermed consulting co., ltd.composition of the data monitoring committee, its role and reporting structure {21a}the independent data safety monitoring board (dsmb) in this study is responsible for reviewing the reports regarding the safety of the study patients and protocol adherence and making recommendations to continue or terminate the study or modify sample size on the basis of the results from the interim analysis. the dsmb members are all independent of the sponsor and have no financial or other conflicts of interest. table 2 lists the dmc members.aes and saes will be collected from the time of informed consent to day 28. saes occurring after day 28 ± 3 will be reported if investigators determine that these saes are related to the study drugs. saes will be followed up until the sae has subsided, returned to baseline, or is stable.investigators or designees are responsible for collecting, assessing, reporting, and managing aes. aes will be fully investigated and recorded in detail in the crf, including onset date, the duration of ae, symptoms/signs, severity, action taken to manage the ae, relationship with the study drug, outcome of the ae, and date of outcome assessment (if outcome was other than recovering, not recovered, or unknown).the contract research organization (hangzhou tigermed consulting co., ltd.) will be responsible for monitoring the trial. on-site monitoring and remote monitoring visits will be conducted in accordance with the study monitoring plan to ensure the completeness and accuracy of research data. audits may be conducted at any time during or after the study.plans for communicating important protocol amendments to relevant parties (e.g. trial participants, ethical committees) {25}during the trial, the principal investigator will inform the independent ethics committee (iec) of any revision or modification of the protocol. the revision or modification will only be implemented after receiving iec approval, unless it is necessary to be implemented in order to eliminate immediate and direct harm to patients, in which case the iec will be informed as soon as possible.after any protocol amendment, the informed consent form and any other written information provided to subjects will be updated as necessary. investigators will inform subjects in time and ask them to sign the revised informed consent form to confirm their participation. the updated informed consent form must be approved by the iec before implementation.we will communicate trial results to national and international health authorities, healthcare professionals, the public, and other relevant groups as soon as the trial results are available.this study is the first double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of an experimental therapeutic for covid-19. whilst the covid-19 epidemic has been declared a public health emergency of international concern, this does not negate the need to generate robust evidence in which healthcare professionals, patients, their families, and public health authorities can have confidence. in past epidemics, unproven treatments have been used on a compassionate use basis, in observational studies, or in underpowered trials, and the results are uncertainty and ongoing treatment dilemmas. randomized, placebocontrolled trials are well established as the best way to minimize bias and confounding and produce reliable evidence. such trials can be implemented even in the most difficult circumstances; in fact, the difficult circumstances themselves make it even more important that patient care is not driven by fear and rumour but by science and evidence. during health emergencies, doctors and politicians are under enormous pressure to find cures to save lives and stop the epidemic, whilst patients are willing to try anything in the face of a frightening and unknown threat. we must resist these pressures and make sure that patients benefit from the fruits of science, even in difficult times.the use of placebo is especially beneficial in the midst of great anxiety, when the pressures to announce a cure or act on preliminary, but inconclusive data, are intense. a placebo relieves the temptation from all involved in the trial to engage in speculation and the worry that they are withholding what early (but often false) impressions may suggest is a promising drug. whilst remdesivir has shown promising activity in preclinical models of severe cov infection, it is currently unknown whether it will prove safe and effective in treating severe covid-19, both because of its uncertain antiviral efficacy and the unclear importance of ongoing viral replication versus an inflammatory process in disease pathogenesis in severely ill patients. of note, remdesivir yielded positive results in preclinical models of ebola virus infection but was inferior to two monoclonal antibody therapies in treated patients [15] .during epidemics, as well as calls to treat everyone, other voices demand that vulnerable patients not be treated as 'guinea pigs'. clinical trials use well-deliberated, tested, and transparent scientific methods, and are undertaken as a joint endeavour between patients and health professionals within a clear ethical framework. health emergencies raise additional ethical concerns, but these have been carefully considered by various groups, and clear guidance exists on the conduct of clinical research during health emergencies [20] [21] [22] .the choice of the primary endpoint for a clinical trial is always challenging, but it has added difficulties when dealing with a disease with uncertain natural history, an overstretched workforce, and the desire for an early answer. this requires an endpoint that is clinically meaningful, is based on simple data collection, has sufficient power, and will occur early. it also requires statistical methods that are robust to misspecification of design parameters, such as the endpoint frequency. we believe that our primary endpoint is both pragmatic and informative, but we have included a range of secondary endpoints to show consistency with the primary endpoint, as recommended by the us food and drug administration for trials in influenza [23] .the protocol version is number 3.0, dated 9 th february 2020.the first patient, first visit was on 6 th february 2020; the recruitment end date was anticipated to be 3 rd april 2020.the study sponsor and funders had no role in study design; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of data; writing of the report; or the decision to submit the report for publicationauthors' contributions {31b} bc, yw, ghf, fz, fh, and pwh designed the trial. tj and ghf developed the statistical analysis plan. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.funding was provided by the following:• emergency project for novel coronavirus pneumonia of the ministry of science and technology (2020yfc0841300) the study funders had no role in the study design; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of data; writing of the report; or the decision to submit the report for publication.the datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study will be made available.this trial has been approved by the ethical review board of the china-japan friendship hospital, no. 2, east yinghua road, chaoyang district, beijing, 100029, china. informed consent will be obtained from all study participants.not applicable.the global pandemic of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has created an urgent need for effective antivirals. 1, 2 a wide variety of novel and repurposed agents are currently being evaluated in clinical trials and anecdotal reports of off-label and compassionate use of a number of these agents have emerged. 3, 4 remdesivir (formerly gs-5734) is a monophosphoramidate nucleoside analogue prodrug that was originally developed in response to the 2014 -2016 ebola outbreak in west africa. 5, 6 ribavirin against coronaviruses, for example, has been attributed to its removal by exon. 11 remdesivir is more active against viruses lacking exon but is able to partly evade proofreading and maintain potent antiviral activity in the presence of exon. this was nicely illustrated in a βcoronavirus murine hepatitis virus (mhv) model. 11 compared to wild-type mhv (ec 50 0.087 μm), viruses lacking exon were approximately 4-fold more sensitive to remdesivir inhibition (ec 50 0.019 μm). the reason remdesivir's activity is only modestly decreased by exon relates to two unique properties. first, remdesivir is incorporated into replicating rna more efficiently than natural nucleotides. 10, 12, 13 this was shown in a series of kinetic studies that determined the selectivity of βcoronaviruses for remdesivir vs. natural nucleotides. 10, 12 in this context selectivity was defined as the ratio of the parameters vmax (reflecting the maximal velocity of nucleotide incorporation) to km interestingly, selectivity values were higher for ebola virus (4) and for other nucleotide analogues with sars-cov-2 (favipiravir = 570 and ribavirin >> 1000). 10 the second reason that remdesivir is able to partly evade exon is because it functions as a nonobligate or delayed rna chain terminator. 10, 12, 13 delayed chain termination occurs when a nucleotide analogue has a free 3'-oh group required for the addition of natural nucleotides. the incorporation of the delayed chain terminator however perturbs the rna structure and synthesis is halted at some point downstream. 13 in sars-cov-1, sars-cov-2 and mers-cov, remdesivir (gs-443902) incorporation consistently results in chain termination after three additional nucleotides are added. 10, 12 it is thought that these nucleotides provide protection from exon excision. 10, 12 as described in the chemistry and pharmacology section, remdesivir is a pro-drug; concentrations decline rapidly after iv administration (plasma half-life, t ½ ~ 1 hour), followed by the sequential appearance of the intermediate alanine metabolite gs-704277 and the nucleoside monophosphate metabolite gs-441524 (plasma t ½ 24.5 hours) ( figure 1 ). inside cells, gs-441524 is rapidly converted to the pharmacologically active triphosphate analogue, gs-443902 which has a prolonged intracellular t ½ (peripheral blood mononuclear cell, pbmc t ½ ~ 40 hours). both remdesivir and gs-441524 exhibit linear pk following single doses between 3 mg and 225 mg and no remdesivir accepted article accumulation was observed following once daily dosing for up to 5 days. by contrast, gs-441524 reaches steady state around day 4 and accumulates by ~ 2-fold after multiple once daily dosing. 3 the remdesivir dosing regimen being evaluated in clinical trials (200 mg iv on day 1, then 100 mg iv on days 2 through 5 or 10) was substantiated by in vitro data and bridging the pk with the rhesus monkey experience to humans. 7, 8, 14 table 1 summarizes pertinent pk parameters of remdesivir and metabolite gs-441524, which were derived from single and multiple-dose studies in healthy human adult volunteers. 14 as shown, remdesivir c max values are many fold above concentrations required in vitro to inhibit sars-cov-2 replication by 50% and 90% (ec 50 0.137 -0.77 μm, ec 90 1.76 μm, see microbiology section). 14, 15 due to the near complete first pass effect of phosphoramidates, remdesivir is expected to have poor oral bioavailability. 6 plasma protein binding for remdesivir is moderate (free fraction of 12.1%). by contrast metabolites gs-704277 and gs-441524 exhibit low plasma protein binding with mean free fractions ≥ 85%. 14 in cynomolgus monkeys, radiolabeled remdesivir or its metabolites were detectable in the testes, epididymis, eyes and brain 4 hours after a 10 mg/kg dose (equivalent to 200 mg in humans). 16 levels in the brain were significantly lower than other tissues but accumulated over time. 16 distribution studies in humans have not yet been reported.remdesivir is a substrate of several cytochrome p450 enzymes in vitro (see drug interactions section), however clinical implications are unclear since the pro-drug is rapidly metabolized by plasma hydrolases. 14 by similar reasoning, the effect of hepatic impairment on remdesivir plasma levels should be low although specific studies have not been conducted in patients with hepatic impairment and the drug is contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment. 14 metabolism of metabolites gs-704277, gs-441524 and gs-443902 has not been characterized.remdesivir exhibits low renal excretion (< 10%). however, 49% of a radiolabeled dose was recovered as gs-441524 in urine. 14 theoretically, plasma exposure of gs-441524 may be increased in patients with renal impairment. remdesivir formulations contain sulfobutylether β-cyclodextrin sodium (sbecd) as a solubility enhancer. 14 formulations containing sbecd have historically been cautioned against in patients with renal impairment although clinical data suggest sbecd accumulation does not increase the risk of acute kidney injury. 17 there are no recommendations for dose adjustments in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment at this time. under the fda emergency use authorization guidance, remdesivir is not recommended in patients with an estimated accepted article glomerular filtration rate (egfr) < 30 ml/min or serum creatinine ≥ 1 mg/dl unless the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk. 18 patients with an egfr < 30 ml/min and those who are receiving hemodialysis or hemofiltration are excluded from the ema compassionate use program. 14 there are no pk data available for children or women who are pregnant or breast feeding.remdesivir has demonstrated broad-spectrum activity against a diverse panel of zoonotic and clinically relevant human coronaviruses including sars-cov-1, sars-cov-2 and mers-cov with micromolar ec 50 or ic 50 values in multiple in vitro systems. 3, 9, 11, 19, 20 in human airway epithelial cell cultures for example, remdesivir inhibited sars-cov-1 and mers-cov replication with ic 50 values of 0.069 and 0.074 μm, respectively. 9 emerging data suggests remdesivir also exhibits potent activity against sars-cov-2. 14, 15, 21 in testing performed by the chinese cdc in collaboration with the manufacturer, gilead sciences, inc., using vero e6 cells (a cell line from green monkey kidney epithelial cells that is commonly used to evaluate antiviral activity), the ec 50 value was 0.137 μm against sars-cov-2. 14 14, 15 in this study viral load was fitted in logarithm scales (log 10 tcid 50 /ml and log 10 viral rna copies/ml). using this scale ec 50 values were many fold higher at 23.15 μm and 26.90 μm, respectively. 21 it is uncertain which method is most reflective of activity in vivo. it should also be remembered that ec 50 and ic 50 values represent a single point on the dose-response curve and the slope of the curve may be more important when evaluating potency. 22 this relationship is generally neglected when assessing in vitro antiviral activity. furthermore, clinical outcomes may depend on whether > 90% inhibition is achieved but ec 90 values are reported in a minority of studies.it is reassuring that the ec 90 value reported by wang and colleagues (1.76 μm) is achievable with the dosing regimen under evaluation (see pk section). 14, 15the development of remdesivir resistance in coronaviruses has been assessed by cell culture in mhv which has similar ec 50 values to sars-cov-1, sars-cov-2 and mers-cov. 11 following > 20 accepted article in vitro passages, two nonsynonymous mutations were selected in the nsp12 rdrp: f476l and v553l. neither of the mutations directly altered rdrp's catalytic site or substrate binding pocket but they did cause minor structural alterations that are thought to impact rdrp's fidelity checking step before catalysis. 11, 13 compared to wild-type virus, these mutations conferred 2.4-fold and 5-fold reduced susceptibility to remdesivir, respectively while the double mutant showed 5.6-fold reduced susceptibility in vitro. 11 the ec 50 values of the mutants (0.057 -0.13 μm) however, remained below achievable human drug exposures. 3, 11, 13 furthermore, the mutations appear to confer a fitness cost, with wild-type virus rapidly outcompeting the mutants in the absence of remdesivir. of concern however, the affected residues are conserved across coronaviruses raising the possibility of a common pathway to resistance. in fact, substitutions at homologous sars-cov-1 residues conferred a 6-fold decrease in susceptibility to remdesivir (ec 50 0.01 μm → 0.06 μm). 11 no data specific to sars-cov-2 remdesivir resistance have been published at the time of writing.remdesivir's efficacy against respiratory diseases caused by β-coronaviruses has been evaluated in both rodent and rhesus monkey models. 7-9, 14, 19 before summarizing these studies the reader should be aware that rodent models are not ideal for evaluating remdesivir efficacy against β-coronaviruses. first, high levels of serum esterases rapidly degrade the pro-drug (t ½ ~ 5 minutes). 9, 16 investigators have attempted to overcome this by using esterase knock-out mice. 9 this improves plasma stability (t ½ ~25 minutes), but tissue levels of active metabolites are still ~ 10-fold lower. 9 second, the active triphosphate metabolite (gs-443902) has a significantly shorter t ½ in the mouse lung (3 hours) compared to human lung cells and nonhuman primate lungs (t ½ 20 -40 hours). 9, 14 finally, mice are naturally resistant to infection by mers-cov due to the inability of the spike protein binding domain to interact with the mouse dpp4 receptor. therefore transgenic mice harboring a modified humanized dpp4 must be used. 19 these limitations notwithstanding, sheahan and colleagues evaluated prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir against sars-cov-1 in an esterase-deficient mouse model. 9 compared to control mice, prophylactic administration of remdesivir (24 hours before viral inoculation) resulted in less weight loss, lower viral lung titers and reduced sars-cov-1-induced lung pathology. 9 similarly, therapeutic remdesivir (administered 1 day post-inoculation) significantly diminished weight loss and viral load and improved pulmonary function, although to a lesser degree than the prophylactic regimen. whenthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved remdesivir was initiated 2 days post-infection however, it did not improve disease outcomes even though viral lung titers were reduced. the disease course in mice is accelerated compared to humans with viral titers peaking around day 2 concurrent with maximal damage to lungs.the same group of investigators conducted a similar study evaluating remdesivir and lopinavir/ritonavir +/-interferon-β against mers-cov in an esterase-deficient, humanized ddp4 mouse model. 19 prophylactic remdesivir significantly improved mers-cov-induced weight loss, decreased viral lung titers, and diminished features of acute lung injury compared to control mice. it also prevented mortality in mice administered a lethal dose of virus. in contrast, prophylactic lopinavir/ritonavir +/-interferon-β slightly reduced viral loads but had no impact on other disease outcomes. therapeutic remdesivir also led to improved disease outcomes and lower viral loads, but again, the effect size was diminished compared to prophylactic administration. remdesivir administered after a lethal viral dose was given (as opposed to before with prophylaxis), did not prevent mortality. 19 the prophylactic and/or therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir has been evaluated in mers-cov-infected and sars-cov-2-infected rhesus monkeys. these models more accurately recapitulate the lung disease observed in humans with mild-moderate mers-cov and sars-cov-2 infection compared to rodent models. 23, 24 dosing and pharmacokinetic analyses can also serve as a bridge to human dosing regimens. 7 however, due to the acute and accelerated infection course in monkeys, it is difficult to directly translate the timing of drug initiation to corresponding disease stages in humans. 23, 24 furthermore, neither model replicates many of the extrapulmonary disease manifestation seen in humans. 23, 24 in the mers-cov study, monkeys were administered remdesivir (5mg/kg which approximates drug exposures equivalent to 100mg in humans) 24 hours before mers-cov inoculation (prophylaxis) or 12 hours post-inoculation (treatment). 8 viral titers peak shortly after 12 hours in this model. for both groups, remdesivir was continued once daily until 6 days post-inoculation. prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir treatment significantly reduced mers-cov-induced clinical signs, viral titers in respiratory specimens and the severity of lung lesions compared to control animals. these effects were most pronounced in the prophylactic group. 8 a similar prophylactic study was conducted using a higher remdesivir dose (10mg/kg which approximates drug exposures equivalent to 200mg in humans). 14 clinical signs and viral loads were significantly reduced vs. controls. increases in serum accepted article creatinine and blood urea nitrogen suggestive of altered renal function were only observed in remdesivir treated animals. 14 in the sars-cov-2 study, remdesivir was again initiated shortly before viral titers are expected to peak at 12 hours post-inoculation and a dosing regimen equivalent to the regimen being tested in human covid-19 clinical trials was used (10 mg/kg load ~ 200 mg in humans, then 5 mg/kg daily ~ 100mg daily in humans x 6 days). 7 compared to vehicle-treated monkeys, remdesivir-treated monkeys had improved clinical and radiographic outcomes. viral titers were reduced in lower respiratory tract specimens and undetectable at 3 days post inoculation. viral titers were not reduced in upper respiratory tract specimens nor in rectal swabs however. 7 if translated in humans, the absence of a reduction in viral shedding in these sites may have implications for potential transmission risk following clinical improvement. 7initial experience with remdesivir in patients with covid-19 emerged in the form of case reports and uncontrolled case series as detailed in table 2 . 3, [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] all patients in these reports received remdesivir through compassionate use or expanded access programs. 14, 30 the largest report included 61 patients from centers in north america, europe and japan. 3 all patients were hospitalized with microbiologically confirmed covid-19 and had an oxygen saturation ≤ 94% on room air or required oxygen support. those with severe renal impairment, elevated hepatic enzymes, or receiving another investigational agent at baseline were excluded. of the 53 patients with short-term follow-up data available, 30 (56%) were receiving mechanical ventilation at baseline and a further 4 (8%) required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo). remdesivir was started at a median of 12 days following symptom onset. after a median follow-up of 18 days, 7 (13%) patients died including 6 (18%) who were receiving invasive ventilation. adverse events were reported in 32 (60%) patients, including 12 (23%) who experienced at least one serious adverse event. the most frequent adverse events were hepatic enzyme elevations, diarrhea, rash, renal impairment, and hypotension.the publication of this report generated a great deal of controversy. the authors rightly acknowledge many of its limitations including the small sample size, the short duration of follow-up, missing data and the absence of a control group. 3 the lack of post day 1 data on 7 patients is particularly concerning and not adequately addressed in the publication. in addition, a target sample size was not reported nor was a rationale given for why the data were analyzed and reported at the point theywere. it is unclear how many physicians applied for compassionate use for their patients but were denied. it would be interesting to know how these patients differed from the small number whose request for remdesivir was approved. finally, preclinical studies suggest that remdesivir has little benefit when administered after the peak in viral replication has occurred. 7-9, 14, 19 although the precise timing of peak viral loads was not accessed in these patients, it may be problematic to attribute favorable outcomes to the remdesivir when initiation was delayed beyond 12 days for many patients.against this backdrop, the first randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluating remdesivir for covid-19 was recently published. 31 in this study 237 hospitalized adults with severe covid-19 were enrolled at 10 centers in wuhan, hubei, china and randomized (2:1) to remdesivir or matching placebo for a planned 10-day treatment course (200mg iv day 1, 100mg iv daily on days 2 to 10). severe covid-19 was defined as a sars-cov-2 positive respiratory specimen by rt-pcr, pneumonia confirmed by chest imaging and an oxygen saturation ≤ 94% on room air or a ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fractional inspired oxygen ≤ 300mmhg. the primary outcome was time to clinical improvement defined as discharge alive from hospital or a 2-point improvement on a 6-point ordinal scale adapted from the world health organization's 8-point illness severity scale. 32 the study was stopped before reaching its target sample size of 453 due to slow enrollment.baseline characteristics were similar between groups: the median duration of illness before enrollment was 10 days and most patients (82%) required only low-flow supplemental oxygen at baseline. 31 use of antibiotics (91%) and corticosteroids (66%) were high in both groups. in addition, 28% and 32% of patients received lopinavir/ritonavir and/or interferon-α2β, respectively during the course of their illness. with regards to the primary outcome, there was no significant difference in time to clinical improvement between the remdesivir and placebo groups [ this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved adequately powered clinical trials or meta-analyses. considering remdesivir's potent in vitro activity against sars-cov-2 and impressive results in pre-clinical models, one of the most unexpected findings in this study was that remdesivir had no impact on viral load. it is plausible that the delayed time to administration may have played a role. on the other hand, in vitro activity and animal data often do not translate into meaningful benefit for patients. 5, 33, 34 strengths of this study include its randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design, high protocol adherence and low loss to follow-up. 31 premature termination however leaves an underpowered study with inconclusive results. although cautious of over-interpretation, the point estimate for the primary outcome (hr 1.23) suggests any benefit of remdesivir may be more modest than hoped for (hr 1.40) and the small difference in favor of remdesivir for the composite primary outcome appeared to be driven largely by change in oxygenation status rather than the more clinically meaningful hospital discharge. as discussed in the safety section, this study did give valuable data to help better characterize the adverse effect profile of remdesivir.on the same day that the peer-reviewed publication of the study by wang and colleagues was released, partial results of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases sponsored adaptive covid-19 trial (actt-1) were made public in a press release. 31 actt-1 was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-control study evaluating remdesivir (200mg iv day 1, then 100mg iv days 2 to 10) in hospitalized adult patients with covid-19. the primary endpoint, (which was changed 9 days before the independent data safety monitoring board meet to review the results announced in the press release) was time to recovery within 28 days after randomization using a 3point ordinal scale. after 606 recovery events, the median time to recovery was 11 days in the remdesivir group vs. 15 days in the placebo group (hr 1.31; 95% ci 1.12 to 1.54). mortality was numerically, but not statistically lower, in the remdesivir group (8.0% vs. 11.6%; p = 0.059). 31 in a second statement, gilead announced that similar outcomes had been demonstrated in their open-label, multicenter clinical trial of 5 vs. 10 days of remdesivir in patients with covid-19 not requiring invasive mechanical ventilation or ecmo. 35 more comprehensive data about these studies is anticipated. as of 5 may 2020, there are 10 clinical studies underway and registered on clinicaltrials.gov, including 6 randomized-controlled trials, the full results of which are eagerly awaited. 36 (table 3) this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved information on the safety profile of remdesivir is rapidly evolving. until recently, most clinical experience has been in patients with ebola virus infection which has very different clinical manifestations compared to covid-19 making extrapolation of drug safety across populations problematic. 5, 14 in the palm study, 9 of 175 patients who received remdesivir for ebola virus infection experienced serious adverse events judged by trial investigators to be potentially related to remdesivir. 5 the most serious of these was hypotension during the loading dose rapidly followed by cardiac arrest and death. 5 among 38 ebola virus infection survivors who were enrolled in the single arm phase ii prevail iv study, 1 patient required a remdesivir dose reduction due to transaminase elevations. 14 safety data from four phase 1 pk studies in healthy volunteers has also been partly reported. 3, 23 in these studies, subjects received single remdesivir doses of up to 225mg or multiple doses of 150mg once daily for 7 or 14 days or 200mg once followed by 100mg daily for a total of 5 or 10 days. the most common adverse events, recorded in at least 5 subjects, were phlebitis, constipation, headache, ecchymosis, nausea and extremity pain. 3 transient asymptomatic grade 1 or 2 alanine aminotransferase (alt) elevations were observed in most subjects (exact frequency not reported) in the multi-dose pk studies including 1 individual with alt values > 10 x baseline. 3, 23 transaminase increases have also been reported in covid-19 patients treated with compassionate use remdesivir (table 2) 3, 23, 26, 28 in the report detailing the first 12 covid-19 cases in the us, all 3 patients who received remdesivir experienced transient transaminase elevations and gastrointestinal symptoms. 26 in addition one patient in the case series from france experienced alt elevation to 3 times the upper limit of normal and a maculopapular rash leading to remdesivir discontinuation 4 days following the first dose. 28 the fda reports that among 163 patients enrolled in the compassionate use program, the overall incidence of liver function test abnormalities was 11.7%. 23 seven cases were considered serious. the time to onset from first dose ranged from 1 to 16 days.with the exception of 1 case of seriously elevated bilirubin, none of the other cases had associated hyperbilirubinemia or symptoms of hepatitis. 23 in the rct reported by wang and colleagues, adverse effects were recorded in 66% of patients randomized to remdesivir of which 8% were grade 3 or 4 (thrombocytopenia n =4, hypokalemia n=2, hyperkalemia n = 2, anemia n=1, increased total bilirubin n = 1) . 31 the incidence and distribution of adverse effects was similar in the placebo group. aspartate aminotransferase (ast) elevations were observed in 5% of patients in the remdesivir arm compared to 12% in the placebo arm. no patients in accepted article either arm experienced grade 3 or 4 transaminase elevations. more patients in the remdesivir discontinued treatment prematurely (12% vs. 5%) with respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome being the most common event leading to drug discontinuation in the remdesivir group. in a summary of safety data reported by the fda from the a remdesivir clinical trial comparing 5 and 10day treatment courses in patients with covid-19, grade 3 and 4 alt and/or ast elevations occurred in 7% patients. elevations in bilirubin were uncommon (1.3%). 23 at this time, it is unclear if the liver enzyme abnormalities seen in patients receiving remdesivir for covid-19 are a component of the infectious process or due to the drug. the fact that abnormalities, albeit less severe, were seen in healthy volunteers suggests remdesivir is at least partly culpable.whether asymptomatic abnormalities are harbingers of more serious liver toxicity is also unknown.other approved nucleoside analogues including those used to treat hiv, hepatitis b and cytomegalovirus, are known to cause liver injury by a variety of mechanisms. 24 the most common involves inhibition of mitochondrial dna synthesis leading to mitochondria depletion or dysfunction.first generation hiv reverse transcriptase inhibitors are thought to cause hepatic injury by this mechanism. mitochondrial dysfunction can affect multiple tissues manifesting as myopathy, neuropathy, pancreatitis, bone marrow suppression and/or hepatic injury. 24 extra-hepatic manifestations of mitochondrial dysfunction have not been reported in patients exposed to remdesivir to date. nucleoside analogues may also cause liver injury through acute hypersensitivity reactions or the production of toxic intermediates. 24 these reactions tend to be idiosyncratic and uncommon whereas transaminase elevations are consistently observed in a minority of remdesivir treated patients. a fulsome safety assessment of remdesivir will require thorough review of data from recently completed and ongoing studies in addition to post-marketing surveillance and real-world experience.at the time of writing, no in vivo drug interaction studies of remdesivir have been published but the ability of remdesivir to inhibit or induce cytochrome p450 (cyp450) enzymes and transporters has been tested in vitro. 14 importantly however, as a pro-drug, remdesivir is rapidly degraded in vivo so the potential for clinically significant drug interactions is likely limited. 14 data on the potential for remdesivir metabolites to perpetrate drug interactions is even scarcer. in in vitro studies, remdesivir was a weak inhibitor of cyp1a2, cyp2c9, cyp2c19 and cyp2d6. 14 remdesivir's ic 50 for cyp3a was 1.6 μm suggesting inhibition may occur briefly with standard human exposures. inhibition of accepted article cyp450 enzymes by metabolites was not investigated. 14 tests of remdesivir cyp450 induction have been inconsistent; it may induce cyp1a2 and cyp2b6. 14 again the clinical importance of this is questionable. gs-441524 and gs-704277 demonstrated no cyp450 induction in these studies.remdesivir was found to be a substrate (oatp1b, p-glycoprotein) or inhibitor (oat1b1, oat1b3) of several drug transporters. 14 there are no exclusion criteria related to drug-drug interactions in current remdesivir clinical studies (table 3) .remdesivir is available in 2 bioequivalent formulations: a concentrated solution (5mg/ml) and a lyophilized powder formulation. 14, 18 vials contain 100mg of remdesivir and are preservative-free. 14, 18 readers are referred to the fda fact sheet for full storage, preparation and administration instructions. 18 for adults and children weighing ≥ 40kg requiring invasive mechanical ventilation or ecmo, the recommended dose is 200mg iv on day 1 followed by 100mg iv once daily on days 2 to 10. for those not requiring invasive mechanical ventilation or ecmo, a 5 day regimen is recommended.doses should be administered over 30 minutes to 2 hours. readers are referred to the fda fact sheet for full pediatric dosing recommendations. 18 there is no information on direct iv push, intramuscular or subcutaneous administration at this time.at this time there are no therapies that have been scientifically proven to improve mortality in covid- 19 . current management is largely focused on supportive care and prevention of complications. 37, 38 efficacious and safe antiviral agents are therefore urgently needed to relieve the burden on healthcare systems. as detailed in this review, remdesivir is a nucleoside analogue pro-drug with unique structural features that allow high concentrations of the active triphosphate metabolite to be delivered intracellularly. 6 it evades proofreading to successfully inhibit viral rna synthesis and has demonstrated potent antiviral activity against β-coronaviruses, including sars-cov-2 both in vitro and in animal models. 7-12, 15, 19, 20 these data, coupled with early safety data from clinical experience in ebola virus infection 5 , provide strong rationale for prioritizing testing of remdesivir in covid-19 clinical trials. the unpredictable nature of a pandemic however poses many challenges to researchers attempting to conduct clinical trials. 39 the first randomized controlled trial evaluating remdesivir for covid-19 was conducted a multiple sites in the initial outbreak epicenter yet it failedthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved to meet its target sample size due to slow enrollment after the surge in cases diminished and it produced inconclusive results. when patient enrollment in clinical trials is not available, many clinicians face intense pressure to offer unproven therapies based on compelling pre-clinical data. as of april 30, 2020, more than 2000 patients with covid-19 have received remdesivir through compassionate use or expanded access programs. 35 it is impossible to know if these patients benefited or were harmed but we do know these programs do little to advance science. efforts must focus on ensuring the necessary infrastructure is in place to expand patient access to pragmatic clinical trials and make it simple for clinicians to enroll them. this could obviate the need for compassionate use programs. with at least 6 remdesivir randomized-controlled trials currently underway worldwide, there is reason to be optimistic that we will accumulate good data and learn if remdesivir provides a meaningful benefit to covid-19 patients.infectious diseases society of america. april 2020. https://www.idsociety.org/practice- this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved on december 31st, 2019, several pneumonia cases linked to a seafood market in wuhan, china were reported to the world health organization (who). the fast-spreading infection, now known as coronavirus disease 2019 , is caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) [1] . on march 12th, 2020, who declared covid-19 outbreak a pandemic *2+. according to johns hopkins' covid-19 global case dashboard, by june 12 th , june 23th, 2020, there were 9,157,320 confirmed cases and 473,849 total deaths worldwide [3] . at present, there is no treatment specific for sars-cov-2 with efficacy proven by randomized controlled trials (rct). however, given the scale and rapid spread of this infectious disease, it is obligatory to take a deeper look at medication therapies that have been experimented by frontline clinicians and examine the clinical and laboratory evidence behind them.the selection of medications in this review is based the 7 th edition of covid-19 diagnosis and treatment guideline issued by the national health commission (nhc) of the people's republic of china ( table 2) and relevant clinical studies. although there are few published rcts on sars-cov-2, the novel virus is found to share 79% genome sequence with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and about 50% with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) while manifesting overlapping pathogenesis [4, 5] . relevant in vitro researches, animal models and clinical evidence in all coronaviruses and reviewed by june 12 th june 23th, 2020, in order to gain insights on the potential role of these medication therapies in combating covid-19. data for this review were identified by searches of pubmed and references from relevant articles using the search terms "*medication name+" and "sars-cov-2", "coronavirus", "covid-19". only articles published in english and chinese (speaking languages of the authors) were included. patients-based clinical data, when available, were given priority over in vitro and in vivo data. randomized controlled trials, when available, were given priority over other studies.remdesivir (gs-5734) is an investigational drug first developed for the treatment of ebola [6, 7] . as an adenosine analogue prodrug, it putatively disrupts viral rna transcription and is viewed as a broadspectrum antiviral agent [8, 9, 10, 11] . profoundly, remdesivir has exhibited mechanisms to overcome drug resistance and genetic mutations in coronavirus [11] . patients with severe renal impairment (egfr< 30 ml/min/1.73) or severe liver disease are excluded from receiving remdesivir [12, 13, 14] .remdesivir is generally well tolerated with possible adverse effects of nausea, liver enzyme elevation, hypotension and respiratory failure [6, 7, 13, 14] .in a mouse sars-cov model, remdesivir reduced viral burden and lung pathology efficiently.notably, when remdesivir was given after the peak of viral replication and airway epithelium damage, it no longer increased survival or reserved pulmonary function significantly [15] . in february 2020, results of remdesivir in the first nonhuman primate model of mers became available, revealing successful reduction of clinical signs, lung lesions, and viral replication [16] . the regimen was started 12 hours postinoculation, again signaling the importance of early initiation of therapy [16] .in february 2020, remdesivir produced high efficacy against sars-cov-2 in vitro (half maximal effective concentration ec 50 = 0.77 μm; the 50% cytotoxic concentration cc 50 > 100 μm; the selectivity index si > 129.87) *9+. the first covid-19 case in the united states was treated with remdesivir intravenously (iv) [17] . within 24 hours of remdesivir initiation, the patient became afebrile, off nasal cannulae, with chest rales resolved. however, the viral loads had been downward trending even before remdesivir treatment. it therefore cannot be determined if further viral load decrease and clinical improvement were a direct result of remdesivir. a case series of remdesivir compassionate use (n=53) reported 68% improved oxygenation, 47% discharge and 13% death. the study was weakened by many factors, including most significantly the lack of a paired control group [12] . a double-blinded rct in china (n=237) revealed no superiority of remdesivir over placebo in time to clinical recovery, 28-day mortality and viral clearance [13] . on average, remdesivir was initiated 11 days post symptom onset, likely past the peak of viral replication. as covid-19 surge passed in china, the trial only recruited 50% of target sample size, reducing statistical power. simple, a phase 3 open-label rct, revealed that remdesivir 5-day vs. 10-day regimens of 200 mg once followed by 100 mg iv daily produced similar outcomes. the group that started remdesivir early (<10 days of symptoms onset) had a higher discharge rate on day 14 (62% vs 49%). the national institutes of health (nih) recently released preliminary result analysis of the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial (actt, n=1063) [18] . in this rct, remdesivir arm had 31% faster time to recovery than the placebo group (p<0.001). mortality rate was also reduced in remdesivir group but not statistically significant (8% vs. 11.6%, p=0.059). the forthcoming full publication might reveal whether the promising outcomes were associated with early administration of remdesivir, as suggested by previous studies.by far, remdesivir has not shown significant mortality benefit. when initiated early, remdesivir appears to expedite recovery. as an investigative drug on incomplete trials, remdesivir is neither recommended nor disapproved by china's nhc and who [19, 20] . currently, remdesivir is recommended by the nih for hospitalized severe covid-19 cases as defined by oxygenation needs [21] .lopinavir/ritonavir (lpv/r) is a combination protease inhibitor approved for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection [22] . lopinavir binds to viral protease and prevents cleavage of the gag-pol polyprotein, resulting in the production of immature, non-infectious viral particles. ritonavir increases the plasma concentration of lopinavir by inhibiting cytochrome p450 3a (cyp3a) metabolism.short-term side effects of lpv/r include nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, elevation of liver enzyme and prolongation of qt and pr interval [22] .lopinavir showed in vitro cytopathic effect against sars-cov at 4 μg/ml *23+. although the trough (5.5 μg/ml) concentration of lopinavir was above 4 μg/ml, the free drug concentration would likely be below the inhibitory threshold in the setting of high protein binding (98-99%). the unfavorable pharmacodynamics are likely to limit the efficacy of lpv/r in covid-19 as well.during the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak, it appeared that lpv/r conferred clinical benefit in an early phase of the disease to reduce peak viral load before progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). when lpv/r was added to ribavirin and corticosteroids as initial treatment, the mortality and intubation rates were lower than among those who received it as rescue therapy (2.3% vs. 15.6%, 0% vs. 110% respectively, p<0.05) in a multicenter retrospective cohort study [24] . a hong kong study retrospectively evaluated the efficacy of lpv/r in 152 patients with sars.patients from the historical control arm received ribavirin while those in the second arm received lpv/r in addition to ribavirin. the second group showed lower rates of 21 days adverse outcomes (ards or death) when compared to the historical controls (2.4% vs. 28.8%, p<0.001) [23] .in a cohort study describing 18 patients with covid-19 in singapore, five of 6 patients with hypoxemia started lopinavir/ritonavir (200 mg/100 mg bid). two patients deteriorated and required admission to intensive care units (icu). both patients had persistent nasopharyngeal viral loads during their icu stay. limitations of the study include statistical underpowering, suboptimal dose of lopinavir/ritonavir, and delay on initiation of therapy or absence of combination therapy with ribavirin [25] . the elacoi trial, a single-blind rct (preprint), included 44 patients with mild to moderate covid-19 symptoms. there were no differences in the primary outcome of time to negative pharyngeal pcr test between the lpv/r, umifenovir and control groups (8.5, 7 and 4 days, respectively). there were no differences in pyrexia, cough or lung ct findings at day 7 and 14. five patients in the lpv/r group experienced adverse events including gastrointestinal symptoms and worsening liver function [26] .on march 18th, the results of the first covid-19 clinical trial of lpv/r were published.unfortunately, lpv/r did not show superiority over standard care for time to achieve clinical improvement, 28-day mortality and viral clearance [27] . in the trial, lpv/r shortened icu stay by a median of 5 days (95% ci, −9 to 0). the authors made valuable points that the study size is small and the antiviral medication might have been initiated too late in the course of infection.recommended against by the nih due to unfavorable pharmacodynamics and lack of proven clinical efficacy [21] .ribavirin is a nucleoside analog which has antiviral activity against multiple rna viruses, including respiratory syncytial virus, sars-cov and mers-cov by interfering with rna polymerase and viral protein synthesis [28, 29] . the most severe adverse effects are hemolytic anemia and leukopenia. other adverse effects include fatigue, pruritus, rash, and gout. ribavirin is a notorious teratogenic drug and is contraindicated in pregnancy [28, 29] .ribavirin, with or without the concomitant use of steroids, was used extensively during the 2013 sars outbreak. in vitro tests showed that ribavirin inhibited a β coronavirus at relatively high concentration [30] . however, when using ribavirin with interferon-α2b combined, lower concentrations of ribavirin inhibited viral replication in vero cell lines [30] .a prospective, uncontrolled study evaluated clinical outcomes of ribavirin and corticosteroids in 132 patients with suspected sars when fever was not resolved after 48 hours of hospital admission. twentyfive patients (18.1%) responded to ribavirin and corticosteroids and two of those patients received ribavirin iv [31] . approximately 49% to 59% of patients treated with ribavirin had a reduction in hemoglobin of more than 2 g/dl from baseline, 36% to 76% had evidence of hemolytic anemia and 40% experienced elevation of transaminases [31, 32] .in a phase 2 open-label covid-19 trial, which enrolled 127 patients from 6 hong kong hospitals, hung and his colleagues compared triple therapy (lopinavir/ritonavir 400/100 mg po every 12 hours, ribavirin 400 mg po every 12 hours, and interferon β-1b 8 million iu sq on alternative days) with a control group of lpv/r [33] . median time from symptom onset to start of treatment was 5 days. in an intent-to-treat analysis, the triple therapy group had a significantly shorter median time to negative pcr test (hr 4.37, 95% ci 1.86-10.24, p=0.0010), shorter clinical improvement and time to complete symptoms (4 days vs. 8 days, respectively) and shorter median hospital stay (9 days vs. 14.5 days). there was no difference in the incidence of adverse events, serious adverse events or duration of nausea/vomiting. limitations of study include the open-label study design, absence of critically ill patients, and the confounding factor of a subgroup omitting concurrent interferon β -1b if time of symptom onset was 7 days or more.ribavirin iv is suggested by china's nhc for covid-19 as only an add-on therapy to lopinavir/ritonavir or interferon (table 2) [19]. it is not evaluated by the nih [21] .interferon (ifn) induces several parallel antiviral pathways by triggering viral rna degradation, rna transcription alteration, protein synthesis inhibition, and apoptosis [34] . the common side effects include flu-like symptoms and mood changes [35] . it is contraindicated in patients with decompensated liver disease, severe autoimmune disease, worsening psychiatric conditions, cytopenia and uncontrolled seizures [35] . during the sars and mers outbreaks, interferon was widely used for its antiviral effects aftershowing in vitro efficacy [42, 43] . an open-label uncontrolled retrospective study on sars showed that the addition of alfacon-1® (ifn-α) to corticosteroids was associated with faster lung recovery and shorter intubation time compared to corticosteroids alone [36] . similarly, a randomized, 4-arm, openlabel, retrospective study on sars in guangzhou, china demonstrated that ifn plus high dose steroid therapy achieved respiratory improvement, faster resolution of pulmonary infiltrates, and less need for mv [37] . moreover, ifn combined with ribavirin was correlated with neither a faster viral clearance, nor an improved survival rate in older (>50 years old) critically-ill patients with comorbidities [38, 39, 41] .in vitro data of interferon activity against sars-cov-2 suggested that the ec50 in vero cells of [21] .corticosteroids are a type of anti-inflammatory medication that is effective in treatment of a variety of conditions such as asthma, allergic conditions, autoimmune diseases, septic shock, and cancers [45] .corticosteroids are a double-edged sword since while these agents inhibit inflammation, they also impair immune response and increase the risk of infection. the adverse effects vary depending on the dosage and duration of therapy. these side effects include hyperglycemia, abdominal obesity, infection, mood swing, osteoporosis, growth retardation, glaucoma and hypertension [45] .a systematic review of steroids administered to patients with sars reported no survival benefit and possible harm including avascular necrosis, psychosis, diabetes, and delayed viral clearance [46] .another study of patients receiving corticosteroids for mers found no benefit in mortality but delayed lower respiratory tract clearance of the virus [47] .since the outbreak of covid-19, corticosteroid treatment has been used in up to 45% of infected patients in china [48, 49] . one retrospective observational study showed 72% of the icu patients with covid-19 received glucocorticoid therapy [48] . in covid-19 patients with ards, treatment with steroids is associated with decreased risk of death compared to the patients who did not receive steroids (46% vs 61.8%) [50] . however, the existing evidence regarding the use of steroids in this specific patient population remains inconclusive due to methodological limitations. [53] .as of now, the use of corticosteroids to reduce cytokine-related pulmonary damage in patients with covid-19 pneumonia is controversial. robust evidence from well-designed clinical trials is needed for the recommendation of corticosteroid treatment in covid-19 patients who developed different complications.intravenous immunoglobulin (ivig) is a product of human immunoglobulins derived from plasma, indicated for various immunodeficiencies, autoimmune and inflammatory disorders [54, 55] . ivig has potent immune replacement and immune modulating effects via complex pathways [55] . in addition, ivig has anti-inflammatory properties and can neutralize bacterial toxins [56] . the most common adverse reactions of ivig are headache, fever and tachycardia [55] .currently, there is no solid clinical evidence to support the use of ivig in coronaviruses. several animal studies found that equine and bovine-produced human immune antibodies can reduce viral titers and accelerate viral clearance of mers-cov in mouse models [57] . during the 2013 sars epidemic, observational studies and case reports described ivig for the treatment of critically ill patients in combination with antiviral therapies. in a clinical review on sars, ivig was used with interferon in all critically ill patients (n=120). the authors concluded that there was no significant benefit [36] . in another prospective observational study, ivig was used in sars patients with severe leukopenia or thrombocytopenia, and it appeared to be effective for controlling cytopenia by increasing leukocyte and platelet counts. however, without a control group, ivig's role in sars treatment remains undetermined [58] .since the outbreak of covid-19 in china, clinicians have used ivig in patients infected with sars-cov-2 based on extrapolated ivig data from sars and mers. in a descriptive study of covid-19, 27% of 99 patients received ivig, but the efficacy and safety of ivig in was not addressed in this study [47] . several observational case reports suggest that high dose ivig at the early stage of clinical deterioration may improve clinical outcomes in patients with severe symptoms [59, 60] . xuebijing (xbj) is a widely used traditional herbal medicine in china for its anti-inflammatory and antiendotoxin effects [61, 62] . it is a five-herbal combination (carthamus tinctorius, radix paeoniae rubra, ligusticum wallichii, salvia miltirrhiza and angelica sinensis). the common side effects include infusion reactions of rash, tachycardia, hypotension and gi discomforts including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and/or diarrhea [61, 62] .in a meta-analysis of case-control studies on sepsis, xbj significantly reduced 28-day mortality and improved clinical parameters including the acute physiology and chronic health evaluation ii score (apache ii), wbc, c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin and body temperature [61] . that being said, the efficacy of xbj in sepsis needs to be confirmed in a rct. the current clinical data on xbj in ards are inconsistent. one rct showed reduction in duration of mv, icu stay and murray score, while the other rct revealed no difference in these clinical outcomes [63, 64] . however, neither of the ards studies proved significant 28-day mortality benefit. further well-designed rct with larger sample size is warranted to conclude on xbj in ards. in a multicenter rct on critically-ill patients with severe community-acquired pneumonia (cap), xbj significantly improved pneumonia severity index, 28-day mortality, duration of mv, and icu stay [65] . umifenovir is a synthetic antiviral drug marketed in russia and china for treating seasonal influenza. it has shown broad-spectrum antiviral activity against other viruses including sars-cov [66] . it is generally well tolerated.umifenovir is used alone or in combination with other antiviral treatment in a few clinical studies. in one trial, a total of 81 covid-19 non-icu patients were assigned to either umifenovir group or control group. the median times from onset of symptoms to sars-cov-2 rt-pcr negative were similar. no clinical differences were reported and the umifenovir group had slightly longer hospital stay (13d vs. 11d) [67] . in a covid-19 case series study, the combination of umifenovir, lopinavir/ritonavir and traditional chinese medicine alleviated pneumonia symptoms in all four patients and decreased viral load to undetectable in two [68] . a retrospective cohort study on non-ventilated covid-19 patients (n=33) compared lpv/r plus umifenovir and lpv/r monotherapy over treatment of 5-21 days [69] . the lpv/r plus umifenovir combination group had a higher negative viral detection rate on day 7 and day 14, with significantly improved chest ct scans on day 7. however, inflammation markers were not compared at baseline. the lpv/r monotherapy group had significantly higher corticosteroids usage, which could delay viral clearance.all available clinical studies on umifenovir are with significant limitations in study designs and sample sizes. it appears that umifenovir monotherapy is ineffective. the combination of umifenovir with other antivirals might benefit viral clearance and chest ct improvement. whether the positive outcome is achieved by using antiviral combination strategy or by adding umifenovir remains to be studied. all these studies should be treated as hypothesis generating and should be interpreted with great caution.umifenovir is a newly added antiviral option in china's nhc guide on covid-19 ( chloroquine (cq) is a classic antimalarial drug. its well-known effect of neutralizing acidic endosomal ph supports broad-spectrum antiviral usage by blocking endosome-mediated viral entry [70] . it also exhibits anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory benefits in viral infections. hcq is a less toxic metabolite of cq. both could be toxic and even fatal if overdosed [71, 72] . the adverse effects include retinopathy, liver enzyme elevation, blood counts change and mood change. it is important to monitor drug interactions with other qtc-prolonging agents [71, 72] .since the covid-19 outbreak, cq showed antiviral effect on sars-cov-2 in vitro, with the 90% effective concentration (ec 90 ) of 6.90 μm, which is clinically achievable *9+. hcq is even more potent in vitro (ec 50 =0.72 μm) against sars-cov-2 and a pharmacokinetic model found that a regimen of 400 mg twice a day orally followed by 200 mg twice a day orally for four days would achieve therapeutic level [73] .an open-label non-randomized clinical trial in france studied hcq regimen of 200 mg three times a day orally with and without azithromycin. the study reported 100% viral clearance on day 6 in hcq plus azithromycin group vs. 57.1% in hcq monotherapy group vs. 12.5% in control group [74] .however, the small-size trial (n=42) was not randomized. the hcq group had higher viral load at baseline. the control group had younger patients. six patients were excluded in results reporting.clinical outcomes were not studied.the first published rct assessing hcq in covid-19 was conducted in china (n=150) [75] . clearance is expected to happen much sooner. it is worth noting that the soc arm is not a placebo.more than 50% patients in both arms received other antivirals. this introduces a great confounder, especially when there are no conclusions on the effect of antivirals in covid-19 yet. another small-size hcq trial in shanghai with similar outcomes had the same issue [76] . the rct also reports higher adverse effect in hcq plus soc group (30% vs. 9%). this could be due to the high-dose regimen of hcq 800-1200 mg daily.in june, a retrospective multicenter study (n=807) in american veterans with covid-19 showed hcq as ineffective and potentially harmful [77] . hcq with or without azm did not decrease mortality, mv rate or length of hospitalization. the hcq group, but not hcq + azm group, even had higher risk of death. however, the study subjects were not randomized. naturally, patients with severe disease were more likely to start hcq treatment. in fact, both hcq and hcq + azm groups had more patients with elevated liver enzymes and inflammation markers, which are confounders that could affect study outcomes [77] . a new york hospital reported qtc prolongation associated with hcq + azm (n=84) [78] .qtc increased from a baseline of 435 ± 24 ms to a maximal value of 463 ± 32 ms (p < 0.001) on day 3.6 ± daily for 10 days in all settings due to potential toxicity [21] .tocilizumab (actemra®), known as a humanized interleukin-6 (il-6) receptor antagonist, is currently approved for rheumatoid arthritis, and cytokine release syndrome (crs) due to chimeric antigen receptor t cell (cart) therapy [79] . the common side effects of tocilizumab include hypersensitivity reaction and infection [79] .in covid-19 patients with crs, patients were found to have elevated levels of cytokines such as il-2 receptor (il-2r), il-6, 8, 10 and tnfα that indicate inflammation and immunological diseases. in addition, crs was revealed to be associated with the severity of covid-19 [80, 81] . these data suggest that the il-6 pathway may play an important role in the overactive inflammatory response in the lungs of covid-19 patients. therefore, it could be a potential target for immunotherapy of covid-19.a recent one single-group, multicenter study showed that within a few days of administration of tocilizumab, fever was reduced to normal temperatures and oxygen intake was lowered in 75% of patients with severe or critical covid-19. they also observed a significant improvement in ct imaging, abnormally elevated crp and lymphopenia. no obvious adverse reactions were identified in this study [82] . it suggests that tocilizumab may be a new therapeutic strategy for treatment of severe or critical covid-19 patients, however, further data from large rcts are required to justify the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab.sarilumab (kevzara®) is another fully-human monoclonal antibody that inhibits the il-6 pathway by binding and blocking the il-6 receptor. it has been approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis [83] . the common toxicities include neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, infusion reaction and infection [83] . the global clinical trials of sarilumab in covid-19 treatment have been initiated to evaluate the clinical outcomes such as fever, the need for supplemental oxygen, mortality, mv, icu stay and hospitalization [84] .siltuximab (sylvant®) approved in the us to treat patients with multicentric castleman disease is the third potential il-6 targeted therapy for covid-19 trials [83] . similar to other il-6 antagonists, the common adverse effects of siltuximab are cytopenia, infection and hypersensitivity reaction [85] . ▪ based on respiratory distress and chest imaging, may consider glucocorticoid that is equivalent to methylprednisolone 1-2 mg/kg/day for 3-5 days or less. note that large-dose glucocorticoid suppresses immune system and could delay clearance of sars-cov-2.▪ may consider xuebijing 100ml iv twice a day.▪ may use microecological preparation to maintain intestinal flora balance and prevent secondary infection.▪ provide psychotherapy for patients who develop high level of anxiety.i. practice syndrome differentiation and dialectics-based medicine.general recommendations of traditional therapies are made for each stage of clinical course from initial, severe, critical to recovery stage. (note: please refer to the original guide for details.)severe case: respiratory rate ≥ 30 per minutes, oxygen saturation ≤ 93%, pao2/fio2 ≤ 300 mmhg, or significant disease progression in 24-48 hours per chest imaging critical case: ards requiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or organ failure requiring icu carecurrently the guidance from who focuses on supportive care and the management of complications per general guidelines [20] . remdesivir is moderately recommended by the nih for hospitalized severe cases [21] . the covid-19 diagnosis and treatment guideline issued by china's nhc provides several medication therapy recommendations (table 2) [19]. all these therapeutics are discussed in this review.this review does not include darunavir/cobicistat, nitazoxanide, angiotensin ii receptor blockers and other medications that have been suggested for sars-cov-2, awaiting evidence. this review does not discuss any oral-route traditional chinese medications, the prescribing of which follows dialecticsbased medicine.in conclusion, supportive care remains the cornerstone of covid-19 management.complications should be managed according to general guidelines. when safety is ensured, remdesivir might be considered early in the course of illness promptly prior to disease progression for potential clinical recovery. for the other medication agents discussed in the review, outcomes from case reports and case series cannot be generalized for a larger population. more well-designed rcts in covid-19therapies are warranted before final conclusions on efficacy can be made.funding: this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.recently, the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) [1] emerged in hubei province, p.r.china [2, 3] . the whole-genome sequence of 2019-ncov was first released on january 10, 2020 [4] . 2019-ncov has a wide range of infection to mammals, including humans.this characteristic of transmission leads to the possibility of transmission from animals to people. the 2019-ncov, known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is highly transmittable and could lead to mild to severe respiratory tract infections [5] . the spread of 2019-ncov has drawn great attentions 3 and concerns worldwide, since 2003 humans have faced two coronavirus-related crises [6] . severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) broke out in 2003 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) emerged in the arabian peninsula in 2012 with a fatality rate of 35% [7] .coronaviruses (covs) encode replicase complex (orf1ab), express in the form of polyproteins (pp), which synthesis the non-structural proteins (nsp) and four structural proteins, namely spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins [8] during proteolytic processing [9] . the main protease (3cl protease) is a key enzyme in the processing of polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab. orf1a and orf1ab are cleaved by papain-like protease (plpro, nsp3) and 3c-like protease (3clpro, nsp5) to produce the nsp [10] . due to the important function of sars-cov 3cl protease, it is considered as an active target for the antiviral drug. many 3cl protease inhibitors have been reported over the past decade [11] and a variety of inhibitors were found through screening and structure-based design [12] . plpro is an indispensable enzyme in the virus replication and infection of the host, and also has been an important target for coronavirus inhibitors.a recent study showed that 2019-ncov also use angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as entry receptor to go into the host cells [13] . the spike plays a crucial role during the virus' entry to the host cells [14] . s protein, a type i glycoprotein, on the surface of the virus, can assist virus to bind to host acceptor, which has attracted great attention because of its function in receptor binding. the receptor binding domain (rbd) of spike protein is in charge of the binding to host. 72% of the amino acid sequences in the rbds from sara-cov and 2019 ncov are identical. however, as to 2019-ncov, the rigid prolyl residues is replaced with a distinct loop with flexible glycyl residues [15] . a unique phenylalanine f486 in the loop can penetrate into a the hydrophobic pocket of (ace2) [16] , may play the key role in acceptor recognition.nsp12 is a viral rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), together with co-factors nsp7 and nsp8 possessing high polymerase activity. four functional proteins in 2019-ncov: main protease (3clpro), rdrp, plpro, and spike were all studied as the targets of potential drugs. up to now, there is no approved special antiviral drug available to be used against covid-19. the fastest way to find drugs anti-2019-ncov is to screen drugs which were commonly used in clinic. 4 during the treatment of patients infected by sars-cov-2 [17] chloroquine draw great attention, which was made by bayer in germany in 1934 as the replacement of natural antimalarial drugs. chloroquine was found to be efficient on sars-cov-2 [18, 19] . the mechanism of chloroquine is inhibiting quinone reductase 2, a structural similarity of udp-n-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerases which is involved in the biosynthesis of sialic acids. the possible interference of chloroquine with sialic acid biosynthesis could account for the broad antiviral spectrum [19] . chloroquine can also impair early stage of virus replication by interfering with the ph-dependent endosome-mediated viral entry of enveloped viruses as well as the post-translational modification of viral proteins. but the mechanism of action of chloroquine in anti-2019-ncov is not clear.ribavirin is a traditional antiviral drug widely used in clinic for treating a variety of viral infections, but for sars, ribavirin showed no significant effect [20] . the new antiviral drug remdesivir were found to be effective in preventing replication of this virus [21] . remdesivir [22] is now as a possible therapeutic option for the covid-19 [23] .lianhuaqingwen (lh) as traditional chinese medicine (tcm) compound preparation has been used to treat influenza and exerted broad-spectrum antiviral effects on a series of influenza viruses. lh showed anti-2019ncov activity in the treatment [24] . honeysuckle and forsythia are commonly used as antiviral ingredients in tcm, which were also included in lh. the kinds and quantity of active components in tcm formula is vital for the function of the preparation. forsythia has long been used as an antipyretic, anti-inflammatory and anti-infectious agent in east asia [25] . the compounds in forsythia showed anti-viral activity against h1n1virus and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) [26] [27] [28] [29] . honeysuckle are traditional medicine used in china [30] . the major ingredients in honeysuckle exhibit antibacterial and antiviral [31, 32] activities. luteolin is the main flavonoid in honeysuckle [33] . at this situation, tcm can contribute as an alternative treatment. in 2003, tcm was widely used to treat severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). the high similarity between 2019 ncov and sars in genomic and structural characterization suggesting that tcm may have potential use in the current outbreak [34] . in this study, the binding of chloroquine, remdesivir, ribavirin and luteolin with main proteins of 2019-ncov 5 (3cl protease, plpro, rdrp, and spike protein) were carried out by computational methods.the newly-emerged sars-cov-2 nucleotide gene (nc_045512.2) was retrieved from the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) nucleotide database. 6 autodock vina software was utilized in all the docking experiments, with the optimized model as the docking target. the screening method is restricted to molecular docking, and molecular dynamics simulation has not been carried out yet.remdesivir and ribavirin are all rdrp antagonists. remdesivir could effectively fight against the new coronavirus, however, ribavirin is invalid. molecular docking was used to study the binding difference between the two molecules. chloroquine was proved to be clinically effective, and its molecular target should be further studied. at n3 molecule is the ligand molecule isolated from the crystal structure of 3cl protease, which was used as the binding site control. according to the analysis of docking results (fig. 1) the ligand p85 of plpro was used as control. ethical approval: not requiredthere is little or no research initiated to enlighten nigerians about the pathogenesis and targets for drug development for the newly discovered severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection as a way forward to achieve long-lasting future treatment of the disease, also many citizens of the country are not aware on the deadliness of the disease. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a kind of viral infection causing pneumonia-like symptoms was first reported in wuhan, china, in december 2019, and the disease is caused by sars-cov-2 [1, 2] . the outbreak was declared a pandemic by who on 30 th of january 2020, and it is regarded as the third introduction of a highly pathogenic virus into the human population. the severity at which the virus causes infection to the human population is age and immune status dependent. it is shorter among patients greater than 70-years old compared with those under the age of 70 with early symptoms which include fever, cough, and fatigue, other symptoms include sputum production, headache, haemoptysis, dyspnoea, and lymphopenia (figure 1 ) [3] . clinical features unmask by a chest computer tomography (ct) scan presented as pneumonia, however, there are also abnormal features such as rnaaemia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute cardiac injury, and incidence of ground-glass opacities that can lead to death [3] . unfortunately, the use of interferon inhalation for the treatment of some cases did not show clinical progress but worsen the condition and can lead to pulmonary opacities [4] . besides, patients infected with sars-cov-2 also developed gastrointestinal associated symptoms like diarrhea [3, 5] . to minimize the transmission of the sars-cov-2 through health care workers and patients, it is important to develop methods for the identification of various modes of viral transmission such as through fecal and urine samples [3] .genome sequencing of the virus of five patients with pneumonia hospitalized from december 18 to december 29, 2019, showed the presence of a previously unknown β coronavirus (β-cov) strain in all of them *6+. upon isolation and sequencing of the β-cov, it shows 88% identity to the sequence of two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndromes (sars)-like coronaviruses, batsl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, and about 50% identity to the sequence of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [7] . there are similarities in the genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with a minimum number of ten open reading frames (orfs) with the genome sequences of other covs such as mers-cov and sars-cov. the first orf making up two-third of the sars-cov-2 rna undergoes translation to two polyproteins. in comparison to mers-cov and sars-cov, in which their two polyproteins (pp1a and pp1ab) are then further processed by a post-translational modification to 16 non-structural proteins (nsps), which are nsp1 to nsp16 [8] . those nsps are then translocated from the rough endoplasmic reticulum into double-membrane vesicles where the replication and transcription of the virus occurred [9, 10] . while the remaining orfs of the sars-cov-2 that are localized on the one-third of the remaining genome are responsible for encoding non-replicating participating accessory proteins with unknown functions and structural proteins such as membrane (m), nucleocapsid (n), envelope (e), and spike proteins (s). an investigation by scientists in china revealed that the sars-cov requires angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor for their binding and invasion of the host. also, the binding is significant in the determination of the disorders caused by sars-cov-2 infection j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pathogenesis of the infection caused by sars-cov [11] . nevertheless, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a receptor required by mers-cov for invasion [12] . to predict the specificity of zoonotic coronaviruses in the infection of humans and adaptation possibility, a better understanding of the proteases action and receptor binding is essential. therefore, the development of therapeutics for the treatment of sars-cov-2 is highly warranted [3] . however, this review aims to discuss the molecular pathogenesis of sars-cov-2, its target for drug development, to enlighten nigerians on the deadliness of the disease, and the way forward to achieve future treatment of the current pandemic.the molecular pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 is poorly understood up to date. nevertheless, mers-cov and sars-cov mechanisms can shed light on the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2. the essential protein of sars-cov-2 that mediates binding to a human cell is spike protein (a protein involved in the first step of infection), the protein is composed of s1 and s2 subunit, in which according to cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoem) studies the receptor-binding domain (rbd) is a 3d structure with the size of ~12kda which is localized in the s1 subunit. the vibrational movement of the rbd has been examined during the characterization of the structure of related mers-cov and sars-cov and was found to have the same mechanism of action with sars-cov-2. interestingly, there are similarities in the structure of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike glycoprotein but the only structural difference is in the rbd, where the sars-cov-2 rbd is an angle closer to the central cavity of the trimer in the down conformation, while sars-cov rbd can packs tightly against the domain of the n-terminal of the neighboring protomer in the down conformation [13] . the binding affinity of the two viruses was investigated using surface plasmon resonance which showed that even though sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share the same binding receptor ace-2, the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 is ~15nm which is almost 10-15 fold higher than sars-cov binding to ace-2 receptor, this is the reason why sars-cov-2 can easily be transmitted from human to human. whereas, the complex formed by sars-cov-2 s-ectodomain and ace-2 has been studied using high-resolution cryoem, which revealed that the complex is similar to the sars-cov complex. the spike structural protein mediates entry of sars-cov-2 into human cells, it is a trimetric protein of class 1 fusion protein with metastable prefusion conformation, it undergoes structural rearrangement before human cell membrane fusion. the rearrangement is activated upon binding of rbd of the s1 subunit to the host cell receptor ace2 [13] . destabilization of the prefusion trimer will then take place upon receptor binding (viral membrane with the host cell membrane) which will lead to the shedding of the s1 and s2 subunit transition to more stable postfusion conformation. the rbd of the s1 will pass through hinge-like movement leading to transient hiding (down conformation receptor inaccessible state) or exposing (up confirmation i.e. receptor accessible state) of the receptor binding determinant, therefore this is the mechanism of engaging host cell receptor by sars-cov-2 [14] [15] [16] .before entry into human cells, mers-cov binds to the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) receptor and sars-cov binds to the ace2 receptor. membrane fusion and viral infectivity of coronavirus occurred by proteolytic cleavage of s20 position of s protein, this occurred in sars-cov pathogenesis. the use of two-step furin activation is essential for the fusion of mers with the host membrane [17] . the entry of sars-cov is also mediated by clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis [18, 19] .the sars-cov-2 binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme receptor (ace2) which results in its entry into the host. the virus releases its rna into the cytoplasm, the orf1a, and orfab of the rna is translated into polyprotein 1a (pp1a) and polyprotein ab (ppab). the orf1a encodes the enzyme protease that cleaves the polyproteins into non-structural proteins (nsps) which form the rna replicase-transcriptase complex that is needed for structural protein synthesis. the replicase complex executes the formation of negative-sense rna. upon fragmentation of the negative-sense rna into sub-genomic rna through discontinuous transcription, after which fragments that encode j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f spike, membrane, nucleocapsid, and envelope protein are formed, the structural proteins are then synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and then they pass through the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate compartment (ergic) into the golgi apparatus where sortation and assembly take place. finally, viral protein and genomic rna are then assembled as virion in the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi and then released outside the cell as a vesicle [20] [21] [22] [23] . after the invasion of cells by sars-cov-2, its antigen will be attached to antigen-presenting cells as the central anti-viral immunity. finally, major histocompatibility complex (mhc) or human leukocyte antigen (hla) in humans present antigenic peptides and then cytotoxic t lymphocytes specific for the sars-cov recognized viral antigen. therefore, this pathogenesis mechanism (figure 2 ) of sars-cov will help in the understanding of drug development strategies for sars-cov-2 infection. upon presentation of antigen by antigen-presenting cells, cellular and humoral immunity of the body is then stimulated by virus-specific b and t cells. therefore, igm and igg are the common antibody profile of sars-cov, and 12 weeks are marked as the time taken for igm against sars-cov to disappear, with igg lasting longer [23] . more researches on the cellular immunity of coronavirus have been carried out, and the most updated report reveals that the number of cd4þ and cd8þ t cells in the peripheral blood of sars-cov-2 infected patients significantly reduced [24] . during the acute phase of sars-cov infection, there is a decrease in cd4þ and cd8þ t cells. interestingly, sars-cov recovered patients have four years of t cell memory and the t cells can undergo ifn-g production, delayed-type hypersensitivity (dth) response, and proliferation even without the antigen [25] . also, t cell memories against sars-cov persist after six years of infection from recovered patients [26] . therefore, the understanding of the immunology of sars-cov-2 can help in the development of a vaccine [27] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f figure 2 . an overview of sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. the virus binds to the ace2 receptor to enter the human cell and its rna got translated to structural proteins (spike, nucleocapsid, membrane, and envelope), these proteins are essential in the invasion and infection of the human cell.pathological events associated with sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov infection is called acute respiratory distress syndrome (ard) [24] . the mechanism of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is that the effector immune cell uncontrollably released deadly systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines such as ifn-a, ifn-g, il-1b, il6, il-12, il-18, il-33, tnf-a, tgfb, etc. and also chemokines such as ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, cxcl8, cxcl9, cxcl10, etc [27, 28] . the cytokine and chemokine release by the effector cells will lead to organ failure and death, this happened in the severe case of sars-cov-2 infection [24] .for better survival of mers cov and sars-cov in the invaded host, for example, pattern recognition receptor is responsible for recognizing pathogen-associated molecule, however, the mers and sars viruses will develop a way of producing double-membrane vesicle without pattern recognition receptor, this allows the viral genome to replicate without the control of the immune system [29] . can be inhibited by mers accessory protein through activation of melanoma differentiated associated protein gene 5 (mda5) by interaction with double-stranded directly [30] [31] [32] . to elaborate, nuclear transport of ifn regulatory protein and activation of ifn b promoter is blocked by mers-cov orf4a, orf4b, orf5, and membrane proteins [33] . since coronaviruses, such mers can destabilize the immune system by altering the antigen presentation cells through the downregulation of gene expression. therefore, it is important in drug development to develop a strategy of destroying immune evasion by sars-cov-2 [4] .drug development from scratch will take at least a decade, following this, repositioning of existing antiviral drugs effective on sars-cov-2 might be the only solution to the current pandemic of sudden infectious diseases. the human innate immunes system plays a crucial role in the replication of the coronaviruses, together with the use of interferon will boost the immune response in counteracting coronaviruses [34] . sars-cov and sars-cov-2 bind to ace2 while mers-cov binds to protease receptors called dpp4 before entry into a human cell. therapeutics acting on the coronaviruses can either be blocking virus association with the human cell, inhibition of viral selfassembly through inhibition of structural protein, blocking rna synthesis through viral genetic material inhibition, and blocking critical enzymes of the virus to inhibit replication [35] . three strategies of coronavirus drug development were introduced by scientists. the strategy is testing the broad-spectrum of existing antiviral drugs [27] . drugs such as ribavirin, and cyclophilin inhibitors, and interferons are used to treat coronavirus associated symptoms such as pneumonia and can be considered to fall into this category. therefore, known metabolic characteristics, dosage, efficacy, side effect, approval for viral treatment are the major advantage associated with this therapeutic strategy. the major problems with such drugs are killing of coronaviruses in a targeted manner because they are too broad-spectrum, therefore, better-targeted therapeutics are indeed needed. the second strategy involved the use of existing molecular databases to screen and find molecules with therapeutic potential that are effective on coronaviruses [36] . the availability of high throughput techniques makes it possible for the screening of potential therapeutics, which can aid in finding the function of some new molecules, for instance, the discovery of drugs such as lopinavir/ritonavir (anti-hiv). the third strategy is the development of new targeted drugs from scratch based on coronaviruses pathological features and genetic information. it was perceived that drug development through this strategy will exhibit more efficacy against the virus. however, this might cost several years of drug development and clinical trials and it is estimated that drug development can take seven years, or even more than 10 years [34] . it is recommended that research should be initiated on drug development from scratch for highly contiguous viruses, this is to prepare for future pandemics.based on molecular targets, four major strategies of sars-cov-2 drug development were discussed below. also, the targets can be used to develop new drugs from scratch based on the pathological and genomic characteristics of the new sars-cov-2.3.1 therapeutics acting on protein and enzymes that are critical to the growth of the virus, by preventing its replication and synthesis of rna: -non-structural proteins (nsps) are involved in protein synthesis, translation, rna transcription, processing, modification, virus replication, and host infection. therefore, nsps are considered as a significant functional protein of coronaviruses, in which coronavirus main proteinase (3clpro), papain-like proteinase (plpro), rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), and helicase are superior molecular targets for small inhibitory molecule drug development as a result of their well-understood enzyme active sites and biological functions. for example, papain-like proteinase (plpro); this protein cleaves replicase polyprotein n-terminus, leading to the of release nsp1, nsp2, and nsp3, which is indispensable for the replication control corrections [7] . also, plpro can antagonize the immunity of the infected patient [16, 37] . these group of enzymes is necessary for the replication and viral infection, and it is the most popular target for (3clpro) ; otherwise called nsp5, this protein is cleaved automatically from polyprotein to form mature enzyme and it is then further cleaved downstream at 11 sites which will then leads to the release of nsp4 to nsp16. interestingly, maturation of nsp's is directly mediated by 3clpro, and the life cycle of the virus depends on the maturation of 3clpro. studies into the structure and catalytic mechanism of 3clpro can make it a promising drug development target for covid-19. therefore, anti-bacterial drugs such as lymecycline and anti-hypertensive drugs such as nicardipine are all known to block the activity of the 3c-like main protease. rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp); otherwise known as nsp12, this protein is conserved in coronaviruses, it forms the vital enzyme of the viral replication and transcriptional complex, rdrp has conserved amino acid of which are serine and 2 aspartic acid. therefore, nsp12 has been used as an important target for sars and mers drug development. even though no specific inhibitor of nsp12-rdrp has been found, its targeted inhibition will not result in significant side effects and toxicity of the host cell. strengthening research on this target can lead to therapeutic development for sars-cov infection [38] [39] [40] . however, natural products that exhibit anti-virus, anti-tumor, and anti-inflammation effects will exert binding affinity to rdrp, molecules such as betulonal (from cassine xylocarpa), gnidicin, and gniditrin (from gnidia lamprantha) will bind and inhibit the rdrp of coronaviruses. helicase (nsp13); this is a multifunctional protein with n terminal metal-binding domain and helicase domain. the structure of the n terminal contains 26 cysteine residues that make up the zinc and binding domain, with c terminus conserved motif. helicase is also a necessary component for the replication of coronavirus. therefore, helicase is identified as a target for antiviral drug discovery, but there is less research on helicase inhibitors. drugs such as anti-bacterial (lymecycline, cefsulodine, and rolitetracycline), anti-fungal such as itraconazole, an anti-hiv drug such as saquinavir, an anticoagulant drug such as dabigatran, and diuretic drug such as canrenoic acid were shown to be potent inhibitors of helicase [41, 42] . also, studies have shown that myricetin and scutellarein can potentially inhibit the sars-cov-2 helicase protein in vitro by affecting the atpase activity, but not the unwinding activity of nsp13 [43] .inhibiting its self-assembly: -the core structural protein of coronavirus that gathered to form a special corolla like structure on the viral surface like trimer is called spike protein, its binds to host cell receptor using its rbd which results to the invasion of the host. host cell protease cleaves spike protein into s1 and s2, the s1 binds to surface receptor of the host, and s2 mediates virus to cell fusion and cell to cell fusion. cleavage activation and structural integrity are crucial in the invasion and virulence activity, which is mediated by spike protein [44] . strategies to block spike protein as a means of preventing coronavirus from entering the host are regarded as valuable for the development of antiviral drugs [44, 45] . natural flavonoids (licoflavonol from glycyrrhiza uralensis), therapeutics such as anticoagulant drug (dabigatran etexilate), anti-fungal drugs (posaconazole and itraconazole), anti-hypertensive drugs (rescinnamine, iloprost, and prazosin), and an anti-bacterial drug (sulfasalazine, azlocillin, penicillin, and cefsulodin) inhibit coronavirus binding to a receptor in the cell surface of human cell [6] .the rdb located in the s1 of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 is also a target for the development of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. despite the fact of structural homology of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov by cryoem studies, a monoclonal antibody that was originally developed to target sars-cov rbd was tested against sars-cov-2 rbd sd1 fragment, but the antibody did not show binding affinity to sars-cov-2. this is to say there are some amino acids involved in the interaction between the rbd of the spike protein and ace2 receptor in sars-cov-2 that are not the same in sars-cov.this is further supported by [46] that modeling of sars-cov-2 rdb interaction with ace2 revealed some sequence of amino acids that are important for the interaction between ace2 and rbd of spike glycoprotein, but there is less clarity on the actual sequence involved in that interaction. therefore, there is a need for new monoclonal antibody development for rbd of sars-cov-2. hence, the knowledge of spike protein of the sars-cov-2 atomic level using cryoem will enable scientists to carry out protein engineering, design, and development of more effective inhibitory molecules and monoclonal antibodies [13] .-virulence factors in coronavirus that interferes with the innate immunity of infected cells are nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a. the nsp1 induces degradation of host mrna and interferon type 1 production upon binding to the 40s ribosomal subunit [47] . while nsp3c binds with the nucleotide of the host (adp-ribose) which gives coronavirus the ability to resist innate immunity, for instance, bone marrow matrix antigen 2 blocks assembled coronavirus in the host cell. also, sars-cov orf7a interacts with bst 2 and blocks its glycosylation which results in termination of orf7a activity [48] . therefore, the aforementioned virulence factors are potential drug discovery targets for coronavirus. for example, anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory natural products can bind and inhibit those virulence factors, also drugs such as platycodin d, streptomycin, tetracycline, piperacillin, cefpiramide, and lymecycline (from platycodon grandifloras) can potentially inhibit coronavirus virulence factors [49, 50] .-the receptor of the spike rna binding domain of sars-cov is the ace2 receptor. since sars-cov can interact with the angiotensin receptor, blocking the receptor can be a target for therapeutics development for sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, antihypertensive drugs (losartan), anti-bacterial (cefmenoxime), hepatoprotective (silybin), anti-diabetes (troglitazone), and analgesia (ergotamine) bind with high affinity to angiotensin 2 receptor [6] .rna dependent rna polymerase (nsp12) is the most promising molecular target for sars-cov-2 drug development. the current state in finding treatment for sars-cov-2 is drug repositioning in which drug targeted for the treatment of the ebola virus called remdesivir, which showed efficacy against sars-cov-2 replication. therefore, the rna dependent rna polymerase inhibitor (rdrp's)called remdesivir was developed by gilead science, inc to mimic the structure of adenosine, and is regarded as nucleotide analog, it was developed originally to inhibit ebola virus replication. even though the drug did not pass the phase 3 clinical trial on the ebola virus, but studies have shown that it is promising for the treatment of covid-19 [51] . also, the drug was reported to be the most promising for sars-cov-2 replication inhibition by who. as a result of structural similarities of rdrp's of various viruses, remdesivir can serve as a broad antiviral drug. studies have also shown that the drug is effective against mers-cov. interestingly, the usa and china commence the phase 3 clinical trial of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 [52] . even though drugs such as broad-spectrum antibiotics, anti-viral drugs, and interferons-a nebulization have been used in the reduction of viral load, but it is the only remdesivir that has a promising impact on sars-cov-2. the controversy of the efficacy of drugs used in the treatment of sars-cov and mers-cov such as ribavirin, corticosteroids, lopinavir-ritonavir, and interferon, is what makes them not to be investigated for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. but the satisfactory result was achieved after the trial of remdesivir in mice model, in which after the treatment of the mice a day after infection with coronavirus there is a decrease in the viral load and an improvement in mice pulmonary function. however, remdesivir administration after the viral load reaches a maximum peak of infection cannot improve the symptoms of the patient, but remdesivir can improve patient symptoms before the virus reaches its maximum peak. treatment of rhesus monkey with remdesivir 24 hours before the infection is promising in the reduction of symptoms associated with mers-cov infection, and within 2 hours of administration of 10g of remdesivir in rhesus monkey results to peripheral blood mononuclear blood distribution of the drug, followed by drug activation to nucleotide triphosphate [53] . according to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the new england journal of medicine, a patient with recent travel to wuhan china was diagnosed with covid-19 after returning to washington on january 15, 2020, even though there is an improvement on the patient symptoms upon remdesivir treatment, but the viral load got decreased before the treatment, this is to say that the viral infection is self-limiting and his immune system might have started fighting the infection. therefore, it is not clear whether the improvement in the symptoms of the patient is due to the drug or the patient's natural immunity. however, remdesivir is expected to be a specific drug that targets the rdrp of sars-cov-2 [54] . the great zealot of chinese to combat the pandemic has initiated research on covid-19 drugs, in which remdesivir was approved for clinical trial after passing stringent ethical review and was on 5 th february 2020 launched for the trial. china's compassionate use reported that remdesivir will be the immediate drug for the treatment of severe covid-19 if proven to be effective. what brought remdesivir to the stage of the clinical trial is safety and good pharmacokinetics [55] . remdesivir in vitro inhibition research carried out by wuhan research institute find out that the drug can block the replication of the virus at (ec50 = 0.77 μm, cc50 > 100 μm, si > 129.87) very low micromolar concentration of infected-vero e6 cells . other studies have shown that effective treatment of sars-cov-2 infection can only be achieved by combinational treatment of chloroquine and remdesivir which will result in the blockage of the viral replication and recovery of the patient from the disease [56] . chloroquine increases the endosomal ph of a cell as well as affecting glycosylation of cellular receptor, these result in blockage of sars-cov-2 infection [50, 57] . the effect of chloroquine on sars-cov-2 was further investigated by [50] , and they reported that chloroquine function at entry and post-entry of the virus in addition to its antiviral activity. also, chloroquine can modulate the immune system which in turn will result in the enhancement of its antiviral activity, it can also inhibit the replication of coronavirus in the epithelial cells of lungs through cellular receptor glycosylation interference. the authorization to use chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection was granted by the fda of the u.s.a, hence chloroquine function in the blocking of virus fusion to the cell membrane [58, 59] . widely distribution of chloroquine in blood and lungs upon its administration orally is another interesting future of the use of chloroquine in establishing treatment for sars-cov-2 infection. it was recommended that covid-19 patients with mild, moderate, and severe symptoms should take 500mg of chloroquine twice in a day, this prescription has shown to decrease the length of stay in the hospital with improved symptoms. hydroxychloroquine has the same activity as chloroquine because they are having an identical mechanism of action [60] . moreover, intensive research is needed to unravel the potential of other receptors for drug discovery and development for sars-cov-2. besides, [59] reported that synthetic mrna called moderna's mrna-1273 can be used as a vaccine for protection against sars-cov-2 infection, in which upon its intramuscular administration, it can evoke antiviral effect directed to the spike protein, this is to say the synthetic mrna encodes pre-fused spike protein of sars-cov-2. the use of mrna to elicit antiviral activity does not need the use of a virus, unlike conventional vaccines.the clinical trial phase 1 of mrna-1273 is currently taking place and if the vaccine is promising, its efficacy will be investigated immediately. to sum up, rna dependent rna polymerase and spike protein of sars-cov-2 are the most promising targets for sars-cov-2 vaccine and drug development, and therapeutics repositioning [61] .drug development for viral pathogens is a long-term process. however, as drug repositioning is taking place for the treatment and reduction of the peak of the covid-19 pandemic, it is also imperative to identify some promising targets for drug development to have long-lasting future treatment for the disease. also, an in-depth understanding of the sars-cov-2 pathogenesis and its atomic studies using cryoem to understand the amino acid involved in the interaction between the rbd of spike protein with ace2 of human cells are essential for effective vaccine and drug development. nigerian government should initiate research and clinical trial on antiviral drugs that can inhibit sars-cov-2 infection.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fas the current pandemic is claiming the health and lives of people all over the world, it is highly important to initiate and expand researches in the study of pathogenesis and drug targets for sars-cov-2, as this will help in developing treatment and vaccine and also will prepare the world to prepare the future reoccurrence of the disease. research should also be initiated on the development of bispecific inhibitors of sars-cov-2 to achieve effective inhibition of the coronavirus activity.the author declares that there are no conflicts of interest j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthis study investigated sars-cov-2 molecular targets (enzymes, receptors, and proteins) for drug development, the most promising targets based on drug repositioning, novel drug, monoclonal antibody, and mrna vaccine development to establish scientific discoveries in nigeria towards fighting the present pandemic.evidence before this studythere is little or no research initiated in nigeria towards the development of treatment and drug repositioning for sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, this is to motivates nigerian scientists to initiate research on drug repurposing and studies of molecular targets for sars-cov-2 therapeutics development from the scratch, so that nigeria will play a crucial role in fighting the present pandemic by helping in the identification of novel molecular targets for new drug development for sars-cov-2 infection. this can help the country to develop new treatments locally, repurpose existing antiviral drugs, and initiate clinical trials on them, which could be beneficial in fighting the pandemic and prevention of the future reoccurrence of the disease.proteins associated with sars-cov-2 infection can be explore for drug and vaccine development. molecular targets critical in sars-cov-2 replication and rna synthesis are papain-like proteinase (plpro), 3c-like main protease (3clpro), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) (nsp12), and helicase (nsp13). spike protein is important in binding to ace2 receptor, which is one of the great targets for drug repositioning, monoclonal antibody, and vaccine development. also, virulence factors such as nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a can be explored for sars-cov-2 drug development. based on drug repositioning, remdesivir targeting rna dependent rna polymerase and chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine affecting the activity of spike protein binding to ace2 receptor are under clinical trial and they are yielding positive results. however, unless molecular targets are well studied that is when their potential could be unraveled.this study reveals that there is a wide variety of enzymes, proteins, and receptors that can be explored for the development of novel therapeutics from scratch and repurposing of existing antiviral drugs for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. it is suggested that extensive research should be carried out on rna dependent rna polymerase and spike protein to develop novel therapeutics apart from the repositioning of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir. this is a strategy to prepare for the future reoccurrence of the disease and to have long-lasting future treatment. coronaviruses, members of the family coronaviridae and subfamily coronavirinae, are enveloped positive-stranded rna viruses which have spikes of glycoproteins projecting from their viral envelopes, thus exhibit a corona or halolike appearance [3] . the recent outbreak of novel coronavirus pneumonia referred to as neo-coronary pneumonia caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in december 2019 raised global health concerns. neo-coronary pneumonia has been officially named by the world health organization as corona virus disease 2019 . sars-cov-2 virus has been identified as a zoonotic coronavirus, similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus. among all known rna viruses, coronaviruses have the largest genomes ranging from 26 to 32 kb in length [16] . the * 306 aa long main protease is a key enzyme for coronavirus replication and is suitable for designing wide-spectrum inhibitors. it is responsible for processing the polypeptide into functional proteins [20] . the protease's activity is triggered by the binding of molecules to specific points on the protease called active sites. however, the protease's activity can also be blocked by molecules called inhibitors. when an inhibitor attaches to an active site, it prevents the binding of substrates-inhibiting the action of the protease altogether. therefore, finding an inhibitor for covid-19's protease may be the first step to beating the epidemic. thus the viral protease is a proven drug discovery target in case of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, and an attractive target for the design of anti-corona viral drugs.among the potential protease inhibitors, the antivirals remdesivir, nelfinavir, lopinavir, and ritonavir along with a-ketoamide are particularly attractive as therapeutics to combat the new coronavirus. remdesivir is a broad-spectrum antiviral nucleotide pro-drug with potent in vitro antiviral activity against a diverse panel of rna viruses such as ebola virus, marburg, mers-cov, sars-cov, respiratory syncytial virus, nipah virus and hendra virus [18] . similarly, nelfinavir, lopinavir and ritonavir are protease inhibitors recommended for the treatment of sars and mers, which have similar mechanisms of action as hiv [13] . using vero cell lines infected with sars-cov, antiviral effects of nelfinavir has been studied [9, 25] . a separate investigation performed by xu et al. [24] indicated that nelfinavir was identified as a potential inhibitor against covid-19 main protease, based on binding free energy calculations using molecular mechanics with generalized born and surface area solvation (mm/gbsa) model and solvated interaction energy methods.other protease inhibitors, lopinavir and ritonavir are currently available in both first and second-line antiretroviral therapy regimens in pediatrics and adult hiv/aids patients, respectively. china's national health commission has recommended using these agents as an adhoc treatment against covid-19. since sars-cov-2 infection is an rna virus similar to hiv, lopinavir/ritonavir is proposed for its management despite the absence of official approval of these drugs for the treatment of covid-19. at present, lopinavir/ritonavir is used for possible treatment of sars-cov-2 infection in countries where the emerging infection prevails [1] . due to the absence of crystallographic structure of sars-cov 3c-like protease, binding modes of these compounds have been proposed through docking studies [4, 14] . antiviral like a-ketoamides have also been reported in the literature as inhibitors of the coronavirus main protease [11] . because of their unique specificity and essential role in viral polyprotein processing, these proteases are suitable targets for the development of antiviral drugs [26] .thus, with no proven antiviral agent available, current research now suggests that selecting drugs with the appropriate viral restraining mechanisms can yield promising results. various clinical trials are being carried out on nucleotide analogue drugs such as remdesivir [17] . re-purposing the available protease inhibitor drugs for immediate use in treatment in sars-cov-2 infections could improve the currently available clinical management.thus, the twin objective of the current study is (1) to predict the 3d structure of protease of covid-19 and (2) to carry out docking studies with protease inhibitors available in drugbank such as remdesivir, nelfinavir, lopinavir and ritonavir along with ketoamide. this was followed by molecular interaction studies so as to identify any conserved ligand binding sites in the predicted structure.protease sequence of covid-19 (region 1541-1858) was downloaded from genbank database (accession no: p0c6x7.1) in fasta format. for building the 3d model of protease of covid-19, the target sequence information was submitted to swiss-model server [21] (http:// swissmodel.expasy.org). templates with the highest quality were selected for model building. the output of the predicted model generated as pdb file was downloaded for further analysis and visualized using spdbv 4.10 [10] . the model was subsequently validated using verify3d [6] , prosa [23] and procheck [12] servers. the final structure was visualized and analyzed with spdbv program.candidate protease inhibitors of covid-19 based on literature survey, the structural coordinates of 4 potential protease inhibitors namely: remdesivir (accession no: db14761), nelfinavir (accession no: db00220), lopinavir (accession no: db01601) and ritonavir (accession no: db00503) were downloaded from the drugbank database (ref); for ketoamide, the coordinates were separated from the crystal structure of protease of sars coronavirus in complex with a-ketoamide (pdb id: 5n5o), available from protein data bank.docking studies were attempted to explore the binding mode of the suggested protease inhibitors onto the 3d model of protease of covid-19 using autodock tools 1.5.6 [7] . before docking, polar-h atoms were added to the covid-19 model followed by gasteiger charges calculation using autodock tools available from scripps research institute (http://www.scripps.edu/mb/olson/doc/ autodock). the macromolecule file was then saved in pdbqt format and ready to be used for docking. ligand centered maps were generated by autogrid program with a spacing of 0.375 å and grid dimensions of 90 9 90 9 90 å 3 . gridbox center was set to coordinate -0.074, 0.083 and -0.013 in x y, and z respectively. polar h charges of the gasteiger-type were assigned and non-polar-h atoms were merged with the carbons and internal degrees of freedom and torsions were set. default d. mothay, k. v. ramesh settings were used for all other parameters. pymol package [5] was used to visualize the binding interactions between these ligands with 3d model of protease of covid-19.multiple sequence alignment was carried out to identify the conserved regions of protease sequence of covid-19 with orf1ab polyprotein from wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus (yp_009724389.1) and the best pdb template identified by the swiss model server using clustal omega [19] .swiss-model server was successful in generating a 3d structure for protease of covid-19 using crystal structure of sars-cov papain-like protease plpro in complex with ubiquitin aldehyde (pdb id: 4mm3_b) as the template. chimera package was able to superimpose the 3d model of protease of covid-19 onto the crystallographic structure of 4mm3_b. the root mean square deviation (rmsd) of ca atoms between protease of covid-19 and the pdb template 4mm3_b computed was 0.065å (supp fig. 1 ).-the quality factor of the residues of protease model of covid-19 when evaluated by verify3d server (supp fig. 2) showed 95.57% of the residues had an averaged 3d-1d score c 0.2 which represents a good score, suggesting high compatibility of the atomic model (3d) with its amino acid sequence (1d).validation of model using ramachandran plot available with the procheck server revealed that 86.7% residues of protease of covid-19 model were in the most favoured regions, followed by 12.6% in additional allowed regions, 0.4% in generously allowed region and 0.4% in the disallowed regions. overall g factor for the predicted structure was -0.18 (supp fig. 3) . the g-factor provides a measure of the normalcy of stereo-chemical property of a protein model. values below -0.5 shows unusual stereo-chemical property while values below -1.0 show a highly unusual property. since g value obtained for the predicted model in the present study is not less than -0.5, it is suggestive of satisfactory quality. the main chain parameter plot statistics suggested that the overall quality of the predicted model was good. prosa energy plot revealed negative energy distribution pattern being scored by the amino acid residues for the predicted structure (supp fig. 4) . the z score calculated by the prosa tool for the model was -7.55, which is within the range of scores typically found for nmr derived structure for the native protein of similar size. since the structure assessment reports were reasonably good for the predicted structure of protease, it was not subjected to loop refinement.all the 5 potential protease inhibitors viz. remdesivir, nelfinavir, lopinavir, ritonavir, and ketoamide got docked onto the predicted 3d model of protease of covid-19 with a negative dock energy value as shown in fig. 1 . the best recorded binding energy value was obtained for nelfinavir (-7.54 kcal mol -1 ) (fig. 1) . further, molecular interaction studies showed that protease model of covid-19 had thr 75 , arg 141 , gln 175 and his 176 '' as the potential drug binding sites, with more than one drug binding site (thr 75 and his 176 ) identified with remdesivir ( fig. 1) .multiple sequence alignment of protease of covid-19 along with orf1ab polyprotein from wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus (yp_009724389.1) and pdb template 4mm3_b revealed bulk of the residues were highly conserved (fig. 2) , including the ligand binding sites (thr 75 , arg 141 , gln 175 and his 176 ) of protease of covid-19.the viral 3-chymotrypsin-like cysteine protease enzyme, which controls coronavirus replication and is essential for its life cycle, is a proven drug discovery target in the case of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). recent studies revealed that the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 is very similar to that of sars-cov [15] . given the fragile health systems, new and reemerging disease outbreaks such as the current covid-19 epidemic can potentially paralyse health systems. according to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), facilities for undergoing research for covid-19 should strictly implement the appropriate biosafety practices inside the laboratory, due to the extremely high virus transmissibility. these factors make it extremely difficult for researchers to work with this virus, despite an urgent need to provide a therapy quickly. computational studies at the preliminary level can save time and resources. the current study, thus, aims to predict theoretical structure for protease of covid-19 and to explore further whether this homology modelled protein can serve as a target for protease inhibitor drugs such as remdesivir, nelfinavir, lopinavir, ritonavir and ketoamide.homology modeling is a useful tool for predicting the 3d structure of proteins. quality of the 3d structure of protease of covid-19 generated by swiss-model server using 4mm3_b as the template was reasonably good based on the validation reports generated verify3d, procheck, and prosa servers. ramachandran plot analysis suggests the predicted 3d model of protease of covid-19 as a good representation of protein structure fig. 1 docking of 5 different potential protease inhibitors of covid-19 using autodock software. among the 5, nelfinavir has got docked with highest biding affinity (panel a).the image has been generated using pymol software with more than 90% of the residues located in the favourable region. the z-score calculated by prosa tool for the model was also within the range of scores typically found for nmr derived structure for a native protein of similar size.docking results suggests the 5 potential protease inhibitors namely nelfinavir, remdesivir, lopinavir, ritonavir and ketoamide got docked onto the predicted 3d model of protease of covid-19 with a negative dock energy value. however, the best recorded binding energy value was obtained for nelfinavir. based on the lowest dock energy value scored by nelfinavir in relation to remaining ligands, this appears to be the drug of choice for treating covid-19 infection. since all the ligands have been docked with negative dock energy onto the target protein, it will be sensible to give equal importance to all these protease inhibitor ligands. the molecular interaction studies also showed that protease model of covid-19 had more than 1 active site residue for remdesivir, while for remaining ligands the structure had only one active site residue each. in a recently reported study by chang et al. [preprint; not peer reviewed], remdesivir has been identified to possess docking sites that strongly overlap with the protein pockets, and could be considered as a potential therapeutic agent. also, one in vitro and a clinical study indicate that remdesivir, an adenosine analogue that acts as a viral protein inhibitor, has improved the condition in one patient [8, 22] . a combination of the anti-retroviral drugs lopinavir and ritonavir significantly improved the clinical condition of sars-cov patients [2] and might be an option in covid-19 infections. from the output of multiple sequence alignment analysis, it is evident that ligand binding sites (thr 75 , arg 141 , gln 175 and his 176 ) were conserved across protease sequences of covid-19, wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus and crystal structure of sars-coronovirus. considering the global threat posed by covid-19, and with no proven antiviral agent available for immediate relief, the current in silico study provide structural insights about the protease of covid-19 and also its molecular interactions with some of the known protease inhibitors. . autodock vina scores (vina score) of adenosine analogues from drugbank. note that the column of "#p" indicates the number of phosphorus in the molecule; "charge" lists the net charge of the molecule; and "mw" lists the molecular weight of the molecule. figure s2 . the homology model of sars-cov-2 nsp12 (pink). the mutated residues from 6nur are highlighted in vdw balls (colored by brown for hydrophobic residues, green for hydrophilic residues, red for positively charged residues and blue for negatively charged residues). the added random coil is highlighted with a loop representation (colored the same way as the vdw balls).coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)a novel coronavirus that has been causing a once-in-acentury pandemic. 1 sars-cov-2 2 belongs to the family coronaviridae, which includes rna viruses such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov, 3 which caused a pandemic in 2003) and middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mers-cov, 4 which has caused a continuing epidemic since 2012). the mortality rate of covid-19 (in the range of ∼1−6%) is believed to be less deadly than sars (∼10%) 5 or mers (∼40%); 5 however, its reproductive number (r 0 ) has been estimated to be 2.0−6.5, 6 higher than sars and mers. covid-19 has been spreading to all continents with multiple epicenters. while certain physical treatment has been shown to assist patients to fight this disease with their own immune systems, 7 no proven remedies exist so far, causing high mortality rates especially in senior groups. 8 this raises high and urgent demand to screen for potential drugs through either drug-repurposing or novel drug development. 9−13 remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue that mimics the structure of adenosine. it was originally developed by gilead sciences, inc., to treat ebola virus disease. 14 even though it has not passed the phase 3 clinical trial of ebola treatment, it showed promising improvement over the mortality rate of this deadly disease. 15 in the case of ebola virus, remdesivir was found to act as an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) binding substrate that replaces atp in the polymerization process before terminating it. 14 such an agent is also known as a "chain terminator". upon entering the body, remdesivir is hydrolyzed and phosphorylated through metabolism, using the core of the molecule as a nucleoside (gs-441524). 14 we term the hydrolyzed and phosphorylated remdesivir as "remtp". like other nucleotide analogues, remdesivir could potentially be utilized as a broad-spectrum antiviral drug 16 due to the structural similarities of rdrp's of various viruses. 17 for example, it was clinically tested against mers-cov and showed significant efficacy. 18 currently, phase 3 trials of remdesivir against covid-19 are under progress in the u.s. 19 it has been shown that remdesivir shortens the time of recovery among covid-19 patients, 19 leading to the recent approval of it for emergency use authorization (eua) by food and drug administration (fda). however, the detailed inhibition mechanism of remdesivir remains unknown. therefore, we carried out a physics-based molecular modeling study on the binding mechanism between remdesivir and sars-cov-2 rdrp. note that the rdrp complex of coronaviruses has multiple nonstructural protein (nsp) units, such as nsp12, nsp8, and nsp7, among which nsp12 possesses some minimal polymerase activity on its own. 20 a previous study revealed that remdesivir mainly substituted atp as substrate to nsp12 of sars-cov rdrp. 21 the nsp8 and nsp7 cofactors, although found to significantly enhance the polymerase activity of sars-cov rdrp, 22 are structurally distant from the nucleoside triphosphate (ntp) binding site. 17 to build a minimal model, we narrowed down our search of the remtp binding site to nsp12 of sars-cov-2 rdrp. we employed homology modeling to first construct the tertiary structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12. the initial binding mode of atp to sars-cov-2 nsp12 was subsequently determined by structural alignment to the atp bound poliovirus rdrp due to the structural resemblance of viral rdrp's. however, we must emphasize that our proposed binding structure should be considered as a checkpoint structure before the rna template is inserted (which is therefore considered as a "preinsertion binding mode"), as was the case for the poliovirus rdrp structure. 23 we then performed molecular dynamics (md) simulations to validate the identified preinsertion binding mode. upon locating the stable binding mode, we further carried out free energy perturbation (fep) calculations to identify the key residues in the binding process and estimate ■ method homology modeling. the structure of sars-cov nsp12 rdrp was obtained from the protein data bank (pdb id: 6nur). 17 the sequence of sars-cov-2 nsp12 rdrp (sars-cov-2 nsp12) was obtained from entry yp_009725307.1 at ncbi. 24 sequence alignment and homology modeling were performed with modeler 9.23, 25 with unresolved structures on the n-terminus and c-terminus truncated (gray residues on figure 1a ), which should not affect our current binding affinity calculations due to their structural distances from the binding pocket.molecular dynamics (md) simulation. based on the cocrystal structure of poliovirus rdrp with atp 23 (pdb id: 2ily), we prepared the initial structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12-atp complex by aligning the "fingers" domain of the two proteins based on the alignment of the sequence (i.e., one from poliovirus and one from covid- 19) . note that this is the initial structure, which will be optimized by md simulations. the complex structure of remtp was then aligned with that of atp for the corresponding simulations. chelating mg 2+ ions are often needed for these rdrp's, which are positioned in our simulations based on previous studies on class i rna polymerase. 26 a total of nine different simulations were performed: one for the apo form of sars-cov-2 nsp12, two (independent runs) for sars-cov-2 nsp12-atp (no mg 2+ ), two for sars-cov-2 nsp12-atp (with mg 2+ ), two for sars-cov-2 nsp12-remtp (no mg 2+ ), and two for sars-cov-2 nsp12-remtp (with mg 2+ ). the parameters of remtp were generated by charmm cgenff 27 and listed in table s2 . all other parameters were taken from charmm36. 28 simulations were performed with gromacs 5.1.2. 29 van der waals interactions were treated with a switching distance of 10 å and a smooth cutoff distance of 12 å. electrostatic interactions were treated with particle mesh ewald with a grid size of 1 å. all simulations lasted about 100 ns before the free energy perturbation calculations.free energy perturbation (fep) calculation. the thermodynamic cycles of our fep calculations were illustrated in figure s1 . a softcore potential was applied in fep, and more details can be found in our previous studies. 30 the λ windows were set as (0.00, 0.00001, 0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99, 0.999, 0.9999, 0.99999, 1.00) to avoid the well-known fep end-point catastrophe. namd 2.13 31 was used to perform the fep calculations. the starting fep complex structures of sars-cov-2 nsp12 binding with ntp (atp or remtp) were selected using the clustering algorithm based on the rmsd of ntp while sars-cov-2 nsp12 was aligned. the largest cluster of each simulation was taken to carry out the fep calculations. all other simulation parameters were the same as md simulations. each simulation was repeated 10 times with different random seeds to obtain the standard error of the free energy changes.homology model of sars-cov-2 nsp12. we constructed the homology model of sars-cov-2 nsp12 by first aligning the sequences between sars-cov-2 nsp12 (wu et al., 24 ncbi: yp_009725307.1) and the recently resolved sars-cov nsp12 rdrp structure 17 (pdb id: 6nur). the sequence identity was 95.8%, with 131 unresolved terminal residues, 10 unresolved hinge residues, and 24 mutated residues ( figure 1a ). the 3d structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12 was then created with the modeler package without the 131 unresolved terminal residues. the 10 unresolved hinge residues (residues 896−905) were estimated with the default algorithm, thus resulting in a random coil configuration. because of the high sequence conservation, the backbone rmsd between 6nur nsp12 and sars-cov-2 nsp12 was a mere 0.25 å ( figure 1b) . the similarity between two proteins has been verified by the newly solved cryo-em structure (pdb id: 6m71) of sars-cov-2 nsp12 (the rmsd is 0.55 å between pdb ids 6nur and 6m71). 32 the newly added random coil and 24 mutated residues have been highlighted in figure s2 . it was previously discovered that figure  1c ). the "grip" (a hole formed between these three domains) served as the binding site for the rna template and nucleoside triphosphates (ntps). additionally, the sars-cov nsp12 also featured a unique n-terminal extension, which was mostly conserved in sars-cov-2 nsp12 (colored by green in figure  1c ). comparing figure 1c and figure s2 , we notice that the majority of the mutations occur at the n-terminal extension and the palm domain. meanwhile, the fingers domain and the thumb domain remain highly conserved. consequentially, the rna/ntp binding grip is highly conserved. as a simple test on the structural stability, we ran a 100 ns simulation on the apo form of sars-cov-2 nsp12. the rmsd (compared to the initial structure, figure 1d ) remains below 3 å, indicating that the constructed protein is stable. binding mode of the substrates. no crystal structures exist yet for the atp-bound sars-cov-2 nsp12. therefore, we referred to another atp-bound rdrp structure from poliovirus (pdb id: 2ily) utilizing the structural conservation of viral rdrp's. the binding structure of atp to poliovirus rdrp is shown in figure 2a , with residues in close contact with atp labeled. the triphosphate part of atp mostly interacts with positively charged residues (we define residues to interact with the substrate when the closest heavy atom distance is below 5 å, same below), such as k159, r174, r163, k167, k172, and k359. the negatively charged residue d323 in the vicinity implies the existence of a chelated ion (mg 2+ ), suggested by other studies. 26 the nucleoside part of atp (adenosine) interacts with more diverse residues, such as k61, i176, e177, d238, and s288, which are mostly hydrophilic with only one hydrophobic residue. to approximate the binding mode of atp in sars-cov-2 nsp12, we aligned the fingers domain of poliovirus rdrp with that of sars-cov-2 nsp12 because this was the main constituent of the grip. the aligned sars-cov-2 nsp12 is shown in figure 2b with both atp and remtp (referred to as ntp for either; note that the residue numbers are drastically different because of the size of the protein: 932 residues in sars-cov-2 nsp12 versus 461 residues in poliovirus rdrp). as expected, the alignment ensured that triphosphates of ntps are in close contact with positively charged residues k545, r551, r553, and r555. nucleosides of ntps are surrounded by residues like t556, v557, a558, c622, d623, and s682, which are still mostly hydrophilic with only some hydrophobic. our alignment of the preinsertion site here indicates once again the conservation of the binding grip from viral rdrp's.binding mode optimization. md simulations were then carried out from the initial binding complex structures prepared above. we ran two sets of simulations for both atp and remtpone set without mg 2+ and one set with mg 2+ to examine the structural influence of mg 2+ . the initial position of mg 2+ was constructed based on previous studies on class i rna polymerase of poliovirus. 26 we must emphasize that at least two mg 2+ ions are needed for the catalytic process in rna replication, with one structurally bound to ntp. 26, 33 however, the exact location of the second mg 2+ remains in debate. 33−35 the inclusion of a second mg 2+ also tended to destabilize the ntp binding (to hepatitis c virus rdrp). 33 therefore, in our current work, we included at most one mg 2+ ion. more studies are needed in terms of understanding the functions of mg 2+ in sars-cov-2 rdrp.we performed clustering analysis based on the rmsd of ntps during the simulations, with sars-cov-2 nsp12 aligned. we noticed that, by adding the mg 2+ , the largest cluster size was slightly larger than that without mg 2+ ( figure  s1a vs s1b). this indicates that mg 2+ might have stabilized the binding between atp and sars-cov-2 nsp12. as a (figure s1b, upper panel) . a closer examination ( figure  4a ) showed that the "bound state" did not deviate much from the initial structure (which was aligned to 2ily). the triphosphate of atp was found to interact with s549, k551, r553, r555 (from the fingers domain), r836 (from the thumb domain), and mg 2+ . particularly, the first solvation shell of mg 2+ consisted of one to two phosphate oxygens and four to five water oxygens. mg 2+ was situated between the triphosphate group and the palm domain of nsp12, neutralizing the slightly negatively charged protein surface, featuring d618, d761, and e811. the adenosine of atp was found to interact with m542, t556, v557, a558, and s682 (from the fingers domain), similar to its initial structure. this indicates a remarkable consistency between the preinsertion binding modes of atp to rdrp's from two species: poliovirus and sars-cov-2. additionally, we plotted the solvent accessible surface of sars-cov-2 nsp12 upon binding to atp ( figure 4b ). atp was found to reside well inside a local pocket within the grip. however, the "extra space" as seen on the right side of the adenosine group might suggest a possible druggable target. to further test this assumption, we performed molecular docking with several adenosine/guanosine analogues (see more details in the supporting information). interestingly, several molecules, including remtp, with an enlarged nucleoside, occupied the top of the list ordered by docking scores (see table s1 for details). likewise, we performed the md simulations for the putative binding structures of remtp in sars-cov-2 nsp12. similar to that of atp, the largest cluster size of remtp with mg 2+ is significantly larger than that without mg 2+ ( figure 3a vs figure  3b ). the "bound state" was therefore chosen as the largest cluster of the first set of simulations with mg 2+ (figure 3b , upper panel). a closer inspection of this structure showed that it deviated from the atp binding site somewhat ( figure 5a ) while staying as the most stable binding state in our simulations. this was mainly due to the binding of the additional nitrile group (cn) in remtp to the shallow pocket formed by k545, y546, and a547 (from the fingers domain). the triphosphate part of the molecule mainly figure  s1b , upper panel). all representations are the same as those in figure 2 except that mg 2+ is drawn with a green sphere and that the initial structure of atp is drawn in transparent pink. in part b, the representation of sars-cov-2 nsp12 is switched to the solvent accessible surface, highlighting the local pocket. figure 5 . in part a, we illustrate the most stable binding mode of sars-cov-2 nsp12-remtp (with mg 2+ ) based on the clustering result ( figure  3b , upper panel). all representations are the same as those in figure 2 except that mg 2+ is drawn with a green sphere, the most stable binding structure of atp (from figure 4a ) is drawn in transparent pink, and d618 is emphasized in red with an orange arrow. in part b, the representation of sars-cov-2 nsp12 is switched to the solvent accessible surface, highlighting the local pocket. figure 5b ). therefore, it might potentially slow down the activity of rdrp, on top of its supposed function that remtp could act as a terminating nucleotide on the rna. 14 our optimized binding structure agrees with the remtp binding structure hypothesized by gao et al. 32 which showed that r555, v557, and d618 were among the key binding residues. k d of remtp is ∼100 times stronger than atp in the preinsertion site. we followed the thermodynamic cycle illustrated in figure s1c and figure 3c to calculate the relative binding free energy of atp and remtp (with the zero-point energy reference as the mtp molecule: methanol triphosphate). the binding free energy of the most stable binding structures was then calculated and averaged over 10 runs of fep calculations. the relative binding free energy (δδg) of atp was found to be −4.88 ± 0.62 kcal/mol, while that of remtp was −7.68 ± 0.57 kcal/mol. the difference between the two was ∼2.80 ± 0.85 kcal/mol, equating to ∼94 times of the difference in k d values under 310 k. it should be noted that fep can converge slowly particularly on systems where the environments of the target alchemical modification undergo slow response fluctuations; for this purpose, various advanced free energy computing strategies were developed, such as funnel metadynamics 36 and orthogonal space random walk (osrw). 37 in this study, we adopted a simple approach following our previous studies 38−41 with multiple runs starting from the most probable binding cluster. it would also be desirable in the future to study the ligand−rdrp binding process with more advanced sampling techniques, such as replica exchange, 42 replica exchange with solute tempering, 43 and metadynamics 44 to help reduce the enormous computational resources required (it takes hours if not days in experiment to measure k d values typically), and better understand the underlying mechanism of the therapeutic effects of remdesivir.nevertheless, our calculations strongly suggest that remtp would almost completely replace the "native ligand" atp when both presenting at the binding grip of sars-cov-2 nsp12. this finding supplements the previous study where remtp was found to bind with the ebola rdrp. 45 it also suggests that, if administrated correctly and highly metabolized, remdesivir might indeed be a promising drug to significantly lower the reproduction of sars-cov-2. this finding agrees with the study by yin et al. 46 where remtp completely blocks the activity of sars-cov-2 rdrp with 1/10 concentration of atp. additionally, the backbone rmsd of our modeled rdrp is only 3.3 å from the solved cryo-em structure with the inserted rna template, 46 indicating a good overall agreement with the experimental structure. more importantly, a structure overlay of our predicted preinsertion state of remtp and the postinsertion cryo-em structure ( figure s3 ) reveals that remtp is situated perfectly to form hydrogen bonds with the primer rna, ready to be incorporated in the polymerization process.in this study, we constructed the homology model of sars-cov-2 nsp12 rdrp with high sequence identity (95.8%). all key residues at the rna/ntp binding site were conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2. although there has been no cocrystal structure yet for atp bound with either sars-cov or sars-cov-2 rdrp's, we successfully constructed a model for atp/remdesivir binding with sars-cov-2 nsp12 based on a previous cocrystal structure of poliovirus rdrp. the relative binding free energy of atp (the baseline is mtp, same below) was subsequently calculated to be −4.88 ± 0.62 kcal/mol with the presence of mg 2+ . the active metabolite of remdesivir (remtp) was found to have a relative binding free energy of −7.68 ± 0.57 kcal/mol, which is significantly stronger than atp. the ∼100-fold difference in the k d value might decisively block atp out of the preinsertion site when remtp is in the vicinity. subsequently, remtp could act as an effective sars-cov-2 rna-chain terminator, stopping its rna replication. more studies are still needed to explore the details of this process, especially on how nsp7 and nsp8 cofactors mediate the entry and incorporation of remtp. finally, the previously identified crucial residue d618 was affected by the binding of remtp, indicating a possible secondary effect of this drug that would slow down the activity of rdrp, thus also helping cure covid-19.the supporting information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcb.0c04198. table s1 (docking results of some approved drugs to the homology model of sars-cov-2 nsp12), table s2 (force field parameters of remtp and atp), figure s1 (simulations of atp bound sars-cov-2 nsp12), figure s2 (the homology model of sars-cov-2 nsp12 labeling mutated residues from sars-cov to sars-cov-2), and figure s3 (overlaid structures of the preinsertion state of remtp from this study and the rna template from the cryo-em structure (pdb id: 7bv2)) (pdf)coronaviruses (covs) are a group of enveloped viruses named for their coronary appearance with positive single-stranded rna genomes that infect animal hosts [1] . many of the coronaviruses were recognized as viruses typically causing pneumonia and colds until the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002 and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 from zoonotic sources [2] . in addition, a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), causing severe acute respiratory disease emerged recently in wuhan, china in december 2019 [3, 4] . like the other two highly pathogenic coronaviruses sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 can also cause severe respiratory illness and even death. moreover, the population's susceptibility to these highly pathogenic coronaviruses has contributed to large outbreaks and evolved into the public health events, highlighting the necessity to prepare for the future emerging viruses [5] .similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 spreads rapidly among humans and likely originates in bats [3, 6] . the initial patient cluster with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection was reported as pneumonia with unknown aetiology, which bore some resemblance to both sars-cov and mers-cov infections and was associated with icu admission and high mortality. moreover, patients requiring icu admission had higher concentrations of g-csf, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, and tnf-α than did those not requiring icu admission, suggesting that the cytokine storm was associated with disease severity [7] . to date the severity of sars-cov-2 has tended to be mild, the risk of fatality among hospitalized cases was 4.3% in a single-center case series of 138 hospitalized patients [8] , and the infection fatality risk could be below 1% or even below 0.1% in a large number of undetected relatively mild infections [9] . however, the basic reproduction number (r0) of person-to-person spread was about 2.6, which meant that the cases of infection would grow at an exponential rate. as of 7 february, 2020, 57,620 cases of sars-cov-2 have been reported in china, including 26,359 suspected cases, and a sustained increase is predicted. it is challenging to judge the severity and predict the consequences of the information available to date. since no specific antiviral treatment for sars-cov-2 infection is currently available, supportive cares, including symptomatic controls and prevention of complications remain the most important management strategy, especially in preventing acute respiratory distress syndrome [4, 10] . currently, there is no special antiviral treatment or vaccine j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f against the new virus. therefore, it is of great importance to research and develop effective and safe antiviral drugs.it has been reported that many traditional chinese medicine (tcm) prescriptions could not only inhibit the replication of virus directly, but also attenuate excessive pro-inflammatory responses and tissue damage by viruses [11] [12] [13] . therefore, it is significantly to study the traditional chinese medicines that have obvious advantages in the treatment of the new virus. liu shen capsule (ls), a traditional chinese medicine, has been used to treat influenza, tonsillitis, pharyngitis, and mumps for more than a century [14] . it consists of bezoar (the gall-stone of bos taurus domesticus gmelin), musk (the excretion of moschus), cinobufagin venom toad (the excretion of venenum bufonis), pearl (the shell of pernulo), realgar, and borneol. in previous studies, it was shown that the ls exhibited a wide spectrum of pharmacological properties, such as anti-inflammatory, anticancer, antiviral, analgesic, antibacterial, and immunomodulatory activities [15, 16] . in addition, ls could inhibit viral propagation and regulate immune function and achieved similar therapeutic effectiveness with oseltamivir in reducing the course of h1n1 virus infection. notably, the anti-influenza activity of ls in infected mice might depend on the regulation of cytokines, particularly in cytokine storm associated cytokines, such as ifn-γ, il-1β, il-6, and tnf-α [17] . however, there is no exact evidence that ls is effective in the treatment of sars-cov-2 and its mechanisms of action remain obscure. therefore, to study the antiviral activity of ls on sars-cov-2 and its potential effect in regulating the host's immune response, we evaluated the antiviral and anti-inflammatory efficiency of ls against a clinical isolate of sars-cov-2 from guangzhou in vitro.in this study, a comprehensive evaluation of the antiviral and anti-inflammatory activity of ls was performed in vitro with sars-cov-2 infection. it demonstrated that ls inhibited the replication of the virus in a dose-dependent manner and found that ls could reduce the number of viral particles. moreover, ls could markedly decrease pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in infected human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (huh-7), which may result in gaining a comprehensive understanding of the inhibition of ls against sars-cov-2 infection.ls (lot: sa01004c) used in this study was produced and provided by leiyunshang j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pharmaceutical group co., ltd. (suzhou, china). the ls was triturated, 50 mg was prepared in at 4000 g for 15 min. the supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 μm syringe filter before use. in the previous study, the index components in ls were detected by high-performance liquid chromatography (hplc). hplc revealed that ls contained 0.12% gamabufotalin, 0.10% arenobufagin, 0.26% telocinobufagin, 0.21% desacetylcinobufotalin, 0.25% bufotalin, 0.41% cinobufotalin, 0.27% bufalin, 0.70% resibufogenin, 0.68% cinobufagin, 1.81% cholic acid, 0.27% anserine deoxycholic acid, and 0.23% deoxycholic acid [18] . remdesivir was kindly provided by the african green monkey kidney epithelial (vero e6) cells and human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (huh-7) were purchased from atcc. the cells were cultured in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem, gibco, usa) with 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs), 100 u/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. sars-cov-2 (genebank accession no. mt123290.1) was clinical isolates from the first affiliated hospital of guangzhou medical university. the virus was propagated and adapted as previously described [19] . the 50% tissue culture infective dose (tcid50) of the virus was determined using the reed muench method (tcid50 = 10-6 /100 μl). virus stocks were collected and stored at -80 °c. all the infection experiments were performed in a biosafety level-3 (bls-3) laboratory.the cytotoxic effects of ls or remdesivir on vero e6 and huh-7 cells were evaluated by mtt assay [20] . briefly, vero e6 (5 × 10 4 cells/well) and huh-7 (5 × 10 4 cells/well) cells grown in a monolayer in 96-well plates were rinsed with pbs followed by incubation with indicated concentrations of ls. after 72 h, the cells were stained with mtt solution at 0.5 mg/ml for 4 h.the supernatants were then removed, and the formed formazan crystals were dissolved in 200 μl dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso). the absorbance at 570 nm was determined using a multiskan spectrum reader (thermo fisher, usa).to investigate the antiviral effects of ls against sars-cov-2, the cpe inhibition assay under the nontoxic concentration of ls was employed. briefly, the vero e6 cell monolayers were grown in 96-well plates and inoculated with 100 tcid50 of coronavirus strains at 37 c for 2 h.the inoculum was removed, and the cells were subsequently incubated with indicated concentrations of ls and the positive control remdesivir. following 72 h of incubation, the infected cells showed 100% cpe under the microscope. the percentage of cpe in ls-treated cells was recorded. the 50% inhibition concentration (ic50) of the virus-induced cpe by ls was calculated as described and the selectivity index (si) was determined from the cc50 to ec50 ratio [21] .the plaque reduction assay was performed as previously described [21] . briefly, vero e6 cells monolayers in 6-well plates were rinsed with pbs and incubated with 100 plaque-forming unit (pfu) of sars-cov-2. following 2 h of incubation, the inoculum was removed, and the cells were covered with agar/basic medium mixture, which contained 0.8% agar and indicated concentrations of ls or remdesivir. the plates were then incubated at 37 ℃ for 48 h, followed by fixation in 4% formalin for 30 min. the overlays were then removed and stained with 0.1% crystal violet for 3 min. the plaques were visualized and counted. the ic50 of the virus-induced plaques by ls was calculated as described [21] .to further identify the possible underlying mechanisms of ls, we used several drug concentrations, with high antiviral efficiency for subsequent experiments. the primers of tnf-α, il-6, ccl-2/mcp-1, il-1β, il-8, cxcl-10/ip-10 and gapdh genes ( table 1) were designed by using primer 5.0.briefly, huh-7 cell monolayer in 12-well plates were rinsed with pbs and then exposed to samples via the sybr premix ex tap™ ii (takara bio, japan). the pcr data were analysed using the detection system (abi prism® 7500 real-time pcr system, applied biosystems co., usa). the relative amount of pcr products was calculated using the 2−δδct method as previously described [22] . with 1% osmium tetroxide. the fixed cells were dehydrated through a series of ethanol and butanol mixtures [23] , and observed under the jsm-6340 sem (jeol, japan).the total proteins of the samples were extracted from the cells with all data in this study were analysed by using analysis of variance (anova) with spss ver. 19 .0 (armonk, ny, usa). data were presented as the mean ± standard deviation (sd).differences in multiple groups were determined by one-way anova with tukey's honest j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f significant difference (hsd) test. a p-value＜0.05 was considered statistically significant.the cytotoxicity of ls in vero e6 cells was first evaluated by non-radioactive cell to verify the antiviral efficacy on sars-cov-2, tem assay was performed in the sars-cov-2 infection is known to be able to induce a strong inflammatory reaction, hallmarked by the production of cytokines and chemokines. therefore, the expression of cytokines to further study whether the antiviral and anti-inflammation mechanisms induced by virus of ls was related to the inhibitory of nf-κb/mapk signaling pathway activation, the expression of the key proteins related to the nf-κb/mapk signaling pathway was examined. as shown in the number of infections caused by sars-cov-2 continues to rise sharply in the world [24, 25] .the viral infection has widely and rapidly spread worldwide [26] . it is a major coronavirus infection, which threatens human life after sars and mers [27] . for this sudden and lethal disease, no specific antiviral drugs or vaccines have been developed, and supportive care and non-specific treatment of patients are currently the only options to ameliorate the symptoms [28] [29] [30] . therefore, effective and safe antiviral agents are urgently needed. currently, the use of tcm is a popular and acceptable therapy, and many tcm prescriptions have been proven to have obvious therapeutic ls is a tcm used to treat tonsillitis, influenza, pharyngitis, and mumps. however, the antiviral and anti-inflammatory effects induced by sars-cov-2 and the potential mechanisms of ls in treating viral pneumonia are less understood. therefore, the potential antiviral and anti-inflammatory activities of ls induced by sars-cov-2 were investigated. in the present study, it was the first time to clarify that ls could not only inhibit sars-cov-2 infection, but also significantly suppress the inflammation caused by sars-cov-2 through a mechanism that involved the downregulation of inflammatory cytokines.first, the effects of ls against sars-cov-2 in vitro by cpe assay and plaque reduction assay ( figure 1 and figure 2 ) were measured. the results showed that ls was able to protect cells from virus-induced cell death and inhibit the average size and plaque number in ls-treated cells in a dose-dependent manner. the si index of ls reached 8.18 (table 1 ). all these results confirmed that ls might be a potential antiviral drug for sars-cov-2. tem has been a potent tool to observe virus entry, virus particle assembly, viral ultrastructure, and budding from the plasma membrane [31] . to understand the antiviral details of ls, tem images were taken from each group it is reported that highly pathogenic coronaviruses such as sars-cov and mers-cov cause fatal pneumonia, which is mainly associated with rapid virus replication, massive inflammatory cell infiltration and elevated proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine responses. although the pathophysiology of fatal pneumonia caused by highly pathogenic coronaviruses has not been completely understood, recent studies suggest a crucial role of cytokine storm in causing fatal pneumonia [32] . early studies have shown that increased amounts of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., il-1β, il-6, cxcl-10/ip-10, and ccl-2/mcp-1) in the serum of sars patients [33] , which was similar to the serum patients with mers with increased concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines (i.e., ifn-γ, tnf-α, il-15, and il-17) [34] . it also reported that the expression of the cytokine storm in the ncip patients in icu than those in non-icu patients [7] . therefore, the since the sars syndrome is characterized by an uncontrolled inflammatory response and nf-κb is the major transcription factor activated in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [35] .similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 can also cause severe respiratory illness and even death.nf-кb plays an important role in mediating inflammation, immune responses, and other cellular activities [36] . activation of nf-кb can induce cytokines production, and these cytokines can react upon in turn and they produce a positive autoregulatory loop and exacerbate the inflammatory response [37] . therefore, to understand the molecular mechanism of ls against virus infection, the regulation of the nf-кb/mapk signaling pathway contributes to the alleviation of inflammation.the results showed that sars-cov-2 activated the nf-кb /mapk signaling pathway and ls could significantly decrease sars-cov-2-induced activation of p-nf-κb p65, p-iκbα, and p-p38 mapk and increase the expression of the iκbα ( figure 5 ). we inferred that the underlying mechanism of ls is to impair the upregulated proinflammatory cytokines induced by sars-cov-2 via inhibiting the activity of nf-кb/mapk signaling pathway. the change of cytokine profiles suggested that ls might have a potential effect on the inhibition of cytokine storm induced by sars-cov-2.in conclusion, our results revealed that ls could significantly protect cells from virus-induced rna to generate new coronavirus particles, which are secreted to extracellular environment through golgi apparatus and infect new cells [7] .with a better understanding of the structure, the infection mechanisms of sars-cov-2 and the clinical symptoms of covid-19 patients, many drugs had been used for the clinical practice of covid-19. up to now, the therapeutic options for covid- 19 can be classified into small molecules, peptide inhibitors, traditional chinese medicines and biologics summarized in table 1 . in late may, 2020, over 1600 clinical trials have been registered to find the effective treatments for covid-19 from clinical trial registry platforms (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ and http://www.chictr.org.cn/). the most widely used therapeutic drugs include abidol, ribavirin, favipiravir, interferonα, chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, kaletra(lopinavir/ritonavir), remdesivir (gs-5734), sars-cov-2-specific neutralizing antibodies and so on. besides, the newly discovered small drugs, peptides and vaccine are also under pre-clinical or clinical researches. in this paper, we systematically introduced the safety, clinical efficacy, and the progress of antiviral researches of these drugs, hoping to provide some ideas for the therapeutic options of covid-19 worldwide and better understand the antiviral strategies prepared for the life-threaten virus diseases in the future. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 3.1 nucleoside analoguesremdesivir (gs-5734) is a novel prodrug of an adenosine analogue and effective against a broad spectrum of human and pre-epidemic zoonotic covs [15] . remdesivir can be triphosphorylated in cells and act as a substrate of virus rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and penetrate into the virus newly synthesized rna strand, thus interrupting the synthesis of the virus genome [12] .in the phase i clinical trial of remdesivir, 3-225 mg intravenous injection of single dose hill climb test was conducted. the subjects showed good tolerance, and all the adverse reactions were grade 1 or grade 2 with aspartic transaminase (ast) or alamine aminotransferase (alt) increasing, but no abnormality in total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase (alp) or albumin, and no effect on renal function [16] . according to a recently randomised clinical trial (rct) of covid-19, 66% (102/155)adverse events of remdesivir treatment were observed compared to the 64%(50/78) in placebo treatment [17] .remdesivir has not yet been approved for antiviral therapy and is currently used days [17] . the outcomes of another multicenter rct of remdesivir in covid-19patients has present a significant shorten in duration of discharge from hospital without significant difference in mortality [17] . according to these studies, we still do not know the benefit or harm of remdesivir treatment in severe covid-19 patients. however, further studies of remdesivir in patients with covid-19 in higher dosage or combination with other antivirals agents might help us to better understand its potential mechanism and clinical efficacy.ribavirin is a guanosine analogue with broad-spectrum antiviral activity against rna viruses. the antiviral mechanisms of ribavirin includes fatal mutagenesis, specific or non-specific chain termination and inhibition of nucleotide biosynthesis etc [23, 24] .the reproductive toxicity and the hemolytic anemia is the most serious side effects of ribavirin. some cohort studies of ribavirin showed that patients on therapy with loading dose of ribavirin experience significant toxic and side effects, such as hemolytic anemia [25] . in another retrospective study, among the 126 patients who received loading dose of ribavirin(2,000mg) treatment, the mainly adverse drug reactions included hemolytic bleeding, bradyarrhythmia(14%) and elevated transaminase(40%) [26] . thus, the dose of ribavirin need to be carefully adjusted to treat patients with covid-19.ribavirin is only approved by fda for hepatitis c, human respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) and some hemorrhagic fevers in combination with pegylated interferon. inchina, ribavirin is used for the patients with covid-19, which is mentioned in"novelby the chinese government [27] . it is recommended to use ribavirin in combination with interferon or lopinavir/ritonavir, the dosage for adults is 500 mg per time, 2~3 times per day by intravenous infusion, and the course of treatment is no longer than 10 days.the clinical studies in hong kong have shown that ribavirin couldn't improve clinical outcome of patients with sars-cov [28] . in 20 mers-cov infected patients, a combination treatment of ribavirin and ifn-α showed significantly improved survival at 14 days but not at 28 days [29] . although ribavirin has shown a certain effect on mers-cov, it is still controversial [30, 31] . in china, ribavirin was chosen j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f for patients with covid-19 in combination with ifn or lopinavir/ritonavir according to the clinical guidelines [27] . a clinical trial showed the significantly antiviral effect of combination treatment of ribavirin and ifn-α on patients with mers-cov [32] .but the adverse reaction of decreasing hemoglobin in infected patients reduces its potential antiviral agent against covid-19. take consideration of limited efficacy of ribavirin against coronaviruses and toxicity in vivo, some medical team stop ribavirin treatment and related studies.favipiravir is a nucleoside analogue that can be triphosphorylated in cells and act as a substrate of virus rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) [33] .the most serious side effect of favipiravir is teratogenicity. in the phase iii of a japanese and international multi-center clinical trial with 501 patients, the main adverse reactions including rising uric acid(24 cases, 4.79%), diarrhea(24 cases, 4.79%), neutropenia(9 cases, 1.80%), increased ast(9 cases, 1.80%) and increased alt(8 cases, 1.60%) [34] . in a randomized clinical trial of favipiravir with 240 patients with covid-19, the most common adverse events were liver enzyme abnormalities, psychiatric, gastrointestinal symptoms and serum uric acid elevations.0001) [35] . the overall adverse reactions were mild symptoms, but pregnant woman should not be treated with favipiravir.favipiravir is approved in japan for treatment of new or recurrent influenza. in 2014, favipiravir was urgently used to treat ebola virus and achieved good results [36, 37] . in 2020, favipiravir showed cytotoxicity in vero e6 cells infected with sars-cov-2 at ec50 of 61.88μm [20] . kaletra is a compound preparation with two specifications (lopinavir/ritonavir).lopinavir is an hiv protease inhibitor, which can influence the formation of matured virus particles and weaken the infectivity of the virus [39] . lopinavir has poor bioavailability and short half-life time. ritonavir is a cytochrome cyp3a4 enzyme inhibitor, which can inhibit the metabolism of lopinavir. the combined treatment of lopinavir and ritonavir can significantly enhance the bioavailability of lopinavir and improve its antiviral effect in vivo [13] .a retrospective analysis with kaletra for 60 weeks showed that diarrhea, nausea and vomiting are the main adverse reactions [40] . a retrospective study with 417 patients with covid-19 revealed that the use of lopinavir/ritonavir lead to increased odds of liver injury (or from 4.44 to 5.03, both p <0.01) [41] . another study revealed that lopinavir/ritonavir has an uncertain antiviral effect and even some potentially severe side effects in solid organ transplant recipients with covid-19 [42] .lopinavir/ritonavir have a synergistic effect on tacrolimus, resulting in higher trough blood concentrations of tacrolimus and cause severe liver and kidney dysfunction and also greatly damage the function of the immune system [43] . as early as 2003, kaletra was considered as a clinical option for the treatment of sars, and it indeed showed antiviral effect on sars both in tissues and patients [44] .one clinical research in hong kong showed that kaletra reduced the mortality rate of sars-cov from 15.6% to 2.3%, but it mainly exhibited good effect on patients with mild symptoms [45] . [49] . it seems that the combination of lopinavir-ritonavir with interferon β-1b, and ribavirin or other drugs could have better effect than lopinavir-ritonavir alone.chloroquine (cq) is a weak base, which can enter cells and accumulate in lysosome, trans golgi network and other acidic organelles through protonation, so as to increase the ph value and destroy the structure and function of the organelles [50] . therefore, it has a broad-spectrum antiviral effect. hydroxychloroquine(hcq) is a less toxic derivative of cq which shows better clinical efficacy than cq.the therapeutic and toxic dose of cq/hcq is narrow. the main toxicological outcomes initiated by cq and hcq reported are related to retinopathy, neuromyopathy, and cardiomyopathy after long term use [51] . the doses used for covid-19 are often much higher than the treatment of chronic rheumatic diseases [52] . thus the improper or renal toxicity were seen among these patients [53] .cq is a widely used drug for malaria and autoimmune diseases, and it has been used for over 70 years. in 2020, cq was recommended for the therapy of covid-19in the "novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment scheme (trial edition sixth)" issued by chinese government [54] . cq phosphate is applicable to patients aged 18 to 65. the administration mode for patients weighing over 50kg is 500mg per time, twice a day, with 7 days treatment; for those weighing no greater than 50kg is 500mg per time, twice a day for the first and second days, and 500mg per time, once a day for the third to seventh days, with 7 days treatment.it was reported in 2004 that chloroquine can effectively inhibit sars coronavirus at the cellular level [55] . in 2020, chinese researchers revealed that chloroquine had the ec90 of 6.90μm for vero e6 cells infected with sars-cov-2 [20] . a chinese clinical trial with more than 100 covid-19 patients found that chloroquine had superior to the control group in reducing symptom duration, exacerbation of pneumonia including radiological improvement and promoting virus-negative seroconversion without any severe side effects [56] . another randomized clinical trial with 81 adult patients suggested that the higher cq dosage (600mg cq twice daily for 10 days)should not be recommended for critically ill patients with covid-19 because of its potential safety hazards [53] . a retrospective multicenter cohort study of 1438 hospitalized covid-19 patients revealed that treatment with hydroxychloroquine, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f azithromycin, or both, compared with neither treatment, was not significantly associated with differences in in-hospital mortality [57] . a comparative observational study with 181 covid-19 patients suggested that hydroxychloroquine should not be recommended to be used in covid-19 patients who require oxygen [58] . multinational registry analysis of cq and hcq for 96,032 covid-19 patients revealed that cq/hcq independently associated with an increased risk of in-hospital mortality [59] . despite many observational studies have been performed to evaluate the efficacy of cq/hcq, we cannot exclude the possibility of unmeasured confounding factors, making it difficult to judge the therapeutic effect of cq/hcq.interferons (ifns) are cytokines that activate the innate immune system in response to viral infection. as a broad-spectrum antiviral drug, interferon-α (ifn-α)itself has no direct antiviral activity, but ifn-α can provoke the synthesis of proteins that have antiviral and immunomodulatory effects. in addition, ifn can enhance the specific cytotoxic action of immune cells on target cells through immune regulation, thereby containing the invasion of virus.in an systematic review including 8 studies(116 patients) of mers-cov treatment by interferon, interferon-α combined with ribavirin caused adverse reactions: two patients had increase in pancreatic enzyme and one patient had obvious hemolysis after the treatment of interferon-α2a combined with ribavirin [60] .interferon-α (ifn-α) is generally used for the treatment of malignant tumors and the prevention and treatment of virus through improving the immune function of human body [61] . the "novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment scheme j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (trial edition seventh)" issued by chinese government recommended that ifn-α aerosol inhalation can be used for antiviral treatment of covid-19 [62] . the administration mode for adults is 5 million u or equivalent dose, with 2 ml sterile water for injection, by aerosol inhalation, twice a day.the in vitro study showed that both ifn-α and ifn-β exhibited antiviral effect on mers-cov and sars-cov [63, 64] . ifn in combination with ribavirin showed better antiviral effect than ribavirin alone in the renal cell line of rhesus monkey infected with mers-cov [65] . a clinical study compared the clinical effects of ifn-α combined with glucocorticoid and glucocorticoid alone in the treatment of sars-cov patients [66] . the results showed that the symptomatic relief time in pulmonary imaging of interferon-α group was shortened by 50% (p=0.001), and the oxygen saturation was significantly improved. a recent triple therapy study of interferon beta-1b, lopinavir-ritonavir and ribavirin presented that remarkable differences were observed in symptom alleviation, shorten the duration of viral shedding and hospital stay in combination group [48] . however, more clinical benefits and potential anticytokine approaches of ifn are still under investigated for covid-19.arbidol hydrochloride is a non-nucleoside antiviral drug. arbidol can specifically [40] [41] [42] .the overall adverse effect of arbidol is mild. the commonly adverse drug reactions was nausea, abdominal discomfort, nausea with headache and leucopenia, increased akp and increased total bilirubin. the retrospective study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of arbidol treatment for covid-19 patients revealed that no apparent side effect was observed during the therapy [67] .arbidol was first approved in russia in 1993 for the treatment of influenza. now,(trial edition sixth)" [54] . the administration mode for adults is 0.2g per time, 3 times a day, with the treatment lasting up to 10 days.in 2019, arbidol received extensive attention due to the outbreak of covid-19.early studies have shown that arbidol has an effect of inhibiting the early replication of sars virus in vitro [68] . recent study reported that arbidol efficiently inhibited sars-cov-2 infection in vitro with ec50 of 4.11μm which suggested arbidol might have potential for the treatment of covid-19 patients [69] . a retrospective study was performed to evaluate the antiviral effects and safety of lopinavir/ritonavir and arbidol in 50 covid-19 patients, which indicated that arbidol group had a shorter viral load compared to those in the lopinavir/ritonavir group (p<0.01) and may have j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f better antiviral effect than lopinavir/ritonavir [67] . another retrospective study with 81 covid-19 patients revealed that arbidol group had longer hospital stay than the control group, and the median time for turning negative was similar with the control, which suggested that arbidol might not improve the prognosis or accelerate sars-cov-2 clearance [70] . however, one research with 69 enrolled covid-19 patients revealed that arbidol had tendency to improve the discharging rate and decrease the mortality rate [71] .lianhuaqingwen (lh) is mainly used to treat influenza which showed antiviral activity and clinical improvement on series of influenza viruses. the relieved symptoms include fever or hyperpyrexia, aversion to cold, muscular soreness, nasal obstruction, running nose, cough, headache and so on. the recommended dosage for adults is 4 capsules per time (0.35g power/capsule), three times a day.since the outbreak of covid-19 pandemic, chinese doctors have used lh to treat patients with common and severe covid-19. as a potential treatment agent against sars-cov-2, lh showed excellent antiviral and antiinflammatory activity on novel coronavirus in vitro [72] . another human rct presented that standard antiviral therapy combined with lh can significantly improve the symptoms of covid-19, such as fever, cough and fatigue in most of common covid-19 patients, relieve the pneumonia symptoms, and significantly shorten the duration of pneumonia symptoms without observed serious adverse events [73] . this provides a preliminary evidence of the antiviral activity of lh for covid-19. lh and other traditional chinese medicines have also played a positive role in antiviral efficacy against sars -cov-2 during pandemic.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fbiologics have attracted much attention during the epidemic outbreak worldwide, including mesenchymal stem cells, sars-cov-2-specific neutralizing antibodies and vaccines.convalescent plasma may contain the human antibody specific for sars-cov-2 produced by whom recovered from sars-cov-2 infection. the concept of convalescent serum therapy is based on the human immunity, which is obtained from a patient who has survived a previous infection and developed humoral immunity against the pathogen responsible for the disease [74] . convalescent plasma could be a valid option for several infections when a specific treatment is not available.at present, convalescent blood products are mainly used for acute and severe virus infections without available vaccine or specific therapy, such as sars-cov, mers-cov, ebola etc. the "novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment scheme (trial edition seventh)" recommended convalescent plasma therapy for serious and extreme cases of covid-19 [62] .in 2015, a systematic analysis of the treatment of sars-cov with convalescent plasma and hepatitis b immune globulin was reported [75] .evidences continuously proved that convalescent blood products can reduce the total mortality of sars-cov, especially in the early stage of symptoms. the clinical trials of convalescent plasma are undergoing for the treatment of patients with severe covid-19. a case series study of convalescent plasma showed that the clinical symptoms were significantly relieved within 3 days of treatment, suggesting that the plasma was effective in treating severe covid-19 patients j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [76] . the convalescent plasma is considered to have possible source of specific antibodies for pathogen. however, it can also be challenging due to the limited serum with sufficiently high antibody and small sample size. convalescent plasma therapy could be a valid option for severe covid-19 patients when a specific treatment is not available.mesenchymal stem cells (mscs) are multipotent cells isolated from diverse mesenchymal tissues such as bone marrow, umbilical cord, adipose tissue [77] .mscs can enlarge the proportion of regulatory t cells and decrease proinflammatory factors such as il-6 and tnf-α, which have a great potential to improve the outcome of covid-19 patients [78] . the immunomodulating effects of mscs have been proven on avian influenza viruses [79] . besides the drugs introduced above, there are many promising drugs registered with the intention of discovering effective treatments. the drugs such as small inhibitors, ace2 peptide inhibitors or vaccines specific for sars-cov-2 are new hope for the treatment of covid-19. we believe that the numerous experiences reviewed in this paper will promote the development of effective drugs for covid-19 patients.no potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).to reduce the case-fatality rate and complication rate without registered treatment or a vaccine, there is an urgent need for health care workers worldwide to review and propose experience and lessons from critical covid-19 patients in a timely manner. given the treatments mentioned above, we will discuss antiviral therapy, glucocorticoid therapy, and extracorporeal support, including ecmo and artificial liver system (als) available for the treatment of covid-19 based on current published evidence. furthermore, we list a table to conclude the mechanism, advantages, and limitations for different treatments mentioned in this review (table 2) the mechanism of remdesivir against the virus showed that the drug effectively inhibited the ebola virus rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) complex. 12, 13 the remdesivir could form remdesivir triphosphate (remdesivir-tp) in vivo, which was incorporated into the newly synthesized rna chain of the virus as the substrate of the virus rdrp, thereby interrupting the transcription of the virus. 12 another study showed that remdesivir-tp could compete with adenosine triphosphate (atp). 14 after entering the cells, a monophosphoramidate prodrug of remdesivir transformed into triphosphate metabolite (ntp) in three steps, and ntp and atp competed to bind viral rdrp. ntp was incorporated into the rna synthesis chain, contributing to the termination of viral rna synthesis and inhibiting rdrp enzyme activity. 12 in addition, remdesivir was used against a case of 2019 novel coronavirus, reported in n engl j med, leading to widespread interest. 15 in this case report, a patient with covid-19 was treated by intravenous remdesivir without apparent adverse reactions on the evening of the seventh day of hospitalization. the patient's clinical symptoms improved on the eighth day after hospitalization (the 12th day after onset).phase iii clinical trials of remdesivir had been completed for the treatment of ebola virus infection with complete data on human pharmacokinetics and safety. 16 recently, phase iii randomized controlled trials were carried out to evaluate intravenous remdesivir for covid-19 (nct04252664 and nct04257656), which will be completed in april 2020 and may 2020, respectively. 17, 18 remdesivir (100 mg except for the first day of 200 mg) for 10 days with placebo in the phase iii trials, which were initiated in china, is worthy of concern about adverse reactions at this dose due to differences in ethnicity.ribavirin is a broad-spectrum nucleoside antiviral drug that is phosphorylated in virus-infected cells, and its product acts as a competitive inhibitor of virus synthetase, interfering with early viral transcription events and hindering the synthesis of ribonucleoproteins, thereby hindering virus replication and spread.in vitro, four studies observed antiviral effects against sars, [19] [20] [21] [22] but the results from cinatl et al 23 during the covid-19 epidemic, ribavirin was indicated for the general treatment of covid-19 in chinese treatment guidelines, 31 and it is recommended that ribavirin is combined with interferon as not be ignored. 38 the contraindications, relative contraindications, and pharmaceutical precautions are listed in table s1 . 39 (table 1) . 38 corticosteroids have been widely used in the treatment of past coronavirus infections (such as sars and mers), and corticosteroids are also one of the methods for treating covid-19. 31, 4, 40, 41 however, no evidence was found on the antiviral effect of corticosteroids alone in resisting sars-cov in vitro. 25 48 and a similar cytokine storm reported by huang et al. 40 hence, it was suggested to use appropriate corticosteroids for patients suffering from ards. 49 furthermore, pathological studies of covid-19 observed pulmonary edema and hyaline membrane formation, implying that timely use of corticosteroids is necessary for severe patients, 48 which was also supported by retrospective pathologic examinations showing edema, and proteinaceous exudate with globules in the lungs of two patients with covid-19. 50 4 | support therapythe als is one of an effective method for treating liver failure, 51 and its treatment mechanism is based on liver cell regeneration ability.through a extracorporeal equipment, als removes all kinds of harmful substances, supplements necessary material, improves the internal environment, and temporarily replaces part of liver function, to create good conditions for the regeneration of liver cells or while waiting for an opportunity for liver transplantation. 52 among the three types (nonbiological, biological, and hybrid) of artificial liver support systems, artificial extracorporeal liver support therapy has been widely used in acute liver failure and has been proven to improve survival. 53 as mentioned above, cytokine storm was associated with disease severity reported by a study, which illustrated that gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnf-α were found to be higher in patients who require icu admission. 40 moreover, a retrospective study including 99 patients with covid-19 showed that 17 patients suffered ards, and among them, 11 patients progressed rapidly and eventually died of multiple organ failure. 49 in these death cases, timely treatment of critical cases is of vital significance. 49 this review will help understand the advantages and limitations of differential treatments. in this review, we summarize and discuss extracorporeal support (als and ecmo) should be considered under strict indications and contraindications; otherwise, the waste of resources and additional complications will be enormous. ecmo may be used more aggressively and many more ecmo devices could be transferred to hubei province in the future due to the temporary absence of effective antiviral drugs and the hope of reducing mortality. in conclusion, antiviral therapy and organ function support are most effective in reducing the mortality rate in patients with mild syndrome and patients in critical condition, respectively.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p tthe severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has emerged around the globe causing a pandemic of coronavirus infectious disease .clinicians worldwide are urgently looking for investigational antiviral agents for benefit over supportive care alone. remdesivir is an investigational drug that shows in vitro anti-viral activity against sars-cov-2 and a shorter time to clinical recovery in clinical trials [1]. on may 1, 2020, the us food and drug administration issued an emergency use authorization for remdesivir for the treatment of covid-19. however, because of the limited experience with remdesivir, information about adverse drug reactions and possible drug-drug interactions is scarce.we report a case of a critically ill patient with covid-19 who developed hepatotoxicity following remdesivir therapy. we propose a relationship with a drug-drug interaction between remdesivir and p-glycoprotein inhibitors.a 64-year-old male patient presented at our hospital with a 7-day history of fever, headache, cough and progressive dyspnea. he had a history of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia for which he used enalapril, amlodipine and simvastatin. he did not smoke or use illicit drugs. his blood pressure was 143/80 mmhg, with a pulse rate of 80/min, his body temperature was 38.8 o c, his respiratory rate 40/min and oxygen saturation 88% while breathing room air. the diagnosis of covid-19 was confirmed by a positive sars-cov-2 pcr of the nasopharynx and consolidations in both lungs on radiology assessment. he was admitted to the hospital for oxygen therapy; a 5-day chloroquine course was started (loading dose 600 mg followed by 300mg b.i.d.), according to national guidelines at that time. due to respiratory insufficiency on day three, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (icu) for mechanical ventilation. the icu course was complicated by pulmonary embolism and icu acquired weakness. on day 16, remdesivir was started as part of an extended access program a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t (gs-us-540-582) [2] . because of new onset atrial fibrillation amiodarone was temporally given (700 mg on day 18) two days after initiation of remdesivir. five days after start of remdesivir, an acute increase in alanine transaminase (alt) and aspartate transaminase (ast) was seen. alt was 1305 iu/l, ast 1461 u/l, alkaline phosphatase 269 u/l, total bilirubin 8 µmol/l, gammaglutamyltransferase 227 u/l and creatine kinase 103 u/l. remdesivir was immediately stopped, resulting in a rapid decrease of alt and ast values to eventually normal levels ( figure 1 ). on day 48 the patient was discharged to a rehabilitation center. two weeks hereafter, he returned home, and he was able to restart his normal daily activities.we presented a case of drug-induced liver injury most likely caused by remdesivir. remdesivir toxicity was suspected based on the time-relation, the positive dechallenge, the known in vitro toxicity of remdesivir and the absence of alternative causes of hepatotoxicity. covid-19 has also been found to be associated with elevated liver enzymes [3] . covid-19 could therefore be the cause of elevated alt seen in the period prior to remdesivir therapy (figure 1 ) [4] . however, the sudden alt peak occurred 27 days after the first onset of symptoms, making viral replication of sars-cov-2 as a cause of acute hepatotoxicity very unlikely. amiodarone-induced liver toxicity was considered less likely, since acute amiodarone toxicity has an early onset (within 24 hours) and the given cumulative dose was low [5] . furthermore, given amiodarone's very long half-life (26-107 days) the rapid resolution which was seen after the initial elevation of alt makes a causative role of amiodarone unlikely.several clinical studies described amino transaminase elevations following remdesivir therapy. in healthy individuals grade 1 and 2 transaminase elevations were seen [6] . in the prevail-iv study using remdesivir as treatment in 38 patients with ebola, the remdesivir dose was reduced in one patient because of amino transaminase elevations [6] . in contrast, hepatotoxicity was not documented as a serious adverse event in 175 ebola patients receiving remdesivir in the palm study [7] . in the actt-1 m a n u s c r i p t study hepatotoxicity, defined as transaminase elevations of grade 1 or higher, was seen less in covid-19 patients receiving remdesivir as compared to placebo (4.1% versus 5.9% ) [1]. in a study bygoldman et al. remdesivir was discontinued because of alt elevations in 3.0% of the patients [8, 9] , which according to the authors could also have been caused by covid-19 itself [9] .on a cellular level, it has been shown that remdesivir is toxic to human hepatocytes [6] . the in vitro threshold concentration for remdesivir toxicity is 10 um, which is only 1.1 times the maximal targeted therapeutic concentration [10] . as such, the upper limit of toxicity could be exceeded with a minor increase in hepatocellular concentration.a possible cause for an increase in hepatocellular concentration and thereby an explanation for remdesivir toxicity, could be an interaction between p-glycoprotein (p-gp) inhibitors and remdesivir. p-gp is an efflux transporter located on the membrane of several humane cells including the hepatocytes. in the hepatocyte p-gp transports xenobiotics out of the cell into the bile duct ( figure   2 ). remdesivir has been identified to as a substrate for p-gp in vitro [6] . a reduced efflux rate of remdesivir was observed in vitro in p-gp overexpressing cells in the presence of the p-gp inhibitor cyclosporine [10] . therefore, p-gp inhibitors could decrease the remdesivir efflux out of the hepatocyte, resulting in a hepatocellular concentration above the toxic threshold.the patient we described was treated with the p-gp inhibitors chloroquine (last gift nine days before remdesivir, half-life approximately two weeks) and amiodarone (concomitantly with remdesivir) [11, 12] . the combination of these two agents with remdesivir could have increased the intrahepatocellular concentration above the toxicity threshold which caused the hepatocellular toxicity. no studies investigating the influence of p-gp inhibition on remdesivir mediated hepatotoxicity have been performed yet. m a n u s c r i p t the novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) has spread all over the world at an unprecedented rate since its outbreak in december 2019. more than 200 countries or territories have confirmed cases, and over 8.4 million individuals have been infected, leading to more than 45,0000 deaths as of june 18, 2020. covid-19 was declared a public health emergency of international concern by the world health organization (who) on january 30 and declared a pandemic on march 11, 2020.as recommended by the who r&d blueprint expert group, clinical improvements for patients with covid-19 can be classified in a seven-category ordinal scale [1]:so far, there are only eight clinical trials for covid-19 completed with results published. among them, two trials were for hydroxychloroquine with relatively small sample sizes (30 patients for the trial of chen et al [2] and 36 patients for the trial of gautret et al [3]). although the trial conducted by gautret et al [3] yielded a significant result, the sample size was too small to draw any convincing conclusion. the trial of cai et al [4] compared favipiravir and lopinavir-ritonavir with a total sample size of 80 patients, leading to a significant result (p=.004). chen et al [5] conducted a trial comparing favipiravir with arbidol, which had a total sample size of 240 patients and yielded an insignificant result. the trial of grein et al [6] was a single-arm trial for remdesivir, and the estimated clinical improvement rate at day 18 was 0.68. to determine the efficacy of lianhuaqingwen (lhqw) capsule, a compounded chinese herb medicine, hu et al [7] conducted an open-label randomized controlled trial and reported a statistically significant difference in the symptom (fever, fatigue, coughing) recovery rate between the treatment group and the control group (91.5% vs 82.4%; p=.022). however, the trial did not include a placebo in the control group to implement a double-blinding scheme. despite the urgency nature of the pandemic, their argument for unblinding due to ethical reasons seems to be unsound. due to the conscious and subconscious psychological tendencies of humans including both clinicians and patients, bias often arises in an open-label study. not only does unblinding lead to potential selection bias, but it may also cause placebo effects for patients who took lhqw [8-11], which thus shed doubts on the clinical benefits of lhqw. in particular, the rate of symptom recovery is related to disease relief or symptomatic manifestations such as fever, fatigue, and coughing (“soft” end points), for which placebo effects are known to be strong and more discernible [10]. however, the lhqw and control groups did not differ in the rate of conversion to severe cases or viral assay findings (“hard” end points), for which placebo effects are less perceptible because generally placebos can neither alter the pathophysiology of the disease nor cure it. we take the three randomized clinical trials conducted by cao et al [12] on lopinavir-ritonavir and by wang et al [13] and beigel et al [14] on remdesivir as examples to illustrate statistical issues and lessons learned, as they have drawn great attention in the clinical community.the lopinavir trial for suppression of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 in china [12] was conducted with record speed from january 18 to february 3, 2020 (the date of enrollment of the last patient). patient recruitment up to a planned sample size is often the bottle neck of trial conduct. this was not the case with severe covid-19 due to the abundance of hospitalized patients during that period of time. in this trial, eligible patients were randomized at a 1:1 ratio to either the lopinavir-ritonavir treatment group (400 mg and 100 mg orally, twice daily) plus the standard care or the standard care alone for 14 days. no placebo was used for blinding because no placebo was prepared due to the urgency of the trial; therefore, both patients and investigators were aware of the treatment identity each patient received. following the who seven-ordinal scale [1], the primary end point adopted by the trial [12] was the time to clinical improvement, which was defined as the time from randomization to an improvement of two points from the status at randomization (eg, from point 6 to point 4 or from point 5 to point 3) or live discharge from the hospital, whichever came first. the sample size was increased from 160 to 199 since the result with the enrolled 160 patients did not reach statistical significance. as a final conclusion, cao et al [12] reported no benefit with the lopinavir-ritonavir treatment beyond the standard care with a hazard ratio (hr) of 1.24 and the associated 95% ci 0.90-1.72.wang et al [13] conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial with remdesivir at ten hospitals in hubei, china. overall, 236 patients were enrolled from february 6 to march 12, 2020, and were randomly assigned to the remdesivir group (200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg on days 2-10) and the placebo group at a 2:1 ratio. in the original design, the trial planned to recruit 453 patients with 302 to remdesivir and 151 to placebo, but no patients were enrolled after march 12 due to no eligible patients being available in the hubei province. as a consequence, the statistical power of the study was reduced from 80% to 58%. the primary clinical end point was the time to improvement within 28 days. clinical improvement was defined as a two-point improvement from an adjusted six-category ordinal scale from the who seven-category ordinal scale. in conclusion, remdesivir did not show statistically significant clinical benefit compared with the placebo in terms of the hr 1.23 (95% ci 0.87-1.75).beigel et al [14] reported a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of intravenous remdesivir in adults hospitalized with covid-19 and evidence of lower respiratory tract infection. this trial had a total sample size of 1059 patients (538 assigned to remdesivir and 521 to placebo). the median recovery time of the remdesivir group was 11 (95% ci 9-12) days and 15 (95% ci 13-19) days for the placebo group. the rate ratio for recovery was 1.32 (95% ci 0.47-1.04; p<.001), which was statistically significant in favor of remdesivir. the kaplan-meier estimates of mortality at 14 days were 7.1% with remdesivir and 11.9% with the placebo, and the hr for death was 0.70 (95% ci 0.47-1.04). remdesivir was shown to be superior to the placebo in shortening the time to recovery in adults hospitalized with covid-19, and, in terms of the hr for death, there was no significant difference between the two groups.so far, only one treatment, remdesivir, has been shown to be effective by a randomized clinical trial, but the other remdesivir trial failed to demonstrate its superiority over the placebo. as the pandemic of covid-19 will not be controlled anytime soon, the aforementioned three clinical trials [12-14] provide extremely valuable information on the treatments of covid-19 and the corresponding trial design and analysis. however, several important issues have been identified in the statistical analysis, design, and implementation of the three trials. we point out the statistical problems that arose in the three trials [12-14] and reanalyze the data from the cumulative incidence curves for the time to improvement or recovery using more appropriate approaches. our in-depth and comprehensive analyses yield new insights on the design and analysis for ongoing and future covid-19 clinical trials.the log-rank test [15] is the most commonly used method in survival analysis and clinical trial design to compare the survival benefit of two arms. consider a randomized clinical trial with a planned sample size n1 using a two-sided log-rank test. if the hypothesis test indicates no significant survival difference between the two groups under the significance level α but the trial decides to continue to enroll more patients up to a larger sample size n2, this would inflate the overall type i error of the trial. any adjustment to the sample size during the trial should be planned and evaluated in advance to maintain the overall type i error rate.let z1 and z2 denote the log-rank test statistics with sample sizes n1 and n2, respectively. it holds that under the null hypothesis [16,17] z1 and z2 jointly follow a multivariate normal distribution:d1 = dn1 and d2 = dn2 are the expected numbers of events with sample sizes n1 and n2, and d is the proportion of patients experiencing the event. thus, the overall type i error rate α overall with the significance level α is: is the (1 – )th quantile of the standard normal distribution.for clinical studies with a survival end point, we are interested in the distribution of event time t. in general, patients will eventually experience the event with a long enough follow-up; although, the exact event time might not be observed due to censoring. however, for some diseases with long-term survivors, it may happen that the event will never occur in a fraction of subjects (ie, the event time for cured subjects is infinity [18-21]). under this situation, patients can be divided into two groups: the terminal (or cure) group (the specified event would never occur) and the nonterminal group (the specified event would occur but possibly censored due to the end time of the study). thus, the distribution of the event time t has a point probability mass η at ∞:η is the group label taking a value of 1 if the individual is in the terminal group and 0 otherwise; γ = p(η = 1) = p(t = ∞) is the terminal rate and t* follows a proper distribution with p(t* < ∞) = 1. for the covid-19 trials [12,13], the cumulative incidence curve of t can be expressed byft and ft* are the cumulative distribution functions of t and t*, respectively. note that p(t < ∞) = 1 – γ < 1.restricted mean survival time (rmst) [16,22-26] is an alternative measure for the mean survival time that is not estimable due to the presence of censoring. the rmst is equal to the expectation of the minimum value of event time t and the specified time point τ, which can be calculated as the area under the survival curve from 0 to τ. it can be estimated by the area under the kaplan-meier survival curve, which has gained enormous popularity due to its robustness feature.although the hr is the most popular statistic to quantify the survival difference in randomized clinical trials, it is no longer an interpretable quantity if the proportional hazards (ph) assumption is violated [25]. by contrast, the rmst has the advantages of being nonparametric and model-free yet carrying clinically meaningful interpretations. given the prespecified time point τ, the estimate of the rmst difference between two groups can be interpreted as the extra survival gain on average during the time τ follow-up period.clinical trials during the epidemic of an infectious disease might fail to reach the planned sample size due to a lack of eligible patients if the outbreak can be quickly controlled [27]. however, early termination of a clinical trial would inevitably lead to loss of power and thus unconvincing findings. based on the collected data, the bootstrap method can be used to predict what would happen if the trial had continued to reach the desired sample size. let n denote the desired sample size and n0 (n0 < n) the actual number of patients enrolled. the statistic of interest prediction can be conducted under either conditional or unconditional schemes. the unconditional prediction draws n samples (sampling with replacement from the original data with n0 observations), while the conditional prediction draws n – n0 samples from the original n0 observations and keeps the original n0 samples intact. by repeating the sampling procedure for a large number of times, one can estimate the predicted mean and the corresponding confidence interval for the statistic of interest if the trial had continued to reach the sample size of n.in the original analysis of cao et al [12], the time to clinical improvement was assessed after all patients had reached day 28, and failure to reach clinical improvement or death before day 28 were considered as right-censored at day 28. in contrast to the usual survival analysis where death (or a bad event such as disease progression) is used as the event of interest, a good event (clinical improvement) was adopted as the end point in this trial. as a result, the shorter time to reach clinical improvement, the better. cao et al [12] concluded no benefit of using the lopinavir-ritonavir treatment beyond the standard care with an hr of 1.24 (95% ci 0.90-1.72).we carried out an in-depth and comprehensive investigation of the trial design in cao et al [12] and identified several key issues with the trial that might have hindered its success. first, the unplanned sample size increment from 160 to 199 would inflate the type i error rate. for this trial, we have n1=160, n2=199, d=0.75, d1 = 160 × 0.75 = 120, d2 = 199 × 0.75 = 149.25, and based on equation 2, αoverall=.071 when the nominal significance level is set as α=.05. that is, the false-positive rate for this trial increased as high as 7.1% in contrast to the nominal level of 5%. any sample size alteration or re-estimation should be planned in advance to control the type i error rate and maintain the integrity of a trial. when the sample size reached 199, the trial was halted for enrollment because of the availability of another treatment, remdesivir. such termination of a trial was again unplanned and immature; if there were not another agent available, would the trial continue recruitment? interestingly, the remdesivir trial by wang et al [13] (the same group of investigators as the lopinavir-ritonavir trial) started 3 days later after the lopinavir-ritonavir trial was terminated.in terms of the primary end point, clinical improvement using two-level increment on a seven-category ordinal scale from baseline is ad hoc due to uneven clinical differences between adjacent scales. for example, it is ambiguous whether the status of a patient changing from point 5 to point 3 is equivalent to that of changing from point 6 to point 4. in addition, live discharge from the hospital may occur from point 3 to point 2 or point 4 to point 2, which cannot be considered equivalent either. thus, choosing 2-point improvement on the clinical outcome scale is not a precise end point, which ignores the 1-point improvement and the difference between 2-point and 3-point improvement. instead, we recommend death as a single and clean end point for such trials, given the mortality rate was not low with patients who were hospitalized with severe covid-19 (19.2% in the lopinavir-ritonavir group and 25.0% in the standard care group).the original analysis [12] treated death before day 28 as right-censored at day 28, no matter when death had occurred. this may cause ambiguity because it cannot distinguish the situations where all deaths in one group occurred earlier while those in the other group occurred later. as death is a terminal event, a terminal (or cure) rate model would be more appropriate for analysis of such data. a terminal rate model can be viewed as the counterpart of the traditional mixture cure rate model [18-21], which can be developed by slight modifications. as death is a terminal event, patients who died during the 28-day follow-up period would never reach the clinical improvement (ie, the time to clinical improvement was infinity) denoted as ∞. death can also be viewed as a competing risk for clinical improvement.the upper panel of table 1 shows that there was neither any significant difference in the terminal rates between the lopinavir-ritonavir and standard care groups or in the hr (after excluding the terminal subjects who would eventually be absorbed in the death state) from the mixture terminal rate model. in particular, the terminal rates (including observed deaths as well as unobserved deaths that would occur after day 28 but were censored at day 28) were 21.17% for the lopinavir-ritonavir group and 29.91% for the standard care group with p=.16, and the hr for nonterminal subjects was 1.05 (95% ci 0.78-1.42; p=.74).moreover, the crossings of the cumulative event curves for the lopinavir-ritonavir and standard care groups at days 10 and 16 in the second figure of cao et al [12] imply possible violation of the ph assumption. when the ph assumption is not satisfied, the hr from a cox model [29] is not clinically meaningful. as an alternative, the area above the curve in the second figure of cao et al [12] or the area under the inverted curve as shown in our figure 1, referred to as the restricted mean time to improvement (rmti), can be used to quantify treatment effect that requires no assumption such as ph [16,22-26]. as a model-free quantity, the rmti up to 28 days can be interpreted as the average time to reach improvement in 28 days, for which the shorter is the better. the 28-day rmti difference between the two groups was 1.67 days (95% ci –3.62 to 0.28; p=.09) in favor of lopinavir-ritonavir but not statistically significant. the 7-day and 14-day rmtis are also presented in the lower panel of table 1, where the 14-day rmti showed some promising results for lopinavir-ritonavir, yet further confirmation is needed.tables 2 and 3 show the numbers on mortality and clinical improvement by day 28 across the two treatment groups, respectively. we carried out chi-square tests (or fisher exact tests if some of the cell counts were smaller than 5) to examine any association between the outcomes and treatments. for table 2 with 2×3 cells, there is no association with p=.53, and if combining deaths in both earlier and later stages, this leads to 2×2 cells with p=.32 and odds ratio 0.71 (95% ci 0.36-1.40). patients treated with lopinavir-ritonavir had 0.71 times odds to die by day 28 in comparison to those in the standard care group. for table 3 with 2×4 cells, there is no association with p=.11, and if combining all clinical improvement cases, this leads to 2×2 cells with p=.53 and odds ratio 1.24 (95% ci 0.64-2.40). patients treated with lopinavir-ritonavir had 1.24 times odds to achieve clinical improvement by day 28 in comparison to those in the standard care group. however, none of the results are statistically significant.wang et al [13] reported a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled remdesivir trial for patients with severe covid-19. based on an adjusted six-point ordinal scale of clinical status, the primary end point was the time to clinical improvement, defined as a 2-level decline from randomization (similar to that in cao et al [12]; in fact, the two trials were conducted by the same group of investigators), for which the shorter is the better. patients were permitted concomitant use of lopinavir-ritonavir, interferons, and corticosteroids. the hr between the remdesivir and placebo groups was 1.23 (95% ci 0.87-1.75), indicating no significant difference. overall, 237 eligible patients were enrolled, with 158 patients assigned to the remdesivir group and 78 patients to the placebo group under the intent-to-treat (itt) scheme. the trial was stopped early and thus failed to reach the designated sample size 453 due to a lack of eligible patients.similar to the trial by cao et al [12], deaths before day 28 were treated as right-censored observations at day 28, regardless of the actual occurrence time of deaths in wang et al [13]. moreover, a clinical improvement might not be observed due to death (ie, death is a terminal event), and thus, the terminal or cure rate model introduced earlier should be recommended for the survival analysis rather than the standard cox model.the upper panel of table 4 indicates no significant difference in the terminal rates between the remdesivir and placebo groups. in particular, the terminal rates were 31.49% for the remdesivir group and 40.71% for the placebo group with p=.19. with the terminal subjects excluded, the hr from the mixture terminal rate model was 0.92 (95% ci 0.63-1.35; p=.67), which also showed no significant difference between the two groups.due to the competing risk from death, the end point might not be observed, and thus, the standard hazard concept is ambiguous, and the hr does not have a meaningful interpretation anymore [30]. in the second figure in wang et al [13], the curve for the cumulative improvement event of remdesivir is uniformly higher than that of the control, indicating patients with remdesivir reached improvement faster than those in the control group. the area above the cumulative incidence curve or, equivalently, the area under the survival curve up to 28 days in our figure 2 would be a reasonable quantity for evaluating the treatment efficacy. using the reconstructed data from the second figure in wang et al [13], the rmti evaluated at day 28 was 20.42 (95% ci 19.26-21.57) days for the remdesivir group and 21.31 (95% ci 19.73-22.88) days for the placebo group. as shown in the lower panel of table 4, the difference in rmtis was –0.89 days (95% ci –2.84 to 1.06), numerically favoring remdesivir but not statistically significant. it can be interpreted that patients treated by remdesivir on average had an extra 0.89 days of improvement during the 28-day follow-up compared with those in the placebo group. the 7-day and 14-day rmtis are also presented in the lower panel of table 4, and neither showed statistically significant results.the trial was terminated without reaching the originally planned sample size, 453, due to a lack of eligible patients. with only 236 patients in the itt analysis, the estimated hr was 1.23 (95% ci 0.87-1.75), numerically favoring remdesivir, which might not be reliable due to the underpowered study. using the bootstrap method, we can predict what would happen if the trial had continued to reach the full sample size or double the planned sample size. table 5 shows both the unconditional and conditional predictions of the hr, similar to sample size re-estimation using conditional power [31] in a two-stage design. if the trial could have reached the designated sample size, the hr from the conditional prediction shows the significant treatment effect of remdesivir with p=.02, and if the trial had enrolled twice of the target sample size, both conditional and unconditional approaches result in significant differences under the 5% significance level. thus, a larger sample size may be needed to show the significant difference between remdesivir and placebo.beigel et al [14] presented a preliminary report of the nct04280705 trial, which is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of intravenous remdesivir in adults hospitalized with covid-19 and evidence of lower respiratory tract involvement. this trial enrolled 1059 patients (538 assigned to remdesivir and 521 to placebo). the primary end point of the original analysis was the recovery time, defined by either discharge from the hospital or hospitalization for infection-control purposes only. the median recovery time of the remdesivir group was 11 (95% ci 9-12) days and that of the placebo group was 15 (95% ci 13-19) days. the rate ratio of recovery for remdesivir vs placebo was 1.32 (95% ci 1.12-1.55; p<.001), which demonstrated the superiority of remdesivir. in terms of the hr for death, there was no significant difference between the remdesivir and placebo groups with an hr of 0.70 (95% ci 0.47-1.04).the remdesivir trial of beigel et al [14] is essential to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir, as it had a large sample size of 1059 patients under a well-designed randomized controlled trial scheme. in terms of the data analysis, beigel et al [14] only reported the median recovery time without a p value. from the second figure in beigel et al [14], the kaplan-meier curves of cumulative recoveries are initially intertwined and then diverge, so other percentiles of the time to recovery would provide more information on the efficacy of remdesivir. meanwhile, a global and robust measurement, the restricted mean time to recovery (rmtr), can help to quantify the treatment efficacy in a more comprehensive way [16,22-26].the upper panel of table 6 presents the rmtrs up to day 30 for both the remdesivir and placebo groups. the rmtrs were 14.5 days and 17.2 days for remdesivir and placebo, respectively, indicating that patients with remdesivir on average had 2.7-day gains of recovery with 30-day follow-ups. the difference in rmtrs was statistically significant with p<.001, demonstrating the superiority of remdesivir. this is consistent with the original analysis in terms of the rate ratio of recovery [14]. meanwhile in the bottom panel of table 6, more percentiles of the time to recovery were reported with p values. the early difference for remdesivir vs placebo in the recovery time at the 25th percentile was –1 (95% ci –3 to 0; p=.65), which was not statistically significant. however, the differences manifested to be statistically significant later; for example, the 30th to 60th percentiles of the recovery time in the remdesivir group were all significantly shorter than those in the placebo group. it is reasonable for the treatment to take effect after a certain length of follow-up.when designing and conducting a clinical trial for new treatment, particularly for the covid-19 pandemic without knowing much about the clinical outcomes, many things can go wrong if the design is not well thought out, the trial is not carefully conducted following the protocol, or the analysis is not properly carried out. critical issues with such trials include but are not limited to the end point selection, the type i error rate control, double blinding or open label, early termination of a trial, the validity of the ph assumption in a cox model, and assumptions for statistical tests and models. in contrast to searching for a needle in a haystack, the trial design should be more targeted, focused, and tailored for specific needs of patients with covid-19 and particular disease characteristics and severities [32].given the emergency and the fast spread of the coronavirus around the world, it is crucial to design the right clinical trial and accelerate the development of a new treatment. with the high speed of enrollment and urgency of the trial outcome, it appears to be difficult to carry out any adaptation during the trial conduct. the trial outcomes unfold so fast that any adaptation may not be able to catch up with the speed of recruitment.as a summary, our recommendations for covid-19 trials are:although adaptive design has gained much popularity and is playing an increasingly important role in clinical trials, particularly in oncology, the advantages of adaptive design may be mitigated to a large extent under such a fast patient enrollment because the impact of any adaptation may be too slow to manifest before the trial is completed. in such cases, the consort (consolidated standards of reporting trials) statement [33,34] can provide a general guideline for the trial design and conduct. as a result, our recommendations follow the gold standard scheme of conventional trial design without much adaptation ingredient, which may help investigators to discriminate different treatments and identify the effective ones in an efficient way.in december 2019, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), identified as responsible for the covid-19 outbreak starting in china (zhu et al. 2020) .betacoronavirus, have been proposed as possible therapeutics for sars-cov-2, such as ribavirin and ifnα -2b (martinez 2020) , lopinavir/ritonavir (chu et al. 2004; arabi et al. 2020) , and hydroxychloroquine (savarino et al. 2006; chen et al. 2020; gautret et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020a) , with controversial results. remdesivir, a nucleotide analogue prodrug with a broad spectrum antiviral activity (sheahan et al. 2017; mulangu et al. 2019) , seems promising for sars-cov-2 in-vitro (wang et al. 2020a) . two case reports (holshue et al. 2020 ; kujawski et al. 2020 ) and a recent clinical study of 54 patients (grein et al. 2020) showed encouraging results on covid-19-patients. conversely, a randomized study did not show significant clinical benefit but probably lacked power (wang et al. 2020b) . five patients were treated with compassionate-use remdesivir in our center in paris, france. early findings have been previously described for two patients (lescure et al. 2020 ). here we describe for the first time the complete follow-up, tolerance and virological monitoring among those five patients.we enrolled all patients admitted in the university hospital bichat-claude bernard, paris, france, between january 24 and march 1, 2020, diagnosed with covid-19 and treated with remdesivir (gilead sciences). indication criteria for compassionate-use remdesivir were defined with the french national regulatory authorities and french ministry of health: signs of severe illness at diagnosis or subsequent clinical aggravation (respiratory symptoms or general signs). since march 22, all patients requiring an antiviral treatment are enrolled in the discovery study (2020-000936-23). the institutional review board of bichat hospital approved this report and waived the need for informed consent from individual patients, due to the nature of retrospective chart review and the absence of identifying images or personal/clinical details that compromise anonymity.all patients received remdesivir via intravenous infusion with a loading dose of 200 mg and a maintenance daily dose of 100 mg for a maximum duration of 14 days. all nasopharyngeal and broncho-alveolar samples were collected on universal transport media (virocult, sigma) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f and transported in the laboratory within 24h. all rt-qpcr were performed according to the who recommended procedure (corman et al. 2020) after an extraction on magnapure (total na large volume kit, roche diagnostic) from 200 µl of transport media and amplification on an abi 7500 (life technologies). quantification was done using a standardized rna transcript control obtained from the european virus archive program. bacterial and mycological investigations were conducted on a separate sample without virological transport media using the usual procedures for bacterial growth. broncho-alveolar lavages were also tested with a mpcr assay (filmarray pneumonia assay, biofire, biomérieux) for virus and bacteria detection, and fungal culture with mass spectrometry identification for aspergillus detection. all samples were processed in a bsl3.a 31-year chinese male originating from wuhan and reporting flu-like symptoms for 6 days was diagnosed with covid-19 on january 24, 5 days after his arrival in paris. he was immediately hospitalized with mild lymphopenia (1000 g/l), thrombopenia (146 g/l), and no abnormalities on chest x-ray. the rt-qpcr on nasopharyngeal samples was positive with a sars-cov-2 viral load (vl) at 10.5 log10 copies/ml. on illness day 10, he was referred to intensive care unit (icu) due to oxygen saturation worsening (po2=58mmhg; flow nasal cannula 4 l/min), and bilateral lung ground glass and alveolar opacities on chest ct-scan with no increase in vl. remdesivir was started on january 29, 2020 (illness day 11) and was stopped at day 15, because of alamine aminotransferase (alt) elevation (195ui/l versus 46ui/l before remdesivir administration) and a maculopapular rash. a rapid decline of viral load, from 27.6 ct to undetectability at day 2 of remdisivir infusion was observed. skin and liver abnormalities improved within three days after discontinuing treatment. the patient was discharged on february 12.an 80-year-old tourist originating from hubei province, with past medical history of thyroid cancer, presented on january 25 with fever and diarrhea for 4 days. the chest x-ray showed bilateral alveolar opacities but he did not fulfill the covid-19 case definition at the time.airborne and contact precautions were observed and the covid-19 diagnosis was eventually retained 3 days later. on january 26, an acute respiratory failure with multiple organ failures triggered his admission to icu. a broad spectrum antibiotherapy was started and adapted for coinfection with a susceptible acinetobacter baumannii (diagnosed on multiplex pcr and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f confirmed by tracheal aspirates culture) and an aspergillus flavus (tracheal aspirates culture).remdesivir was started on january 29 but was discontinued on january 31 as the patient needed renal replacement therapy. the nasopharyngeal viral load decreased from 21.0 ct before infusion to 28.9 on day 2 of infusion. ct-scan on january 31 showed bilateral alveolar condensations, ground glass and pulmonary cysts. on february 5, because of the disease severity and the persistence of viral detection, remdesivir was re-initiated. multiple organ failures persisted without any other coinfection identified. he died on february 14.a 39-year old male airport worker, obese (bmi=33kg/m 2 ) and with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome was diagnosed with severe covid-19 and admitted to icu on february 26. he had cough and fever since february 21. he presented an acute respiratory failure (pao2=74mmhg; high debit nasal cannula 40 l/min, 40%) and basal interstitial syndrome on chest x-ray. remdesivir was started on february 27. virus rna levels slightly increased, from 32.5 to 28.8 ct, during the first 4 days of infusion and started to decline at day 5 later until undetectability on march 1, he was referred to infectious diseases ward and was weaned off oxygen on illness day 13. vl was reduced below the rt-qpcr detection limit on day 14. remdesivir was discontinued after 8 administrations, because of alt elevation (116 ui/l versus 43ui/l before remdesivir administration) and a maculopapular rash. these symptoms resolved five days after remdesivir discontinuation and the patient was discharged on illness day 20.a 76-year french male, known for chronic kidney injury (creatinine=115µmol/l, normal range=50-70µmol/l), was admitted on february 22 for cough and fever for 24 hours and transferred in our center on february 26 after diagnosis of covid-19. he presented a spo2=92% on air and pulmonary posterior ground glass on chest ct scan. on illness day 11, he was transferred in icu due to oxygen saturation worsening (po2=69mmhg; flow low nasal cannula=3 l/min). the nasopharyngeal viral load was already very low at 38.5 ct but remdesivir was initiated on march 3 and discontinued on march 12, without any side effect, as sars-cov-2 vl was constantly negative. he was weaned off oxygen on illness day 19 and discharged on illness day 23. this case series of five covid-19 patients requiring icu for a respiratory distress treated with remdesivir, three (#1, #3, #4) had a favorable outcome despite the initial respiratory severity. they were weaned off oxygen between illness day 14 to 19 and discharged between illness day 20 and 26. patients #2 and #5 died in icu on illness day 25 and 31 with multiorgan failure. remdesivir initiation yielded a decrease in nasopharyngeal vl in all but patient #2, for whom the treatment was re-introduced after an early interruption without additional decrease neither in upper nor lower respiratory tract. for patient #5, a viral replication was still ongoing in the lower respiratory tract despite a concomitant undetectable vl in the nasopharyngeal area, thus highlighting the discrepancies between viral replication in upper and lower respiratory tract among the most severe patients. plasma samples were only positive for sars-cov-2 for patient #2.as described in previous case reports (grein et al. 2020; kujawski et al. 2020) , four out of five patients experienced major side effect under remdesivir (two acute renal injuries and two maculo-papular rash with a cytolytic hepatitis). both kidney failure events could be either related to remdesivir or sars-cov-2 infection. none of our patients received immunomodulatory drugs. grein et al. (grein et al. 2020 ) described 53 covid-19-patientsethics approval and consent to participatethe present report has been approved by the french ethics committee (nct04262921).consent for publication: the institutional review board of bichat hospital approved this report and waived the need for informed consent from individual patients, due to the nature of retrospective chart review and the absence of identifying images or personal/clinical details that compromise anonimity.availability of data and materials : the datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request for each patient, type of hospital ward is indicated by the color rectangles, supplemental o2 requirement by the dashed blue line and remdesivir infusion by the red line. viral load is given with black diamonds and black line for nasopharyngeal swabs, with green squares for lower respiratory tract samples when available and red circles for plasma samples. the viral load is estimated by the ct (cycle threshold) values. the lower the ct value, the higher is the viral load. a sample is negative above 40 ct. since the first reported outbreak in wuhan, china, in december 2019, the world has witnessed the pandemic spread of the newly identified betacoronavirus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) that is responsible for coronavirus disease-19 [1] [2] [3] . after a few sporadic cases in nine european countries, italy became one of the western countries with the highest number of diagnosed cases (203,591 as of 29 april 2020), with the greatest outbreak occurring in the region of lombardy (75.134 cases) [4, 5] .sars-cov-2 spreads from human to human transmission by means of respiratory droplets or direct contact, and has a median incubation period of 5.1 days and a basic reproduction number of 2. 24-3.58 [6,7] . the clinical spectrum of covid-19 ranges from mild disease (i.e. the absence of pneumonia or mild pneumonia) in about 80% of cases to life-threatening pneumonia in the form of acute respiratory disease syndrome (ards) requiring intensive care in 6% [8] [9] [10] [11] . the case fatality rate (cfr) seems to vary and reported estimates range from 1% to 7%, but this should be more precisely known once surveillance studies have clarified the number of infected subjects [12] [13] .given the severity and expected high cfr of the pneumonia caused by sars-cov-2, it is imperative to find an effective drug treatment because supportive care and oxygen supplementation is not always enough. remdesivir, a nucleoside pro-drug that is thought to act by inhibiting viral rna transcription, has shown in vitro antiviral activity against bat coronavirus and sars-cov-2, and has been safely used in one patient with sars-cov-2 pneumonia in the usa [14] [15] [16] [17] .this study evolved in the context of the emergency caused by the large outbreak of covid-19 in lombardy, italy, that started on 20 february 2020. on 21 february, the pharmaceutical company gilead sciences agreed to a request for the donation of remdesivir for compassionate use in individual patients seriously affected by sars-cov-2 pneumonia and hospitalised at luigi sacco hospital, milan, italy. a report containing the clinical information and laboratory test results of each eligible patient requiring oxygen supplementation was sent to gilead for approval. enrolment in the programme ended on march 20, 2020 as it was planned to start a randomised, controlled, double-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f blind clinical trial aimed at evaluating the efficacy and safety of remdesivir in hospitalised patients with mild to moderate covid-19 respiratory disease [18] . pending the results of this trial, we report the outcomes of 35 patients who received compassionate remdesivir treatment during the first days of the italian sars-cov-2 epidemic.patients were eligible to receive remdesivir for compassionate use if they were a male or non-pregnant female aged >18 years, had sars-cov-2 infection confirmed by a positive reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test of a respiratory tract sample and pneumonia confirmed by a chest x-ray or computed tomography (ct) scan, and were mechanically ventilated or had an oxygen saturation (sao2) level of <94% in room air or a national early warning score (news)2 of  4 [19] .patients were excluded if their alanine or aspartate aminotransferase level was >5 times the upper limit of the normal range and creatinine clearance was <30 ml/min. urgent approval for each eligible patient was obtained by our ethics committee and sent to gilead together with the patient's clinical history. written informed consent was obtained from all of the patients except those who were undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation, for whom the principle of urgency was applied.the patients were prospectively enrolled in the remdesivir treatment programme between 23 february and march 20, 2020 (fig. 1 ). the drug schedule was an intravenous loading dose of 200 mg on day 1, followed by an intravenous dose of 100 mg/day from day 2 to day 10. the patients could continue their existing treatments including hydroxychloroquine (hcq), but had to discontinue lopinavir/ritonavir (lpv/r) in accordance with gilead's recommendations.the clinical and laboratory data of all of the patients who received at least one dose of remdesivir were collected on a daily basis from the date of enrolment to the date of discharge, death or censoring (20 april 2020).in a subset of patients, a semi-quantitative rt-pcr test of a nasopharyngeal swab was carried out at baseline and during remdesivir treatment using an automated elite ingenius system and the genefinder covid-19 plus realamp kit (elitechgroup, france). the reaction mix was manually prepared in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and loaded on to the system with other reagents, and rna was extracted from 200 l of sample and eluted in 100 l; the final reaction volume consisted of 5 l of rna plus 15 l of reagent mix. the rt-pcr profile was 50°c for 20 minutes, 95°c for five minutes plus 45 cycles at 95°c for 15 seconds and 58°c for 60 seconds in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. three target genes, rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), nucleocapsid protein (n) and envelope membrane protein (e) were simultaneously amplified and tested. viral load was measured as the cycle threshold (ct) value.the primary outcome was the change in the patients' hospitalisation status on the 10 th and 28 th day of treatment. hospitalisation status was assessed using a 7-category ordinal scale previously used in influenza studies [20], in which 1 = not hospitalised, capable of resuming normal activities; 2 = not hospitalised but unable to resume normal activities; 3 = hospitalised, not requiring oxygen supplementation; 4 = hospitalised and requiring oxygen therapy; 5 = hospitalised an requiring highflow nasal oxygen therapy, non-invasive mechanical ventilation, or both; 6 = intensive care unit (icu) hospitalisation, requiring invasive mechanical ventilation or extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo), or both; 7 = deceased.the secondary outcome was safety, including adverse events leading to premature treatment discontinuation. adverse events were classified using the national cancer institute common terminology criteria for adverse events, version 4.0.continuous variables are expressed as median values and their interquartile range (iqr), and were compared using the non-parametric mann-whitney test; categorical variables are expressed as j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f absolute numbers and percentages, and were compared using fisher's exact test. friedman's test was used for paired samples.between 23 february and 20 march 2020, 50 consecutive patients (fully representative of all hospitalised covid-19 patients in italy) were evaluated for the compassionate use of remdesivir and 48 were considered eligible for treatment. thirteen patients did not start the drug for the reasons given in figure 1 . the remaining 35 received at least one dose and were evaluated for the outcomes of interest. thirty-one of these patients had previously received lpv/r + hcq for a median of five days, but all discontinued lpv/r upon enrolment.eighteen patients started remdesivir in our icu and seventeen in our infectious disease ward (idw): most of icu patients were undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation, and most of the idw patients were undergoing high-flow oxygen therapy and/or non-invasive mechanical ventilation. table 1 shows the main baseline characteristics of the icu and idw patients, who were prevalently males (77.8% and 70.6%) and had a median age of respectively 60.5 (iqr 49.25 -63.75) and 64.0 years (iqr 51.0 -75.0). the median time from symptom onset to hospital admission was seven days in both groups, whereas the median time from hospital admission to the start of remdesivir treatment was shorter in the icu than in the idw patients (4 days, iqr 3.0 -5.0 vs 5 days, iqr 4 -6). the median charlson co-morbidity index was 2 in the icu group and 2 in the idw group, and most frequent co-morbidity in both groups was hypertension (27.8% and 41.2%). the median news2 score was higher in the icu than in the idw patients (6 vs 4), and they also had a higher median white blood cell count (7640/l vs 6580/l) and d-dimer level (5632.5 vs 1306), a lower absolute lymphocyte count (625/l vs 890/l), and higher c-reactive protein (177 vs 106) and ldh levels (559 u/l vs 399 u/l).twenty-two (63%) completed the scheduled course of remdesivir, whereas thirteen (nine in icu and four idw patients) had the treatment discontinued after a median of five doses (iqr 4-6) because of toxicities (n=8, 22.8%), death (n=4, 11.4%) and early discharge (n=1, 2.9%).as shown in figure 1 , by day 10 of rendesivir treatment, four (22.2%) of the icu patients showed an improvement in their hospitalisation status (one was still hospitalized but not requiring supplemental oxygen and three had been weaned from invasive ventilation), ten (55.5%) were still undergoing invasive ventilation, and four (22.2%) had died; by the 28 day of follow-up, the hospitalisation status of 38.9% of the icu patients had improved (six had been discharged, one had been weaned from invasive ventilation), 16.7% were still undergoing mechanical ventilation and the other 44.4 % had died.among the idw patients, the hospitalisation status of 6 (35.3%) had improved by day 10 of remdesivir treatment (one had been discharged, three no longer required oxygen supplementation, and, two were still hospitalized but no longer required high-flow therapy and/or non-invasive mechanical ventilation); but 10 still required high-flow therapy and/or non-invasive mechanical ventilation, and one had died. by day 28 of follow-up, hospitalisation status had improved in 88.2% of the idw patients (14 had been discharged, one no longer required oxygen supplementation) but one still required high-flow therapy and/or non-invasive mechanical ventilation.the news2 and laboratory test results of fourteen icu and 15 idw patients could be assessed on day 10 of remdesivir treatment. there were no statistically significant changes from baseline in news2 in either group, but the idw patients (although not the icu patients) showed a statistically significant improvement in fio2 values (p=0.046). moreover, there was a statistically significant increase in lymphocyte counts in both the icu and idw groups (p=<0.001 and p=0.001), and a statistically significant decrease in c-reactive protein levels (p=0.002 and p<0.001).twenty-one of the 35 enrolled patients (seven icu and fourteen idw patients) were tested for sars-cov-2 viral load on a nasopharyngeal swab at baseline and during treatment. the overall median value at baseline was 25 ct (27 in the icu and 25 in the idw patients), and 22 had a negative viral load a median of 12 days ) after the start of remdesivir treatment. table 2 shows severe adverse events recorded during remdesivir treatment. the most frequent was hepatotoxicity, with a grade 3-4 increase in transaminases levels observed in 42.8% of the patients.the most frequent adverse event leading to treatment discontinuation was acute kidney injury, which was observed in four patients, all in icu, three of whom eventually died. remdesevir was also discontinued in three patients showing a grade 3-4 increase in transaminase levels, and in one patients who developed a serious maculo-papular rash.the pandemic emergence of sars-cov-2 infection, which is characterised by progressively severe pneumonia and ards that leads to a high mortality rate among hospitalised patients, challenges the medical community to evaluate rapidly any possibly effective antiviral drug [21] . on the basis of in vitro studies of different coronaviruses (including sars-cov-2), it seems that a number of drugs may be candidate treatment options, including lpv/r, chloroquine, hcq and remdesivir [14] [15] [16] [22] [23] [24] [25] . one randomised, controlled trial of lpv/r involving hospitalised patients with severe covid-19 has failed to demonstrate any clinical benefit [26] . -19 pneumonia [17, 27, 28] . conversely, in a randomized, double-blind placebocontrolled study conducted in china, remdesivir was not associated with statistically significant beneficial clinical outcome with severe covid-19 pneumonia [29] . this later study, however, has been stopped earlier due to the reduction of the number of covid-19 cases in china and it was therefore underpowered to provide conclusive information.we report, our experience of remdesivir compassionate use in 35 patients treated at luigi sacco hospital in milan, italy, between 23 february and 20 march 2020, of whom 63% completed the 10day course, and 37% discontinued it prematurely because of adverse events. the hospitalisation status of 88.2% of our idw patients improved by the day 28 from starting remdesivir treatment, the majority of whom had been discharged to resume their normal activities; however, there was a 44.4% case fatality rate among the patients who started the treatment in our icu. given that the clinical condition of only one of our idw patients worsened, it is possible that remdesivir may be more efficacious in patients who present early in a non-critical condition. as has been shown in a previous study of the use of neuraminidase inhibitors against influenza [30], a delay in beginning antiviral treatment can be crucial when evaluating the efficacy of drugs against an acute respiratory infection.interestingly, we were able to measure sars-cov-2 viral load in nasopharyngeal swabs of 21 of our patients at baseline and during remdesivir treatment, and the rt-pcr showed that all of these patients became negative a median of 12 days after the start of treatment. this is in line with with the rapid decline in viral load observed in a single patient treated with remdesivir in the usa [17], and these may cautiously considered a positive virological response, given that a study conducted in wuhan showed that the median duration of viral shedding among patients surviving sars-cov-2 infection was 20 days [9].one-third of the patients enrolled in our study were unable to complete the scheduled 10-day course of remdesivir because of aes. the most frequent severe ae was increase in liver enzymes, a finding in line with data of the multicenter compassionate study by grein et al. [28] . moreover, four of our patients who started remdesivir treatment in the icu developed aki, and three of them eventually j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f died; however, it is difficult to say whether the aki was caused by the infection itself, remdesivir, or any of the other administered medications. since lpv/r was discontinued 24 hour before the administration of remdesivir we believe that the aes were likely independent of that previous treatment although it cannot fully excluded.we acknowledge that our study has a number of limitations. first, given the context in which it originated, it was impossible to include a control group so we cannot exclude the possibility that the patients whose hospitalisation status improved after remdesivir treatment may have improved regardless of any treatment. secondly, most of our patients had previously received lpv/r + hqc and this may represent a confounding factor when analysing the efficacy of remdesivir. finally, we could not predefine a virological follow-up which limits our finding of a possible virological effect of remdesivir in inducing the clearance of viral rna in the patients' respiratory samples.in conclusion, remdesivir treatment may have a beneficial effect on sars cov-2 pneumonia, especially in the case of non-critically ill patients. our decision to administer it for compassionate use was triggered by a state of emergency, but randomised controlled trials are now needed to determine the safety and efficacy of remdesivir and any other investigational agent in the treatment of patients with sars cov-2 infection. any ae leading to treatment discontinuation 8 (22.8 % ) 6 (33.3%) 2 (11.7%)teicoplanin (other glycopeptides including dalbavancin, oritavancin, and telavancin) enhancement of the anti-sars-cov-2 activity of hydroxychloroquine azithromycinthis systematic review and meta-analysis will be derived from only randomized controlled trials which will increase the quality of evidences.this systematic review and meta-analysis will be derived from only randomized controlled trials which will reduce between study heterogeneity.subgroup and sensitivity analysis will be carried out to identify possible reasons that may cause significant heterogeneity between studies.the use of cochrane risk of bias tool to assess risk of bias for each included studies to extract and synthesize evidence based conclusions.one of the limitation of this study might be the restriction of trials published in english language.over the course of december 2019, the health authority of wuhan city, hubei province, china reported a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown etiology [1] . the chinese researcher rapidly isolated sever acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) from a patient on 7january 2020 and came out to genome sequencing of the sars-cov-2 [2] . on 9 january 2020, china's communicable diseases control authority announced that 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) had been detected as the causative agent for the epidemics [3] . on [4] [5] [6] .in spite of the global containment on prevention efforts, the spread of covid-19 is continuing to rise with 1.1 million confirmed cases and 60,124 deaths recorded worldwide since 04 april 2020. [7] [8] . the outbreak of covid-19 infection has a significant threat to international health and economy [9] . at present, there is no approved vaccine or treatment for covid-19, so that identifying the drug treatment options as soon as possible is critical agenda to overcome the outbreak [10] [11] .despite the lack of approved drugs and vaccine for covid-19, many scientists are endeavoring to find medicines specific to the virus and they have been looking into repurposing the already approved drugs. as of 29 march 2020, there has been 209 clinical trials registered in clinicaltrials.gov and estimated to be over 500 [12] . currently, several drugs such as remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, ritonavir+lopinavir, arbidol and interferon are undergoing randomized controlled trials (rcts) to test their efficacy and safety for the treatment of covid-19 in many countries [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . among these investigating drugs remdesivir showed promising results [18] [19] . remdesivir is nucleotide analog prodrug and shows broad spectrum antiviral activity against many rna viruses including sars-cov-2 [20] [21] . remdesivir has been reported as a treatment of covid-19 in united states, china and italy [13, 15, 22] . while results are yet controversial [9] . to bridge this gap, here we aim to conduct a systematic review and all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059196 doi: medrxiv preprint meta-analysis of rcts to compare the effectiveness of remdesivir and placebo in patients with covid-19.the protocol for this systematic review and meta-analysis is submitted in prospero database for registration and we will include the registration number in the revised version of the manuscript.we will search medline/pubmed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/), embase sars-cov-2, remdesivir, nucleotide-analogue, antiviral drug and randomized controlled trials.all potentially eligible studies will be considered for this review, irrespective of the primary outcomes. manual searching will be performed to find out additional eligible trials from the reference lists of key articles. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. study eligibility criteria for this systematic review and meta-analysis will be in accordance withparticipants, intervention, comparison, outcomes and study designs (picos) descriptions [23] .population: the population will be patients confirmed with covid-19 and with or without other co-morbid conditions in all age groups.the intervention/ experimental group will be any dose of remdesivirthe comparator group will be placebo/ standard of carethe primary endpoints will be time to clinical recovery and proportion of participants relieved from clinical symptoms defined at the time (in hours) from initiation of the study treatment. the secondary endpoints will be all cause mortality, discharged date, frequency of respiratory progression, oxygen saturation and treatment-emergent adverse events in each groups.only rcts evaluating effectiveness of remdesivir versus placebo for patients with covid-19 will be included.the title and abstract of all searched studies will be examined by two independent review authors. from the title and abstract of all studies identified by the database search, those studies duplicated and not meet the eligibility criteria will be excluded. the full texts of the remaining studies will be further reviewed. disagreements will be resolved by consensus and if persisted, we will be arbitrated through discussion with a third review author. we will follow the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma 2015) guidelines [24] for the design and reporting of the results.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059196 doi: medrxiv preprint two authors will independently extract data according to the pre-designed data extraction tool.the following data will be extracted from each included rcts: first author, year of publication, funding information, setting, mean age of the participant, interventions, comparators, doses, number of participants randomized, duration of treatment, all primary, secondary and other outcome measurements. if any disagreement regarding the data extraction between the two m . , , er o all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059196 doi: medrxiv preprint review authors exist, the third author will be consulted and consensus will be made through discussion. the cochrane risk of bias tool [25] will be used to assess the risk of bias for each included study.the risk of bias of each trial will be judged by two independent review authors as "low", "unclear", or "high" based on the critical domains, including random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting and other source of biases. disagreements will be resolved by discussion among all authors. if the disagreements cannot be resolved through discussion, an arbiter will make the final decision.meta-analysis will be carried out using the computer software packages revman 5.3 [26] .continuous outcome data will be reported using a mean difference (md) and a 95% confidence interval (ci). binary outcome data will be summarized using risk ratio (rr) and 95% ci.mantel-haenszel method [27] will be used to pool effect estimates of dichotomous outcomes and inverse variance for continuous outcomes. cochrane q test [28] will be used to assess heterogeneity between studies, and i 2 testing [29] will be done to quantify heterogeneity between studies, with values > 50% representing moderate-to-high heterogeneity. if heterogeneity all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059196 doi: medrxiv preprint between study is acceptable, a fixed-effect model will be used to pool the data. on the other hand, if unacceptable heterogeneity detected or if the number of studies are small, a randomeffect model will be used to pool the data [30] . subgroup analysis will be carried out to identify possible reasons that may cause significant heterogeneity between studies. if we get acceptable heterogeneity after the subgroup analysis, we will perform meta-analysis. otherwise, we will do a narrative description. sensitivity analysis will be conducted to see the robustness of pooled data by removing low quality studies. statistical analysis with a p-value < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.when individual participant's data are initially unavailable, we will review the original source, and/or published trial reports and we will contact the authors to obtain clarification for these data.we will conduct funnel plot and egger test to check any possible reporting bias if a sufficient number of included studies (at least 10 trials) are available in this study [31] .this study does not require ethical approval, because no participant's data will be involved in this systematic review and meta-analysis. the findings of this study will be published in reputable and peer-reviewed journal.w hile remdesivir has demonstrated efficacy against covid-19, its broad translational applicability has been hampered by limited supply and distribution 1 due to the difficulty of its synthesis 2 and its obligatory intravenous (iv) administration requiring an inpatient setting. we recently described in a general audience publication 3 the advantages that the parent nucleoside of remdesivir, gs-441524, has over remdesivir itself for the treatment of covid-19. fundamentally, our investigation into the metabolism of remdesivir evidences premature serum hydrolysis of its phosphate prodrug, followed by dephosphorylation. 4−6 as a result, the major metabolite circulating in the bloodstream is the parent nucleoside, gs-441524, even though remdesivir (monophosphate nucleotide prodrug) was the species initially administered. accounting for this broader pharmacokinetic (pk) rationale, we herein provide a detailed analysis of the literature that supports the use of gs-441524 over remdesivir for the treatment of covid- 19 .the phosphate prodrug on remdesivir is not intended for lung-specific delivery. remdesivir is a structural analogue of adenosine monophosphate (amp) that interferes with the sars-cov-2 rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp). 7 the anionic phosphate moiety on remdesivir is masked by mcguigan prodrug moieties 8 (phenol and l-alaninate ethylbutyl ester) to enhance cell permeability. in principle, these prodrug moieties would be removed intracellularlyfirst by esterases (cathepsin a/carboxylesterase 1) and then by phosphoramidases (hint1-3) 9 to release the monophosphorylated nucleotide. this would then be phosphorylated twice to give the active ntp 7,9 (figure 1a ), which is substrate-competitive with atp for incorporation by viral rdrp and inhibition of viral rna synthesis. 7 the mcguigan phosphate prodrug was partly developed to overcome the perceived rate-limiting first phosphorylation step toward the active triphosphorylated species. bioactivation of the prodrug first involves carboxylesterases (ces1) and cathepsin a (ctsa), followed by phosphoramidases (histidine triad nucleotide binding proteins; hints; figure 1a ). 9−11 protein expression data from the human protein atlas show that these enzymes (ces1, ctsa, hint1, 2, 3) all have high expression in the liver, with minimal expression in type ii pneumocytes in the lung 12 ( figure 2 ). for the hint family of phosphoramidases, there is some slight variation in each isoform's tissue-specific expression (figure 2b, c) ; however, all 3 isoforms show high expression in the gi tract, liver, and kidneys. from the pattern of bioactivation for mcguigan prodrugs, it follows that the most significant accumulation active ntp will be in cell types with high expression of ces1/ ctsa/hint1-3, such as the liver. preferential bioactivation of mcguigan prodrugs such as remdesivir could explain the grade 3/4 adverse events related to liver and kidney damage in covid-19 patients treated with remdesivir. 13 seeing that the enzymes involved in mcguigan prodrug hydrolysis are hardly expressed in the lungs undermines its utility in the context of a primarily respiratory disease such as covid-19.gs-441524 is the predominant metabolite in the bloodstream when remdesivir is administered iv. hydrolytic enzymes are ubiquitous in serum. 14 this is one physiological factor that, especially for prodrugs, 15 prevents direct extrapolation of bioactivation mechanisms observed in vitro to the in vivo setting. for example, esterases and phosphatases are abundantly present in serum across species. 16,17 premature serum hydrolysis of the mcguigan prodrug on remdesivir is thus unsurprising (figure 1b) . multiple studies have demonstrated that the nucleoside, gs-441524, is the predominant species in serum after remdesivir is administered (figure 3b , c). 4−6 all studies that have investigated the pk of remdesivir in nonhuman primates (nhp) have concluded that intact remdesivir exhibits a short plasma half-life of about 0.4 h in serum, with "persistence" of the downstream nucleoside, gs-441524 ( figure 3c ). 4,6 iv injection of remdesivir in nhp results in gs-441524 being present in serum at concentrations 1000-fold higher than remdesivir throughout a 7-day treatment course 6 ( figure 3b ). this recurring phenomenon can first be explained by the abundance of plasma esterases, as the phosphoramidases (hint1) involved in removal of the l-alanine have a strictly intracellular presence (see human protein atlas hint1). inadvertent biotransformation of remdesivir to gs-441524 can be explained by the following sequence: (1) esterase removal of the l-alaninate ester, (2) intramolecular cyclization, displacement of the phenolate, followed by reopening of the ring, (3) cleavage of the phosphate ester by serum phosphatases or nucleosidases (figure 1b) . the proposed serum bioactivation mechanism accounts for the general substrate constraints for each class of enzyme. for instance, ces1 is named as one of the enzymes involved in mcguigan prodrug hydrolysis. however, this does not preclude other esterases from acting on its l-alaninate ester. a study conducted by sheahan and colleagues specifically investigated the pk of remdesivir in carboxylesterase 1c deficient mice (ces1c −/− ). 5 even in this ces1c −/− model, the half-life of remdesivir was still short (t 1/2 ∼ 25 min), supporting the notion that other esterases are capable of performing the initial hydrolysis reaction. thus, the abundance of hydrolytic enzymes in serum explains the persistent, multispecies observation that gs-441524 is the predominant metabolite when remdesivir is administered. 4−6 for the fleeting duration of time that remdesivir is in the blood (prior to hydrolysis to gs-441524), the expression of bioactivating enzymes for mcguigan prodrugs suggests that the highest concentrations of ntp formation by remdesivirrather than gs-441524 would occur in cell types with high expression of ces1/ ctsa/hint1. this largely favors the liver over the lungs (figure 2 ). differential expression of prodrug bioactivating enzymes likely explains the wide range of ec 50 values with remdesivir in vitro. 18−20 gs-441524 is exceptionally effective and well-tolerated against clinical presentations of feline coronavirus. there are currently no studies that have compared the antiviral activities of remdesivir and gs-441524 in vivo, with most focusing exclusively on remdesivir. where gs-441524 has been investigated in vivo is in the veterinary setting. 21−23 cats infected with feline coronavirus (fcov) present with a serious disease known as feline infectious peritonitis (fip). while long considered fatal in its severe manifestations, 24 a study conducted by pedersen and colleagues showed that gs-441524 is capable of treating cats suffering from fip with a 96% cure rate. 21 pedersen noted the "impressive" safety profile of gs-441524, with no systemic signs of toxicity observed when administered subcutaneously at 4 mg/kg. 21 in a more recent study, pedersen and colleagues escalated the dose of gs-441524 (5−10 mg/kg) to treat neurological manifestations of fip; this translates to about 350−700 mg in a 70 kg human, greatly exceeding the dose currently given to patients treated with remdesivir (200 mg loading, then 100 mg). 13, 25 even at these higher doses, they found that gs-441524 treatment resulted in the long term resolution of neurological fip with an excellent safety profile: minimal dose-related toxicities were observed. 23 gs-441524 shows comparable efficacy in cell-based models of primary human lung and cat cells infected with coronavirus. in vitro potency comparisons between gs-441524 and remdesivir are ultimately moot in the context of respiratory diseases such as sars-cov-2, if gs-441524 is the predominant species that reaches the lungs. to better gauge the efficacy of gs-441524 against sars-cov-2, it is helpful to first compare ec 50 values between coronavirus infected human and cat cells, as the clinical efficacy of gs-441524 has already been well-established in cats. 21 gs-441524 has an ec 50 value of 0.78 μm in crfk cells infected with fcov ( figure 3a) . 26 at the time of publication, a study by agostini and colleagues is the only report that has compared the antiviral activities of gs-441524 and remdesivir in primary human airway epithelial (hae) cells, the most clinically relevant in vitro model of the lung, infected with either sars-cov or mers-cov. 27 while the mean ec 50 value of remdesivir is lower for both sars-cov and mers-cov-infected cells, close inspection of the data reveals large standard deviations between the ec 50 values obtained from gs-441524 and remdesivir making these potency differences not statistically significant (figure 3a) . 27 for instance, against sars-cov-infected hae cells, gs-441524 has a reported ec 50 of 0.18 (±0.14) μm, which is comparable, if not lower, than that required to exert antiviral activity against fcov-infected cells in vitro. most significantly, the ec 50 concentration for gs-441524 against sars-covinfected primary hae cells is sustained in the plasma of nhp for nearly the entire duration of the single-dose, 24 h pk experiment conducted by warren and colleagues (figure 3c ). in contrast, the ec 50 concentration for remdesivir against sars-cov-infected primary hae cells diminishes after ∼2 h. the dominance of gs-441524 over remdesivir in serum was even more pronounced in williamson's 7-day pk study, in which gs-441524 was present in serum at concentrations 1,000-fold greater than remdesivir at every measured time point (figure 3b ). 6 coupled with the robust antiviral activity that gs-441524 has demonstrated against fip, these data compel further investigations into the therapeutic and prophylactic utility of gs-441524 against sars-cov-2 in patients. sars-cov-2 is a respiratory virus that primarily affects the lungs. 12 while remdesivir has shown some efficacy in patients with advanced covid-19, 13 its phosphate prodrug is fundamentally not designed for lung-specific delivery. enzymes that activate the mcguigan prodrug are preferentially expressed in tissues such as the liver, which results in uneven distribution of active ntp formation via remdesivir that disfavors the lungs. practically, the structural complexity of the mcguigan prodrug 28 adds unnecessary synthetic difficulty that hampers mass production and impedes distribution. 1 above all else, premature hydrolysis of the mcguigan prodrug, followed by dephosphorylation in serum such that gs-441524 is the predominant metabolite 4,5,29 compels studies investigating its utility in patients with covid-19. in contrast to the prodrug activating enzymes that activate remdesivir, bioactivation of gs-441524 relies on expression of the kinase responsible for initial phosphorylation (likely adenosine kinase, adk). according to the human protein atlas, adk is moderately expressed across all tissues, suggesting that administration of gs-441524 would result in even distribution across tissues. the remarkable safety profile of gs-441524, indicated by selectivity indices in vitro (ec 50 /cc 50 ratio) 2, 19, 30 and by clinical observations in cats, 21−23 suggest that higher dosing and lung ntp loading could be achieved with gs-441524 without encountering serious adverse effects. gs-441524 is also a structurally simple molecule that is easier to synthesize compared to remdesivir, 2 which would ease mass production and distribution. especially amidst the documented premature serum hydrolysis of remdesivir to gs-441524, 4, 5, 29 we see several advantages to using gs-441524 over remdesivir for patients with covid-19. while gs-441524, is not included in the emergency use authorization of remdesivir, the exigence of the pandemic may allow ordinary regulatory hurdles to be overcome, especially as these two drugs yield the same active species. an investigational new drug (ind) waiver or an emergency ind could be filed. the fda has previously made allowances for prodrugs and their corresponding active substances, as in the case of lenflunomide/teriflunomide. the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), began in wuhan, china, in december 2019. 1 on january 21, 2020, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) announced the first case of the virus in the united states had been detected in a man with recent travel from wuhan. 2 the world health organization declared the outbreak a pandemic on march 11, 2020. since that time, the number of cases worldwide continues to increase exponentially, including in the united states, with the number of cases in the united states now surpassing all other countries worldwide. no treatment or vaccination is currently approved for sars-cov-2. it is recommended to implement quarantine, social distancing, and infection control measures to prevent disease spread and to provide supportive care for those who become ill. 3 with the number of critically ill patients overwhelming hospitals in cities across the nation, clinicians are looking to investigational antiviral agents for possible added benefit over supportive care alone. ongoing clinical trials of investigational treatments for sars-cov-2 will likely not conflict of interest: the authors have declared no conflicts of interest for this article.*address for correspondence: julie j. belfer, department of pharmacy services, mercy health saint mary's, 200 jefferson se, grand rapids, mi 49503; e-mail: julie.j.belfer@mercyhealth.com. ó 2020 pharmacotherapy publications, inc. c a s e r e p o r t be completed until after the peak of this pandemic in many countries. remdesivir (gilead sciences, inc, foster city, ca, u.s.) is an investigational antiviral that displays potent in vitro activity against sars-cov-2. 4 it has shown promise in preclinical models as well as in case series, with clinical trials ongoing in multiple countries including the united states. 4, 5 because remdesivir is not approved by the food and drug administration (fda), this medication may only be obtained through participation in registered clinical trials or via a request to the manufacturer. unfortunately, the overwhelming number of requests for remdesivir put a significant strain on the manufacturer's drug supply, and on march 22, 2020, the company halted their individual compassionate use program for most patient populations. they did, however, commit to fulfilling drug delivery for patients who had already been approved for compassionate use remdesivir. 6 this, coupled with delays in testing across the country, may result in significant delays in starting antiviral therapy following symptom onset. for other viral illnesses, such as influenza, the efficacy of antiviral administration was shown to be most effective when administered within 48 hours after symptom onset. 7 it is unknown whether remdesivir's antiviral activity would have a similar temporal relationship. we present the case and outcomes of a critically ill patient who tested positive for sars-cov-2 and met criteria for remdesivir compassionate use that was administered after symptoms had persisted for nearly 2 weeks due to a significant supply shortage and delay in delivery from the manufacturer.a 40-year-old-man presented to his ambulatory provider for a covid-19 screening with a 2-day history of dry cough, shortness of breath, and subjective fever. in accordance with cdc recommendations and state and local health officials, the patient was considered low risk and did not meet criteria to be a person under investigation or for covid-19 testing at that time. on day 3 of illness, he had a telemedicine covid-19 screening due to worsening symptoms and new-onset vomiting. at this time, he was advised to report to a designated covid-19 testing center. there he was tested for covid-19 via nasopharyngeal swab with a real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) assay (advanced technology laboratories). he was advised to quarantine for 14 days and await test results. during this visit, both a rapid streptococcus antigen test (bbl streptocard acid latex test; becton dickinson and company, franklin lakes, nj, u.s.) and respiratory pathogen panel by multiplex pcr (biofire; biomerieux, lombard, il, u.s.) panel were negative.on day 5 of illness, he presented to the emergency department (ed) with worsening body aches and inability to tolerate oral intake. the covid-19 pcr from his day 3 visit was still pending. the patient's past medical history was significant for anxiety and depression, obesity (body mass index 30.8 kg/m 2 ), and hypercholesterolemia. his smoking history included a 5-year history of vaping with nicotine. physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38.1°c, blood pressure of 147/93 mm hg, pulse of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 93% on room air. lungs were found to be clear to auscultation, respirations were nonlabored, and chest radiography was performed that reported areas of faint hazy opacity in the lateral left midlung and the upper right lung field, possibly related to atelectasis or infiltrate ( figure 1 ). after improvement following supportive care, he was discharged with a diagnosis of likely covid-19 and was advised to return to the ed if he had worsening symptoms. later that same day, the patient returned. physical examination revealed body temperature of 38.5°c, blood pressure of 135/74 mm hg, pulse of 122 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 87% on room air. the remainder of the examination was unremarkable. influenza a/b pcr (cepheid) was negative. at this time, the patient was admitted to the hospital for suspected covid-19 and further observation.by day 6 of illness (hospital day 2), he was requiring 6 l of oxygen by nasal cannula with increased shortness of breath and tachypnea with his respiratory rate 25-28 breaths per minute. he was placed on 15 l of oxygen by nonrebreather mask with improvement to oxygen saturation of 95%. the intensive care team was alerted and advised to switch the patient back to 6 l of oxygen by nasal cannula non-rebreather to prevent further viral aerosolization. an hour later he was urgently intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. a chest radiograph revealed diffuse patchy infiltrate bilaterally. a chest computed tomography without contrast revealed extensive ground glass/mosaic attenuation and consolidation opacification throughout 2 pharmacotherapy volume **, number **, 2020 bilateral lung fields, highly concerning for changes secondary to viral pneumonia (figure 2) . he was initiated in an assist control mode of ventilation requiring fraction of inspired oxygen (fio 2 ) of 60% with positive end-expiratory pressure (peep) 14 cm h 2 o. the infectious diseases (id) consultation team initiated hydroxychloroquine 400 mg enterally twice/day for 1 day followed by 200 mg enterally twice/day for 4 days. additionally, cefepime 2 g intravenously (iv) every 8 hours and azithromycin 500 mg iv every 24 hours were recommended for possible superimposed bacterial pneumonia. a sputum culture was ordered as well as legionella urine antigen testing. later that evening his covid-19 test was confirmed as positive. because of his acute hypoxic respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and likely progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), the use of investigational remdesivir was discussed among the id team, clinical pharmacist, and the patient's family. following signed consent by the patient's family for treatment, the id physician contacted gilead via e-mail to initiate the individual compassionate use process, and approval was received early the following morning (figures 3 and 4) . on day 7 of illness (hospital day 3), the patient's oxygen requirements increased to an fio 2 of 70% and a peep of 14 cm h 2 o. furosemide as needed was initiated to maintain an even or slightly negative fluid balance. he intermittently required fio 2 to be titrated up to 95% and peep 16 cm h 2 0. the fda was notified via phone of gilead's approval for compassionate use by the id physician, and the request was made for an emergency investigational new drug (eind). the institution's investigational review board was also notified for approval. the id physician and clinical pharmacist were granted access to the medidata system to input the patient's baseline testing and laboratory data. later in the day, the eind was received from the fda approving the use of remdesivir. pharmacotherapy volume **, number **, 2020on day 8 of illness (hospital day 4), ards treatment was initiated with prone positioning, neuromuscular blockade, and aggressive diuresis to achieve a fluid negative balance. with maximum ventilator support achieved, there was a discussion about extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) with a nearby hospital with capabilities. later that afternoon, however, he tolerated a downward titration to fio 2 of 35% with peep 16 cm h 2 o, and methylprednisolone 100 mg iv/day was added. the fda eind, fda form 3926, patient consent form, and prescriber curriculum vitae and medical license information were e-mailed to gilead. following the receipt of these documents, the final steps in the process were awaiting the manufacturer to send a formal prescriber agreement for signature, shipping instructions, as well as the medication administration and handling instructions.during the next 48 hours, mechanical ventilator settings were stable although unable to be weaned down significantly. he had been afebrile for 24 hours, and sputum culture was reported complete with normal respiratory flora; therefore, the cefepime and azithromycin were discontinued. hydroxychloroquine was also discontinued due to upward trending alanine aminotransferase (alt) and aspartate aminotransferase (ast). at this time, the id team was still awaiting the prescriber agreement paperwork and shipping instructions from gilead that were delayed due to drug supply issues and cessation of the compassionate use program.on day 11 of illness (hospital day 7), the id physician received the prescriber agreement from gilead. this was returned via e-mail, and a letter of authorization was then sent from gilead to the fda to accompany the patient-specific eind. additionally, reference materials including the investigator brochure, template protocol, and pharmacy manual were received from the manufacturer. throughout this period, the patient continued to require aggressive mechanical ventilator support. the id pharmacist was contacted by gilead with shipping instructions indicating medication delivery would occur within 24 hours. at this time, the medication and administration and handling instructions were built in the electronic medical record system to expedite drug compounding and delivery once the product arrived.on day 13 of illness (hospital day 9), remdesivir arrived and a 200 mg iv loading dose was administered to the patient. this was followed by orders for a remdesivir 100 mg iv maintenance dose every 24 hours for the next 9 days. during the following 48 hours, the patient continued to progress, he was able to tolerate aggressive mechanical ventilation weaning, and his alt and ast were downtrending. on day 16 of illness (hospital day 12), he was extubated without incident. his oxygen saturations remained stable requiring 2-3 l of oxygen by nasal cannula and were able to maintain his oxygenation saturation on room air by day 17 of illness (hospital day 13). the patient continues to be in stable condition on room air and is progressing toward discharge.remdesivir, also known as gs-5734, is a novel antiviral nucleotide prodrug created by gilead sciences for the treatment of the ebola virus outbreak in 2016. 8 although it did not demonstrate efficacy in human clinical trials for this disease, it has shown efficacy against coronaviruses including sars-cov-1 and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] because of this, remdesivir has garnered significant attention for its potential use as a treatment option for sars-cov-2. as an adenosine analog, remdesivir was shown to incorporate into growing viral rna chains, resulting in premature termination and a decrease in viral rna production. 4 due to a 96% structural similarity in its rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) compared with the virus causing sars-cov-1, remdesivir, which targets the viral rdrp, is postulated to be effective against sars-cov-2 as well. 13 previous literature showed significantly reduced lung viral load and improved clinical signs of disease as well as respiratory function following remdesivir administration. 11 its favorable safety profile demonstrated in multiple case reports, randomized trials of ebola virus disease, as well as currently ongoing phase 3 randomized double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials in china, further expand interest in this potentially lifesaving drug. 9, 13 unfortunately, the process to obtain remdesivir for compassionate use is both challenging and time consuming. although the manufacturer cautions prescribers that the process to obtain the medication typically takes a minimum of 72 hours, for our patient this process took more than double the estimated time expected. this delay in obtaining medication is concerning because other antivirals, such as oseltamivir for influenza or acyclovir for herpes viruses, are effective only if given within a small window of time delayed remdesivir initiation hillaker et al after symptom onset. 7, 14, 15 additionally, many patients hospitalized with sars-cov-2 may have already been symptomatic for several days, selfisolating while awaiting test results or until symptoms have worsened before presenting to the hospital, further delaying time to therapy. fortunately, our patient made significant improvement in oxygenation and was able to be extubated less than 72 hours after starting remdesivir despite this delay in therapy. thus administration of remdesivir, regardless of time from symptom onset, may still have clinical benefits for patients with sars-cov-2. another report detailing the first case of community-transmitted sars-cov-2 in the united states demonstrated similar complications of delayed diagnosis and treatment with remdesivir was recently published. similar to our case, the authors observed clinical improvement after treatment with remdesivir initiated on day 11 of illness. 16 the rapid increase in critically ill covid-19 cases reported across the country and subsequent demand for remdesivir has resulted in a supply shortage with the manufacturer halting the individual compassionate use process outside of patients who are pregnant or pediatric with severe disease manifestations. at this time gilead is moving toward an expanded access program for future institutional use of remdesivir outside of clinical trials; however, details of that program are still forthcoming, and the procedure is expected to be similarly cumbersome as the previous individual compassionate use process. enrollment in ongoing clinical trials to obtain remdesivir may also be difficult for institutions, especially community hospitals with less investigational research support. this case highlights significant issues that must be addressed as a health care and regulatory system in the united states. as the covid-19 global pandemic continues to spread, it is critical that access to potentially lifesaving treatments be quickly available to patients. the fda and government regulatory agencies must be called on to take urgent action to work with drug manufacturers of promising investigational therapies to ensure adequate supply and rapidly evaluate safety and efficacy data. changes to improve and accelerate the processes of drug manufacturing, fda evaluation, and approval during times of pandemic are paramount to expedite access to treatment for critically ill patients.this report has limitations that must be considered. our perspective comes from a single patient treated with remdesivir late in the course of disease. this patient also received hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin for 5 days, and although he did not initially show clinical improvement after the duration of these therapies, this combination is also being investigated as potential therapy for sars-cov-2. 17 it is possible these medications may have impacted his clinical course. he is also a younger patient with few comorbidities. his most significant risk factor for mortality was obesity; because the mortality rate in his demographic in the united states is less than 1%, it is possible that he would have improved without remdesivir. 18, 19 further study and clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of remdesivir are required to confirm its efficacy against covid-19 including if efficacy differences exist between early and delayed administration.late initiation of remdesivir may be effective in treating sars-cov-2, unlike antivirals such as oseltamivir and acyclovir, which are most effective when started as soon as possible following symptom onset. this case highlights the urgent need for action by regulatory agencies to work with drug manufacturers to expedite the study and approval of investigational agents targeting sars-cov-2 as well as to meet manufacturing demands.within three months of the first identification of sars-cov-2 virus in wuhan, hubei province, china, the world is facing an escalating pandemic that will have significant impacts on global health systems and economy (who, 2019) . infection with the novel sars-cov-2 virus may lead to a wide range of clinical presentations from asymptomatic infection in 1% of laboratory confirmed cases to mild, severe, and critical infections in 81%, 14%, and 5% of symptomatic cases, respectively (wu and mcgoogan, 2020) . the estimated symptomatic case-fatality risk (scfr) among cases in wuhan was 1.4%, and those aged above 59 were 5.1 times more likely to die from infection than those aged 30-59 years . with an estimated basic reproductive number of 2.2 (95% ci, 1.4-3.9) (li et al., 2020) , the virus will continue to spread and infect 55% of the global population over time if no effective vaccine is developed (fine et al., 2011) . there is currently no effective antiviral compound licensed for the treatment against human coronaviruses or sars-cov-2.the sars-cov-2 virus shared 79.5% genetic homology to the sars-cov and both are descendants of bat coronaviruses within the betacoronavirus genus . antiviral compounds previously reported to show effect against sars-cov or other coronaviruses may be effective against sars-cov-2 (chu et al., 2004; de wilde et al., 2014; dyall et al., 2014; shen et al., 2019; cao et al., 2015) . in addition, remdesivir (gs-5734), a prodrug of adenosine analog with a broad-spectrum antiviral activity against filoviruses, paramyxoviruses, and coronaviruses (brown et al., 2019; sheahan et al., 2017; de wit et al., 2020) , was recently confirmed to inhibit 2019-ncov in vitro . according to the 7th edition of the novel coronavirus diagnosis and treatment plan issued by the national health commission of the people's republic of china, options for antiviral therapy include aerosolized α-interferon, lopinavir/ritonavir, ribavirin in combination with lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine phosphate, or arbidol (china national health commission, 2020). ongoing clinical trials are evaluating the efficacy of remdesivir, and various hivprotease inhibitors (lopinavir/ritonavir, asc09/ritonavir, darunavir), reverse transcriptase inhibitor (azvudine), anti-influenza compounds, interferon alfa-2b, or monoclonal antibody targeting pd-1 (camrelizumab) or il-6 (tocilizumab) (chinese clinical trial re). we evaluated the anti-sars-cov-2 effect of compounds that have been under development or already approved for other clinical applications; some compounds were previously reported to inhibit coronavirus replication in vitro, and some are evaluated in clinical trials in patients with coronavirus disease t sars-cov-2 virus, betacov/hong kong/vm20001061/2020, was isolated from the nasopharynx aspirate and throat swab of a confirmed covid-19 patient in hong kong using vero e6 cells (atcc crl-1586). stock virus (10 7.25 tcid 50 /ml) was prepared after three serial passages in vero e6 cells in infection media (dmem supplemented with 4.5 g/l d-glucose, 100 mg/l sodium pyruvate, 2% fbs, 100,000 u/l penicillin-streptomycin, and 25 mm hepes). compounds were sourced from medchemexpress and sigma-aldrich and the stocks were prepared with dmso (50 mm remdesivir, 100 mm favipiravir, 10 mm r-1479, 10 mm tenofovir, 10 mm fludarabine phosphate, 10 mm baloxavir, 10 mm chlorpromazine hydrochloride, 5 mm dalbavancin hydrochloride, 10 mm homoharringtonine, 10 mm lopinavir, 10 mm ritonavir) or with water (5 mm emetine dihydrochloride, 10 mm galidesivir hydrochloride, 50 mm ribavirin, 2.5 mm oritavancin diphosphate). oseltamivir carboxylate (10 mm in water) was provided by roche. to evaluate the effect of compounds in vitro, vero e6 cells were pretreated with compounds diluted in infection media for 1 h prior to infection by sars-cov-2 virus at moi = 0.02. antiviral compounds were maintained with the virus inoculum during the 2-h incubation period. the inoculum was removed after incubation, and the cells were overlaid with infection media containing diluted compounds. after 48 h incubation at 37°c, supernatants were collected to quantify viral loads by tcid 50 assay or quantitative real-time rt-pcr (taqman™ fast virus 1-step master mix) following the methods described (chu et al., 2020) . four-parameter logistic regression (graphpad prism) was used to fit the dose-response curves and determined the 50% effective concentrations (ec 50 ) of the compounds that inhibit viral replication. cytotoxicty of selected compounds was evaluated in vero e6 cells using the celltiter-glo® luminescent cell viability assay (promega).among the 16 compounds we tested, remdesivir, lopinavir, homoharringtonine, and emetine dihydrochloride were found to inhibit sars-cov-2 replication in vero e6 cells with ec 50 under 100 μm (table 1) . importantly, we observed that some of the compounds currently undergoing clinical trials such as ribavirin, favipiravir, oseltamivir, or baloxavir showed no apparent antiviral effect against the sars-cov-2 virus in vitro at concentrations under 100 μm (table 1) . remdesivir is a 1′-cyano-substituted adenosine analogue that has been shown to inhibit human coronaviruses (hcov-oc43 and hcov-229e) sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 (brown et al., 2019; sheahan et al., 2017; de wit et al., 2020) . it is currently evaluated in phase 4 clinical trials for sars-cov-2. a recent study fitted viral load in linear scale (eg. the percentage of inhibition) under increasing concentrations of remdesivir reported ec 50 against sars-cov-2 virus at 0.77 μm . we fitted viral load in logarithm scale (log 10 tcid 50 /ml and log 10 viral rna copies/ml) under increasing concentration of remdesivir and determined ec 50 at 23.15 μm and 26.90 μm, respectively ( fig. 1a and table 1 ). two mutations (f476l and v553l) in the rna-dependent rna polymerase nsp12 of a murine hepatitis virus have been previously reported to confer resistance to remdesivir (agostini et al., 2018) . due to insertions and deletions in nsp12, these two conserved residues are mapped at f480 and v557 in the sars-cov-2 isolate (gisaid# epi_isl_412028) used for the experiments, which should remain sensitive for remdesivir. other adenosine analogues (galidesivir, tenofovor, or fludarabine phosphate) or nucleoside analogues (favipiravir, ribavirin, r-1479) did not inhibit viral replication under 100 μm (table 1) . however, nucleoside analogues require metabolic activation into their triphosphate forms by host cellular nucleoside kinases, which may differ among cell types. further evaluation of the effect of nucleoside analogues in primary human airway epithelial cells would facilitate the interpretation of the results.lopinavir in combination with ritonavir are fda approved hiv-1 protease inhibitors. lopinavir was more potent in inhibiting hiv-1 than ritonavir in vitro but showed poor bioavailability in vivo. ritonavir inhibits not only hiv-1 protease but also the host's cytochrome p450 3a4 enzyme that metabolizes lopinavir (kempf et al., 1997) . lopinavir/ ritonavir in combination prolongs bioavailability of lopinavir in vivo (sham et al., 1998) . lopinavir but not ritonavir showed antiviral effect against sars-cov, mers-cov, and hcov-229e in vitro, with mean ec 50 ranged from 6.6 to 17.1 μm (de wilde et al., 2014) . lopinavir/ritonavir in combination with ribavirin were used previously to treat sars-cov patients under a non-randomized clinical trial. less sars patients developed into ards or death after receiving the combination of lopinavir/ritonavir with ribavirin than historical controls who received ribavirin and corticosteroids (chu et al., 2004) . efficacy of lopinavir/ ritonavir with or without ribavirin is currently evaluated in sars-cov-2 patients under randomized control trials. in agreement with previous reports, we observed antiviral effect of lopinavir (ec 50 at 26.1 μm) but not ritonavir against sars-cov-2 in vitro ( fig. 1b and table 1 ). hiv-1 patients treated with 400 mg of lopinavir and 100 mg of ritonavir twice daily may reach the minimal lopinavir serum concentration at 9.4 μm (iqr 7.2-12.1 μm), which is below the ec 50 against sars-cov-2 virus in vitro (lopez-cortes et al., 2013) . currently, lopinavir/ritonavir at 400mg/100 mg twice daily with or without ribavirin are part of the recommended treatment for managing covid-19 patients in china (china national health commission, 2020). a recent randomized control trial reported no significant benefit of lopinavir-ritonavir in hospitalized sars-cov-2 patients than standard care, as the time to clinical improvement, mortality at 28 days, and viral loads at various time points were comparable between the two groups . combinational therapy of lopinavir with the other effective compounds against sars-cov-2 virus may increase synergy and reduce the inhibitory concentration of lopinavir.homoharringtonine is a plant alkaloid derived from cephalotoxus fortunei. it exhibits anti-tumor activity by binding to the ribosomal a site to inhibit protein translation, leading to rapid loss of short-lived proteins including mcl-1 and c-myc that promote the survival of leukemia cells (dong et al., 2018; lu and wang, 2014) . omacetaxine, a semi-synthetic form of homoharringtonine, is approved by fda for treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia. homoharringtonine has also been reported to exhibit potent anti-viral activity against herpesviruses (varicella-zoster virus, herpes simplex virus-1, pseudorabies virus), coronaviruses (porcine epidemic diarrhea virus and murine hepatitis virus), rhabdoviruses (vsv and rabies virus), and other viruses (hepatitis b virus, newcastle disease virus, and echovirus 1) (dong et al., 2018; andersen et al., 2019) . here, we observed homoharringtonine inhibits sars-cov-2 with ec 50 at 2.10 μm ( fig. 1c and table 1 ). previous pharmacokinetic study showed that patients treated with 1.25 mg/m 2 omacetaxine every 12 h by subcutaneous injection may reach the maximal plasma concentration at 25.1 ng/ml (0.046 μm) and 36.2 ng/ml (0.066 μm) on days 1 and 11, respectively (nemunaitis et al., 2013) , which were below the ec 50 against sars-cov-2 virus in vitro.emetine is a protein synthesis inhibitor that was used as anti-protozoan approved for treatment of ameobiasis; it also inhibits malaria by binding to the ribosomal e site of plasmodium falciparum (grollman, 1966; wong et al., 2014) . however, its potential cardiotoxicity has restricted its clinical use in the recent years. it was found to process antiviral activity against a broad range of rna and dna viruses, including zika virus, ebolavirus, cytomegalovirus, rabies virus, hiv-1, echovirus 1, buffalo poxvirus, bovine herpesvirus 1, peste des petits ruminants virus, newcastle disease virus, herpes simplex virus-2, metapneumovirus, rift valley fever virus, and influenza (andersen et al., 2019; chaves valadao et al., 2015; khandelwal et al., 2017; macgibeny et al., 2018; mukhopadhyay et al., 2016; yang et al., 2018) . emetine was also identified to inhibit hcov-oc43, hcov-nl43, sars-cov, mers-cov, and mhv-a59 in vitro with ec 50 reported at low micromolar range (dyall et al., 2014; shen et al., 2019) . we observed emetine at around 0.5 μm may effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 virus replication ( fig. 1d and table 1 ). the therapeutic plasma concentration of emetine may reach 0.075 μg/ml (0.156 μm) (regenthal et al., 1999) , which is below the ec 50 against sars-cov-2 virus in vitro. the toxic plasma concentration is 0.5 μg/ml (1.04 μm) (regenthal et al., 1999) . table 1 antiviral activity of 16 compounds against sars-cov-2 in vero e6 cells. to reduce the effective concentration of individual compound below the maximal therapeutic plasma concentration, we explored the combinational effect of remdesivir and emetine in vitro. drug interaction was evaluated using the checkerboard assay with serially 2-fold diluted remdesivir (0-50 μm) and emetine (0-0.781 μm) in combination. remdesivir at 6.25 μm in combination with emetine at 0.195 μm may achieve 64.9% inhibition of viral yield, which can be further tested in vivo (fig. 2a) . the loewe additive model and the bliss independent model (malyutina et al., 2019) were used to analyse the interaction of the two compounds using synergyfinder (ianevski et al., 2017) . remdesivir and emetine in combination yielded a loewe synergy score of 0.306 (fig. 2b) and a bliss synergy score of 20.234 (fig. 2c) .we confirm the antiviral activity of four compounds that have been reported to inhibit other coronavirus or sars-cov-2 replication in vitro. our results suggest that combinational therapy may help to reduce the effective concentration against sars-cov-2 under the maximal therapeutic plasma concentration. there is an urgent research need to identify optimal dose combination of effective compounds against the sars-cov-2 virus for better clinical benefit.approximately 15% of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) patients will develop severe lung disease. it is thought that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) results in an acute respiratory infection that is cleared in most cases by the immune system after 7 to 14 days. 1 the severe lung pathology that follows in a subset of patients after this acute viral stage is characterised by systemic inflammation reactions. the cytokine storm in these patients seems to be associated with disease severity. 2 both antiviral agents and immunomodulating drugs might therefore have their place in managing the disease in these patients. drugs that slow down the replication of sars-cov-2 and/or decrease disease symptoms may save the lives of (very) ill patients. in addition, it could reduce the time that is being spent in intensive care units and could thus decrease the pressure on these units by freeing hospital beds. furthermore, the drugs could be used as a prophylaxis to protect healthcare workers.here, we summarise the current knowledge regarding antiviral and immunomodulating treatment strategies against covid-19.unfortunately, no antiviral drug has yet been approved to treat human coronaviruses. as a specific, highly potent antiviral drug for sars-cov-2 will take years to develop and to evaluate in clinical studies, the main focus for covid-19 treatment is now on the repurposing of drugs that have been approved for other diseases. such drugs have known safety profiles and drug production strategies have been implemented. unapproved drugs that showed antiviral activity in animal models for sars-cov-1 and/or middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), two other coronaviruses causing severe disease, are currently also considered as treatment options. however, repurposed drugs cannot be expected to be highly potent inhibitors of sars-cov-2, as these were not developed specifically against this particular virus.clinical trials have already been conducted or are currently ongoing to evaluate the efficacy of several repurposed/experimental drugs for the treatment of covid-19. on 7 march 2020, the most frequently evaluated antiviral therapies were lopinavir/ritonavir (lpv/r) (n ¼ 15), chloroquine (n ¼ 11), arbidol (n ¼ 9), hydroxychloroquine (n ¼ 7), favipiravir (n ¼ 7) and remdesivir (n ¼ 5). 3 most of these agents have demonstrated antiviral activity in cell culture against coronaviruses. in addition, the world health organization (who) very recently announced the launch of a large global trial, called solidarity. this trial will include thousands of patients of different countries and will evaluate the efficacy of what who finds the four most promising therapies at this time: the malaria drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine; remdesivir, an experimental antiviral drug; lpv/r, an hiv drug combination; and lpv/r plus interferon-beta, an immunomodulator. 4 chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are anti-malaria drugs that have been widely used to treat malaria patients. due to the emergence of chloroquine-resistant plasmodium parasites, the use of chloroquine to treat malaria has been more restricted. hydroxychloroquine is also administered to patients with auto-immune disorders such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are considered as safe drugs and the side effects are usually mild and transient. however, it is important to note that the window between therapeutic and toxic doses is narrow. chloroquine poisoning has been associated with cardiovascular symptoms and can be life-threatening. self-treatment with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine is therefore not recommended.the antiviral activity of chloroquine was already identified in the late 1960s. 5 both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are able to inhibit a broad range of viruses from different virus families in cell culture, including coronaviruses (sars-cov-1, mers-cov). 6, 7 recently, in vitro antiviral efficacy against sars-cov-2 was also demonstrated. 8 for some viruses, antiviral activity was observed in mouse models, including for the human coronavirus oc43 9 and influenza a virus h5n1. 10 however, in a sars-cov-1 mouse model, chloroquine was not able to reduce viral titres in the lungs. 11 in patients, no evidence of antiviral activity has yet been observed during acute viral infections. 5 a number of clinical trials has been conducted in more than 10 hospitals in china to assess the efficacy of chloroquine to treat covid-19 patients. in a recent publication, 12 it was stated that 'according to the news briefing', 'results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus negative conversion, and shortening the disease course'. however, no data from these clinical trials have yet been released to support this announcement, making it impossible to draw firm conclusions. in france, 26 covid-19 patients were treated for 6 days with hydroxychloroquine (200 mg, three times per day). 13 six of these patients also received azithromycin. sixteen patients were used as the control group. sars-cov-2 rna was measured in nasopharyngeal swabs daily during the treatment. during the study, six patients from the treated group had to be excluded and were not considered in data analysis. three patients had to be transferred to intensive care units, one left the hospital because the patient tested negative, one stopped treatment due to side effects and one person died during the treatment. the authors reported clearance in sars-cov-2 rna in the nasopharyngeal swabs in 57% of chloroquine-treated patients compared to 12.5% of untreated patients at day 6 postinclusion in the study. in addition, a synergistic effect of azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine was suggested, because all patients treated with this combination cleared viral rna by day 6 post-inclusion. however, as not all patients entered the study at the same stage of the disease, it is difficult to assess whether the clearance in viral rna was due to the treatment or due to the immune system of the patient. furthermore, the combination of chloroquine and azithromycin is associated with severe qt prolongation and should thus be considered with care. before chloroquine can be considered safe and effective as a treatment for covid-19, more studies are needed.remdesivir. remdesivir (gs-5734) is an experimental drug that was under development for the treatment of ebola virus-infected patients. 14 remdesivir is a nucleotide prodrug that inhibits viral rna replication. the prodrug needs to be activated in the cell into a nucleoside triphosphate which then serves as an alternative substrate for the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase. the incorporation of the nucleoside triphosphate in the growing viral rna chain will result in chain termination and therefore halt viral rna replication. despite potent efficacy in ebola virus animal models, remdesivir was less efficacious in a clinical trial conducted in the democratic republic of congo. 15 in cell culture, remdesivir has broad-spectrum antiviral activity against several other rna viruses, including arenaviruses 14 and coronaviruses. 16 it was previously shown that remdesivir can efficiently inhibit sars-cov-1 and mers-cov in cell culture, including in human airway epithelial cells. 16 remdesivir also demonstrated antiviral activity against sars-cov-1 and mers-cov in an animal model. in the mers mouse model, remdesivir reduced lung viral loads and severe lung pathology. 17 very recently, it was shown that remdesivir is also active against sars-cov-2 in cells. 8 a case report described the use of remdesivir in one covid-19 patient. 18 this patient initially presented with mild symptoms including a cough and low-grade intermittent fevers, without evidence of pneumonia. however, by illness day 9 the patient progressed to pneumonia. as the clinical status of the patient worsened, compassionate administration of remdesivir was pursued. treatment with intravenous remdesivir was initiated on day 11 of illness. on illness day 12, the clinical condition of the patient improved. supplementation with exogenous oxygen was stopped. although encouraging, the apparent success of remdesivir treatment in this one patient does not prove that the drug is effective. remdesivir is now being evaluated in covid-19 patients in five clinical studies worldwide: two studies in china, and studies in the united states, singapore and south korea. results of these trials are not available yet.lopinavir-ritonavir. lopinavir is an hiv protease inhibitor that is usually combined with ritonavir to increase its half-life via cytochrome p450 inhibition. whether hiv protease inhibitors might also inhibit the coronavirus protease remains a question, because the hiv protease belongs to a different protease family from the two coronavirus proteases (aspartic vs. cysteine protease family, respectively). 19 furthermore, hiv protease inhibitors were specifically designed to fit in a certain pocket of the hiv protease dimer, but this pocket is not present in coronavirus proteases. antiviral activity of lpv/r against sars-cov-1 was reported in cell culture, 20 but conflicting results were reported for mers-cov. 7, 21 in common marmosets infected with mers-cov, lpv/r was able to improve the clinical outcome and reduce viral loads in the lungs. 22 however, in a mers-cov mouse model, the prophylactic use of lpv/r in combination with interferon-beta only slightly reduced the viral loads in the lungs without impacting other disease parameters. 17 therapeutic treatment of lpv/r with interferon-beta improved the pulmonary function but did not reduce virus replication or severe lung pathology. in sars-cov-1-infected patients, results of the treatment with lpv/r were inconclusive. 23 in addition, two case reports describing mers patients receiving lpv/r in combination with ribavirin and interferon-alpha reported conflicting results. 24, 25 the preclinical and clinical evidence for the use of lpv/r in covid-19 patients is thus modest.a case report from south-korea described the use of lpv/r in a covid-19 patient with mild respiratory symptoms. 26 lpv/r was started at day 10 of illness. no clear inhibitory effect on viral rna was observed in the daily sputum samples. in a randomised, controlled, open-label trial involving hospitalised adult patients with severe covid-19, 99 patients were treated with lpv/r, while 100 patients received the standard care treatment. 27 no difference in the time to clinical improvement and in mortality was observed between both groups.favipiravir. another molecule that is being evaluated in covid-19 patients in china is favipiravir. favipiravir (t-705) is an antiviral drug that has been approved in 2014 in japan to treat pandemic influenza virus infections. it acts as a prodrug which is converted intracellularly into its ribofuranosyl 5 0 -triphosphate metabolite (favipiravir-rtp). 28 interestingly, this molecule is able to inhibit a broad range of other rna viruses. 29 the exact mode of action that underlies this broadspectrum anti-rna virus activity has not been completely unravelled. it is hypothesised that favipiravir-rtp could be misincorporated in a growing viral rna chain, or that it could act by binding to conserved polymerase domains, thus preventing viral rna replication. incorporation of favipiravir-rtp in the nascent viral rna could result in lethal mutagenesis by ambiguous base-pairing or in chain termination.favipiravir was evaluated in clinical trials for influenza virus infections, mainly in japan, in which the drug was well tolerated. reported side effects were mild to moderate diarrhoea, asymptomatic increase of transaminases, and uncommonly decreased neutrophil counts. importantly, favipiravir is contraindicated in women who might be or are pregnant and in lactating women because of its association with embryonic deaths and teratogenicity in animal studies. 29 favipiravir has modest antiviral activity against sars-cov-2 in cell culture (ec 50 value of 62 mm). 8 activity against other coronaviruses in cells or animal models has not been reported. despite the rather weak scientific base for the use of favipiravir as an anticoronavirus drug, clinical trials with favipiravir have been conducted in china. in an open-label, non-randomised controlled study, 35 patients with laboratoryconfirmed covid-19 were treated with oral favipiravir (day 1: 1600 mg twice daily; days 2-14: 600 mg twice daily) plus interferon-alpha by aerosol inhalation (5 million u twice daily). 30 in the control group, 45 patients were treated with lpv/r (days 1-14: 400 mg/ 100 mg twice daily) plus interferon-alpha by aerosol inhalation. both treatments were continued until viral clearance was confirmed or until 14 days after the start of treatment. the median time of viral clearance for the patients treated with favipiravir was 4 days, which was significantly shorter than the time for patients in the control group with lpv/r (11 days). the report of this study does not clarify in which type of samples viral clearance was studied. chest computed tomography scans improved in the favipiravir-treated group (91.4% vs. 62.2% in the lpv/r treated group).in an open-label, randomised study, 116 covid-19 pneumonia patients received favipiravir in combination with conventional therapy, whereas 120 patients received arbidol in combination with conventional therapy. arbidol is an antiviral drug with activity against influenza virus infection that is approved in russia and china. 31 the primary outcome of this study was the clinical recovery rate at day 7 after start of treatment, which was defined as recovery of fever, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation and cough relief for at least 72 hours. a non-peer-reviewed report on this study describes that in covid-19 patients with mild symptoms (fever and respiratory symptoms without difficulties in breathing), the clinical recovery rate at day 7 was higher in the favipiravirtreated group when compared to the arbidol-treated group (71.4% vs. 55.9%). furthermore, the time of cough relief and fever reduction by favipiravir was significantly shorter than that by arbidol. however, for covid-19 patients with hypertension and/or diabetes, the clinical recovery rate was not significantly different between both groups (54.8% vs. 51.4%). the same picture was observed for critically ill covid-19 patients. these data suggest that favipiravir might be useful for patients with mild symptoms, but not for severely ill patients.in a subgroup of covid-19 patients, a cytokine profile is observed that is similar to the profile in macrophage activation syndrome (mas). 2 a retrospective analysis in china indicated il-6 and ferritin as predictors for covid-19-related mortality, suggesting that hyperinflammation increases the risk of mortality. 32 anticytokine therapies could thus be useful to treat this group of covid-19 patients that experience such a cytokine-storm syndrome. it must be noted, however, that the selective inhibition of specific cytokines during acute respiratory distress syndrome or sepsis might involve risks, such as reactivation of viral infections and an increased sensitivity for bacterial infections.il-6 inhibitors. tocilizumab (actemra) is a humanised interleukin-6 (il-6) receptor antagonist that was approved to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis. a non-peer reviewed report describes the results of a single-arm chinese trial in which 21 severe or critical covid-19 patients received tocilizumab. 33 on the first day after receiving tocilizumab, the body temperature of all patients returned to normal conditions and remained stable for the next days. in addition, the need for supplemental oxygen decreased in 75% of the treated patients. although promising, the lack of a control group makes it difficult to interpret the true benefit of this therapy. based on these results, china updated its treatment guidelines and approved the use of tocilizumab to treat covid-19 patients with serious lung damage and high il-6 levels.as published data that support the use of tocilizumab are currently limited, properly designed, randomised trials are essential to understand the true impact of this therapy in covid-19. two non-randomised clinical trials are currently ongoing in china, evaluating the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in larger groups of covid-19 patients. furthermore, a phase iii study (covacta) will enroll hospitalised adults with severe covid-19 pneumonia globally, starting from april 2020. this study will be a randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled trial. a us-based phase ii/iii trial will evaluate the efficacy of sarilumab (kevzara), another il-6 receptor antagonist, in adults hospitalised with serious complications from covid-19. in the doubleblind phase ii trial, the primary endpoint will be reduction of fever and the secondary endpoint the decreased need for supplemental oxygen.granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) plays a critical role in the defence against viruses and maintaining a proper function of the immune system. gm-csf might thus be one of the key cytokines involved in the overreacted inflammatory response observed in covid-19 pneumonia. a yeastderived version of gm-csf, leukine (sargramostim, rhu-gm-csf), has been approved for use in five clinical indications; the safety profile of this drug is therefore well known. the efficacy of leukine for the treatment of covid-19 patients with respiratory failure will be evaluated in a clinical study in belgium (sarpac trial). leukine will be administered in a nebulised form for direct inhalation or through intravenous administration for patients that are already on a respirator.with hospitals being overwhelmed with severely ill patients, treatment options for covid-19 are very much needed. rapid identification of such therapies is thus essential, but challenging. repurposing of existing antiviral and immunomodulating drugs is an important strategy, because the safety profile of these drugs is well known. however, the current outbreak of sars-cov-2 has emphasised once again the urgent need to develop broad-spectrum antiviral drugs, not only for coronaviruses, but also for other virus families that may also be the cause of future epidemics/ pandemics.several clinical trials with covid-19 patients are evaluating repurposed drugs, but there is no uniformity in timing, duration of treatment and study endpoints. in the currently registered clinical trials, the primary outcome was clinical in 66% of the studies, virological in 23%, radiological in 8% or immunological in 3%. 3 as the pathogenesis of covid- 19 is not yet well understood and associations between clinical status and viral clearance, radiological or immunological evaluations are unclear, the use of clinical outcomes should be encouraged. in the solidarity trial launched by the who, only simple outcomes will be measured that are currently relevant for public health: the day the patient left the hospital or died, the duration of the hospital stay, and whether the patient required oxygen or ventilation. 4 in this pandemic context, it is essential that clinicians have rapid access to the information from clinical trials. still, it is important that clinical trials and the reports on their results are of high quality, as these results will guide clinicians in their decision on which drug to use, the dosing and duration of the treatment, and which patients to include and exclude. clinical trials should thus be designed with care, because robust results are essential. in addition, transparent and complete reporting on these clinical trials is needed to allow independent assessment of the potential benefit for covid-19 patients. furthermore, the selection of therapies to be evaluated in clinical studies needs to be based on clear scientific in vitro and preclinical in vivo evidence. we may expect that in the next few weeks carefully performed trials will be reported that will guide doctors around the world to give the best care (both in terms of reducing viral replication and mitigating hyperinflammation) to covid-19 patients.the author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.the author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: this project has received funding from the european union's horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreements no. 101003627 and no. 101003551.approximately 15% of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) patients will develop severe lung disease. it is thought that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) results in an acute respiratory infection that is cleared in most cases by the immune system after 7 to 14 days. 1 the severe lung pathology that follows in a subset of patients after this acute viral stage is characterised by systemic inflammation reactions. the cytokine storm in these patients seems to be associated with disease severity. 2 both antiviral agents and immunomodulating drugs might therefore have their place in managing the disease in these patients. drugs that slow down the replication of sars-cov-2 and/or decrease disease symptoms may save the lives of (very) ill patients. in addition, it could reduce the time that is being spent in intensive care units and could thus decrease the pressure on these units by freeing hospital beds. furthermore, the drugs could be used as a prophylaxis to protect healthcare workers.here, we summarise the current knowledge regarding antiviral and immunomodulating treatment strategies against covid-19.unfortunately, no antiviral drug has yet been approved to treat human coronaviruses. as a specific, highly potent antiviral drug for sars-cov-2 will take years to develop and to evaluate in clinical studies, the main focus for covid-19 treatment is now on the repurposing of drugs that have been approved for other diseases. such drugs have known safety profiles and drug production strategies have been implemented. unapproved drugs that showed antiviral activity in animal models for sars-cov-1 and/or middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), two other coronaviruses causing severe disease, are currently also considered as treatment options. however, repurposed drugs cannot be expected to be highly potent inhibitors of sars-cov-2, as these were not developed specifically against this particular virus.clinical trials have already been conducted or are currently ongoing to evaluate the efficacy of several repurposed/experimental drugs for the treatment of covid-19. on 7 march 2020, the most frequently evaluated antiviral therapies were lopinavir/ritonavir (lpv/r) (n ¼ 15), chloroquine (n ¼ 11), arbidol (n ¼ 9), hydroxychloroquine (n ¼ 7), favipiravir (n ¼ 7) and remdesivir (n ¼ 5). 3 most of these agents have demonstrated antiviral activity in cell culture against coronaviruses. in addition, the world health organization (who) very recently announced the launch of a large global trial, called solidarity. this trial will include thousands of patients of different countries and will evaluate the efficacy of what who finds the four most promising therapies at this time: the malaria drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine; remdesivir, an experimental antiviral drug; lpv/r, an hiv drug combination; and lpv/r plus interferon-beta, an immunomodulator. 4 chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are anti-malaria drugs that have been widely used to treat malaria patients. due to the emergence of chloroquine-resistant plasmodium parasites, the use of chloroquine to treat malaria has been more restricted. hydroxychloroquine is also administered to patients with auto-immune disorders such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are considered as safe drugs and the side effects are usually mild and transient. however, it is important to note that the window between therapeutic and toxic doses is narrow. chloroquine poisoning has been associated with cardiovascular symptoms and can be life-threatening. self-treatment with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine is therefore not recommended.the antiviral activity of chloroquine was already identified in the late 1960s. 5 both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are able to inhibit a broad range of viruses from different virus families in cell culture, including coronaviruses (sars-cov-1, mers-cov). 6, 7 recently, in vitro antiviral efficacy against sars-cov-2 was also demonstrated. 8 for some viruses, antiviral activity was observed in mouse models, including for the human coronavirus oc43 9 and influenza a virus h5n1. 10 however, in a sars-cov-1 mouse model, chloroquine was not able to reduce viral titres in the lungs. 11 in patients, no evidence of antiviral activity has yet been observed during acute viral infections. 5 a number of clinical trials has been conducted in more than 10 hospitals in china to assess the efficacy of chloroquine to treat covid-19 patients. in a recent publication, 12 it was stated that 'according to the news briefing', 'results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus negative conversion, and shortening the disease course'. however, no data from these clinical trials have yet been released to support this announcement, making it impossible to draw firm conclusions. in france, 26 covid-19 patients were treated for 6 days with hydroxychloroquine (200 mg, three times per day). 13 six of these patients also received azithromycin. sixteen patients were used as the control group. sars-cov-2 rna was measured in nasopharyngeal swabs daily during the treatment. during the study, six patients from the treated group had to be excluded and were not considered in data analysis. three patients had to be transferred to intensive care units, one left the hospital because the patient tested negative, one stopped treatment due to side effects and one person died during the treatment. the authors reported clearance in sars-cov-2 rna in the nasopharyngeal swabs in 57% of chloroquine-treated patients compared to 12.5% of untreated patients at day 6 postinclusion in the study. in addition, a synergistic effect of azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine was suggested, because all patients treated with this combination cleared viral rna by day 6 post-inclusion. however, as not all patients entered the study at the same stage of the disease, it is difficult to assess whether the clearance in viral rna was due to the treatment or due to the immune system of the patient. furthermore, the combination of chloroquine and azithromycin is associated with severe qt prolongation and should thus be considered with care. before chloroquine can be considered safe and effective as a treatment for covid-19, more studies are needed.remdesivir. remdesivir (gs-5734) is an experimental drug that was under development for the treatment of ebola virus-infected patients. 14 remdesivir is a nucleotide prodrug that inhibits viral rna replication. the prodrug needs to be activated in the cell into a nucleoside triphosphate which then serves as an alternative substrate for the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase. the incorporation of the nucleoside triphosphate in the growing viral rna chain will result in chain termination and therefore halt viral rna replication. despite potent efficacy in ebola virus animal models, remdesivir was less efficacious in a clinical trial conducted in the democratic republic of congo. 15 in cell culture, remdesivir has broad-spectrum antiviral activity against several other rna viruses, including arenaviruses 14 and coronaviruses. 16 it was previously shown that remdesivir can efficiently inhibit sars-cov-1 and mers-cov in cell culture, including in human airway epithelial cells. 16 remdesivir also demonstrated antiviral activity against sars-cov-1 and mers-cov in an animal model. in the mers mouse model, remdesivir reduced lung viral loads and severe lung pathology. 17 very recently, it was shown that remdesivir is also active against sars-cov-2 in cells. 8 a case report described the use of remdesivir in one covid-19 patient. 18 this patient initially presented with mild symptoms including a cough and low-grade intermittent fevers, without evidence of pneumonia. however, by illness day 9 the patient progressed to pneumonia. as the clinical status of the patient worsened, compassionate administration of remdesivir was pursued. treatment with intravenous remdesivir was initiated on day 11 of illness. on illness day 12, the clinical condition of the patient improved. supplementation with exogenous oxygen was stopped. although encouraging, the apparent success of remdesivir treatment in this one patient does not prove that the drug is effective. remdesivir is now being evaluated in covid-19 patients in five clinical studies worldwide: two studies in china, and studies in the united states, singapore and south korea. results of these trials are not available yet.lopinavir-ritonavir. lopinavir is an hiv protease inhibitor that is usually combined with ritonavir to increase its half-life via cytochrome p450 inhibition. whether hiv protease inhibitors might also inhibit the coronavirus protease remains a question, because the hiv protease belongs to a different protease family from the two coronavirus proteases (aspartic vs. cysteine protease family, respectively). 19 furthermore, hiv protease inhibitors were specifically designed to fit in a certain pocket of the hiv protease dimer, but this pocket is not present in coronavirus proteases. antiviral activity of lpv/r against sars-cov-1 was reported in cell culture, 20 but conflicting results were reported for mers-cov. 7, 21 in common marmosets infected with mers-cov, lpv/r was able to improve the clinical outcome and reduce viral loads in the lungs. 22 however, in a mers-cov mouse model, the prophylactic use of lpv/r in combination with interferon-beta only slightly reduced the viral loads in the lungs without impacting other disease parameters. 17 therapeutic treatment of lpv/r with interferon-beta improved the pulmonary function but did not reduce virus replication or severe lung pathology. in sars-cov-1-infected patients, results of the treatment with lpv/r were inconclusive. 23 in addition, two case reports describing mers patients receiving lpv/r in combination with ribavirin and interferon-alpha reported conflicting results. 24, 25 the preclinical and clinical evidence for the use of lpv/r in covid-19 patients is thus modest.a case report from south-korea described the use of lpv/r in a covid-19 patient with mild respiratory symptoms. 26 lpv/r was started at day 10 of illness. no clear inhibitory effect on viral rna was observed in the daily sputum samples. in a randomised, controlled, open-label trial involving hospitalised adult patients with severe covid-19, 99 patients were treated with lpv/r, while 100 patients received the standard care treatment. 27 no difference in the time to clinical improvement and in mortality was observed between both groups.favipiravir. another molecule that is being evaluated in covid-19 patients in china is favipiravir. favipiravir (t-705) is an antiviral drug that has been approved in 2014 in japan to treat pandemic influenza virus infections. it acts as a prodrug which is converted intracellularly into its ribofuranosyl 5 0 -triphosphate metabolite (favipiravir-rtp). 28 interestingly, this molecule is able to inhibit a broad range of other rna viruses. 29 the exact mode of action that underlies this broadspectrum anti-rna virus activity has not been completely unravelled. it is hypothesised that favipiravir-rtp could be misincorporated in a growing viral rna chain, or that it could act by binding to conserved polymerase domains, thus preventing viral rna replication. incorporation of favipiravir-rtp in the nascent viral rna could result in lethal mutagenesis by ambiguous base-pairing or in chain termination.favipiravir was evaluated in clinical trials for influenza virus infections, mainly in japan, in which the drug was well tolerated. reported side effects were mild to moderate diarrhoea, asymptomatic increase of transaminases, and uncommonly decreased neutrophil counts. importantly, favipiravir is contraindicated in women who might be or are pregnant and in lactating women because of its association with embryonic deaths and teratogenicity in animal studies. 29 favipiravir has modest antiviral activity against sars-cov-2 in cell culture (ec 50 value of 62 mm). 8 activity against other coronaviruses in cells or animal models has not been reported. despite the rather weak scientific base for the use of favipiravir as an anticoronavirus drug, clinical trials with favipiravir have been conducted in china. in an open-label, non-randomised controlled study, 35 patients with laboratoryconfirmed covid-19 were treated with oral favipiravir (day 1: 1600 mg twice daily; days 2-14: 600 mg twice daily) plus interferon-alpha by aerosol inhalation (5 million u twice daily). 30 in the control group, 45 patients were treated with lpv/r (days 1-14: 400 mg/ 100 mg twice daily) plus interferon-alpha by aerosol inhalation. both treatments were continued until viral clearance was confirmed or until 14 days after the start of treatment. the median time of viral clearance for the patients treated with favipiravir was 4 days, which was significantly shorter than the time for patients in the control group with lpv/r (11 days). the report of this study does not clarify in which type of samples viral clearance was studied. chest computed tomography scans improved in the favipiravir-treated group (91.4% vs. 62.2% in the lpv/r treated group).in an open-label, randomised study, 116 covid-19 pneumonia patients received favipiravir in combination with conventional therapy, whereas 120 patients received arbidol in combination with conventional therapy. arbidol is an antiviral drug with activity against influenza virus infection that is approved in russia and china. 31 the primary outcome of this study was the clinical recovery rate at day 7 after start of treatment, which was defined as recovery of fever, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation and cough relief for at least 72 hours. a non-peer-reviewed report on this study describes that in covid-19 patients with mild symptoms (fever and respiratory symptoms without difficulties in breathing), the clinical recovery rate at day 7 was higher in the favipiravirtreated group when compared to the arbidol-treated group (71.4% vs. 55.9%). furthermore, the time of cough relief and fever reduction by favipiravir was significantly shorter than that by arbidol. however, for covid-19 patients with hypertension and/or diabetes, the clinical recovery rate was not significantly different between both groups (54.8% vs. 51.4%). the same picture was observed for critically ill covid-19 patients. these data suggest that favipiravir might be useful for patients with mild symptoms, but not for severely ill patients.in a subgroup of covid-19 patients, a cytokine profile is observed that is similar to the profile in macrophage activation syndrome (mas). 2 a retrospective analysis in china indicated il-6 and ferritin as predictors for covid-19-related mortality, suggesting that hyperinflammation increases the risk of mortality. 32 anticytokine therapies could thus be useful to treat this group of covid-19 patients that experience such a cytokine-storm syndrome. it must be noted, however, that the selective inhibition of specific cytokines during acute respiratory distress syndrome or sepsis might involve risks, such as reactivation of viral infections and an increased sensitivity for bacterial infections.il-6 inhibitors. tocilizumab (actemra) is a humanised interleukin-6 (il-6) receptor antagonist that was approved to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis. a non-peer reviewed report describes the results of a single-arm chinese trial in which 21 severe or critical covid-19 patients received tocilizumab. 33 on the first day after receiving tocilizumab, the body temperature of all patients returned to normal conditions and remained stable for the next days. in addition, the need for supplemental oxygen decreased in 75% of the treated patients. although promising, the lack of a control group makes it difficult to interpret the true benefit of this therapy. based on these results, china updated its treatment guidelines and approved the use of tocilizumab to treat covid-19 patients with serious lung damage and high il-6 levels.as published data that support the use of tocilizumab are currently limited, properly designed, randomised trials are essential to understand the true impact of this therapy in covid-19. two non-randomised clinical trials are currently ongoing in china, evaluating the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in larger groups of covid-19 patients. furthermore, a phase iii study (covacta) will enroll hospitalised adults with severe covid-19 pneumonia globally, starting from april 2020. this study will be a randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled trial. a us-based phase ii/iii trial will evaluate the efficacy of sarilumab (kevzara), another il-6 receptor antagonist, in adults hospitalised with serious complications from covid-19. in the doubleblind phase ii trial, the primary endpoint will be reduction of fever and the secondary endpoint the decreased need for supplemental oxygen.granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) plays a critical role in the defence against viruses and maintaining a proper function of the immune system. gm-csf might thus be one of the key cytokines involved in the overreacted inflammatory response observed in covid-19 pneumonia. a yeastderived version of gm-csf, leukine (sargramostim, rhu-gm-csf), has been approved for use in five clinical indications; the safety profile of this drug is therefore well known. the efficacy of leukine for the treatment of covid-19 patients with respiratory failure will be evaluated in a clinical study in belgium (sarpac trial). leukine will be administered in a nebulised form for direct inhalation or through intravenous administration for patients that are already on a respirator.with hospitals being overwhelmed with severely ill patients, treatment options for covid-19 are very much needed. rapid identification of such therapies is thus essential, but challenging. repurposing of existing antiviral and immunomodulating drugs is an important strategy, because the safety profile of these drugs is well known. however, the current outbreak of sars-cov-2 has emphasised once again the urgent need to develop broad-spectrum antiviral drugs, not only for coronaviruses, but also for other virus families that may also be the cause of future epidemics/ pandemics.several clinical trials with covid-19 patients are evaluating repurposed drugs, but there is no uniformity in timing, duration of treatment and study endpoints. in the currently registered clinical trials, the primary outcome was clinical in 66% of the studies, virological in 23%, radiological in 8% or immunological in 3%. 3 as the pathogenesis of covid- 19 is not yet well understood and associations between clinical status and viral clearance, radiological or immunological evaluations are unclear, the use of clinical outcomes should be encouraged. in the solidarity trial launched by the who, only simple outcomes will be measured that are currently relevant for public health: the day the patient left the hospital or died, the duration of the hospital stay, and whether the patient required oxygen or ventilation. 4 in this pandemic context, it is essential that clinicians have rapid access to the information from clinical trials. still, it is important that clinical trials and the reports on their results are of high quality, as these results will guide clinicians in their decision on which drug to use, the dosing and duration of the treatment, and which patients to include and exclude. clinical trials should thus be designed with care, because robust results are essential. in addition, transparent and complete reporting on these clinical trials is needed to allow independent assessment of the potential benefit for covid-19 patients. furthermore, the selection of therapies to be evaluated in clinical studies needs to be based on clear scientific in vitro and preclinical in vivo evidence. we may expect that in the next few weeks carefully performed trials will be reported that will guide doctors around the world to give the best care (both in terms of reducing viral replication and mitigating hyperinflammation) to covid-19 patients.the author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.the author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: this project has received funding from the european union's horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreements no. 101003627 and no. 101003551.the sars-cov-2 virus emerged in december 2019 and then spread rapidly worldwide, starting china, japan, and south korea and then to europe and north america, while the world health organization on march 11th declared the rapidly spreading novel coronavirus outbreak a pandemic, acknowledging that the virus will likely spread to all countries on the globe . as of may 2nd 2020, more than 3.5 million confirmed cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and almost 250.000 deaths have been reported, whith one third of the cases and more than one fifth of the deaths to have occurred in the united states (john hopkins coronavirus resource center statistics). in response to the most serious global health threat in more than a century, the world's biomedical establishment has unleashed an unprecedented response to the covid-19 pandemic, rapidly increasing resources aimed at finding safe and effective treatments for the disease, comprehensively reviewed in (zhai et al. 2020) . research for treatments has emerged from different medical backgrounds, both pharmacologically with the use of well known drugs for other diseases (elfiky 2020b (elfiky , 2020a sheahan et al. 2020; gordon et al. 2020; gao and hu 2020) or corticosteroids (russell, millar, and baillie 2020) and immunologically from the serum/ antibodies of former patients against other coronaviruses or from patients that have recovered from covid-19 (mulangu et al. 2019; mair-jenkins et al. 2015; duan et al. 2020) or even with the use of revolutionary ideas such as the combination of cripr tool with cas13 (chen, yu, and guo 2018; knott et al. 2017; abbott et al. 2020) . another tremendous effort from nih (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04283461) and all countries around the globe focuses on the successful development of a vaccine that would prevent the emergence of covid-19 through the years and the creation of a repeating cycle of spreading, like the influenza virus (wrapp et al. 2020; du et al. 2009 ).in this review, we are going to focus on small molecules and drugs that are already in use and fda approved for other diseases, and show promising results for treatment of covid-19 (all except nicotine as of may 2020) and are all under further investigation with large numbers of patients and some of them with randomised, placebo controlled studies, which is considered the golden standard in medicine for the use of a certain compound for a treatment in a novel disease. coronavirus; remdesivir; pandemic; chloroquine; zinc; ivermectin; nicotine; ace2; importin; rna virus; virology; treatment; drugs in order to better understand the mechanisms through which these drugs are working, it is vital to elucidate the basic steps through which the sars-cov2 virus is infecting a human cell (more often alveolar epithelial type ii cells (sungnak et al. 2020) ) and how it replicates inside the human organism.coronaviruses (covs) are the largest rna viruses identified so far and belong to the coronaviridae family. they are divided into 4 groups (α-, β-, γand δ-), while the β-coronaviruses are further divided into a, b, c, and d lineages. sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are members of β-coronaviruses lineage b . particularly, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 have 89.8% sequence identity in their spike (s) protein. s2 subunits mediate the membrane fusion process, and both of their s1 subunits utilize human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hace2) as the receptor to infect human cells (maier, bickerton, and britton 2015) . most importantly, the ace2-binding affinity of the of s protein of sars-cov-2 is 10-to 20-fold higher than that of sars-cov, (wrapp et al. 2020) , which contributes to the higher infectivity of sars-cov-2 as compared to sars-cov (keep, bickerton, and britton 2015) .after binding of the s protein on the virion to the ace2 receptor on the target cell, the heptad repeat 1 (hr1) and 2 (hr2) domains in its s2 subunit of s protein interact with each other to form a six-helix bundle (6-hb) fusion core (kubo, yamada, and taguchi 1994) , bringing viral and cellular membranes into close proximity for fusion and infection (bosch et al. 2004) . therefore, the s-protein-receptor interaction is the primary determinant for a coronavirus to infect a host cell and also governs the tissue specificity of the virus. the virus gains access to the host cell cytosol by aciddependent proteolytic cleavage of s protein by a cathepsin protease, followed by fusion of the viral and cellular membranes. s protein cleavage occurs at two sites within the s2 subunit of the protein (belouzard, chu, and whittaker 2009) . fusion occurs within acidified endosomes and the formation of the bundle after fusion allows for the mixing of viral and cellular membranes, resulting in the release of the viral genome into the cytoplasm (bosch et al. 2004 ).the next step in the coronavirus lifecycle is the translation of the most vital gene of the virus, the rna-dependent rna polymerase or replicase gene, from the virion genomic rna. the replicase gene encodes two large orfs that produce two polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab. (baranov et al. 2005; brierley, digard, and inglis 1989) . these can be expressed by overlapping reading frames through ribosomal frameshifting from the rep1a into the rep1b orf reading frame. in vitro studies predict the incidence of ribosomal frameshifting is as high as 25 % (araki et al. 2010) . polyproteins of coronaviruses are furtherly cleaved by a group of proteases, either two or three proteases that cleave the replicase polyproteins. these are the papain-like proteases (plpro) and a serine type protease. (ziebuhr, snijder, and gorbalenya 2000; mielech et al. 2014 ). many non-structural proteins (nsps) are assembling the replicase-transcriptase complex (rtc) to create an environment suitable for rna synthesis, while specifically nsp12 encodes the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) domain. this is the enzyme that will elongate new positive sense rna molecules from the original rna of the virion when conditions will allow this to happen (snijder et al. 2003 ). viral rna synthesis produces both genomic and sub-genomic rnas (sgrnas). sgrnas serve as mrnas for the structural and accessory genes of the virus. in this stage, coronaviruses are known for their ability to recombine using both homologous and nonhomologous recombination ). this ability is considered to play a prominent role in viral evolution (lai et al. 1985) . after replication and sgrna synthesis, the viral structural proteins, s, e, and m are translated and inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum (er). these proteins move to the the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate compartment (ergic) (krijnse-locker et al. 1994; tooze, tooze, and warren 1984) and are encapsulated by n protein buds into membranes of the ergic containing viral structural proteins, forming mature virions (de haan and rottier 2005) . the m protein is the most abundant of the three and directs most protein-protein interactions required for assembly of coronaviruses, while the e protein functions as a chaperone to the m protein (ye and hogue 2007) . lastly, the s (spike) protein is incorporated into virions at this step by interacting with the m protein, but is not required for assembly. as already stated, the trimeric s protein make up the distinctive spike structure on the surface of the virus (beniac et al. 2006; delmas and laude 1990) and acts as a class i fusion protein (bosch et al. 2004 ) that mediates attachment to the host receptor. following assembly, virions are transported to the cell surface in vesicles and released by exocytosis. (collins et al. 1982 )there more than a dozen already known drugs or small molecules that are potentially able to help in tackling the novel coronavirus' infectious process. here, we discuss five of the most promising compounds and describe how they are able to intervene in one of the many steps that sars-cov2 virus needs to do in order to be replicated successfully in a human cell.zinc will shut down rna dependent rna polymerase or replicase. the problem is how to get zinc inside the cell because zinc is a 2 + ion and ions cannot get through the cellular membrane unless there is a transporter that allows it to come in. this has been already tested in vitro with an ionophore which allows zinc to come into the cell so they could see that the activity of this rna dependent rna polymerase was reduced. thus, zinc inhibited coronavirus rna polymerase activity in vitro and zinc ionophores blocked the replication of these viruses in cell culture when they looked at the sars virus (te velthuis et al. 2010). as the zinc concentration inside the cell went up, the by-product of the rna dependent rna polymerase (rd rp) went down clearly demonstrating that zinc intracellularly is blocking this very important enzyme of the virus.zinc supplements get absorbed into the body in the blood into the extracellular space and the problem is how to get that zinc from the extracellular space into the intracellular space in the cytosol where it needs to work on infected cells and the viral proteins. again, what is needed is some sort of ionophore or a gated mechanism to open and to allow that zinc to come into the cell, thus increasing the concentration of zinc into the cell so it can block rd rp.an, irrelevant of sars infection research, publication of 2014 has showed that zinc may help some cancer cells to be led to autophagocytosis in the lysosomes and that by giving chloroquine they could have these cancer cells disappear in a far more superior rate. what they show is that they were able to detect much higher intracellular zinc by increasing concentrations of chloroquine. in fact, small amount of chloroquine at 10 micromolar will increase the intracellular concentration of zinc ten-fold (xue et al. 2014) .chloroquine is a medication that has been around for decades end is used to treat malaria. while it is pretty inexpensive to produce and widely available, one does need a prescription to use it and it doesn't come without side effects. (mejia torres et al. 2013) .under the pressure of finding a treatment that could possibly ease the covid-19 implications in serious cases, a chinese expert consensus published an article in february 2020 that states that chloroquine phosphate or chloroquine has a wide range of antiviral effects including anti-coronavirus effects and in patients diagnosed with novel coronavirus pneumonia might improve the success rate of treatment and improve patient outcome in 500 milligrams twice per day for 10 days for patients diagnosed as mild moderate and severe cases of coronavirus pneumonia.(multicenter collaboration group of department of, technology of guangdong, and health commission of guangdong province for chloroquine in the treatment of novel coronavirus 2020) . surely, further investigation needs to be done with this combination of drugs to prove or reject their relevance with blocking sars-cov2's infection process.remdesivir, developed by gilead sciences inc., is an investigational broad-spectrum antiviral treatment. it was previously tested in humans with ebola virus disease and so far it has shown promise in animal models for treating middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). remdesivir triphosphate (rdv-tp) is a direct antagonist of adenosine triphosphate (atp) and blocks the function of rdrp when it takes its place upon elongation of the positive sense rna of the virus by rdrp (amirian and levy 2020; gordon et al. 2020) (figure 1).in a letter to editor in nature journal, m. wang et al. proved for the first time that remdesivir is highly effective in the control of covid-19 infection in vitro, at a stage post virus entry . after that, many clinics start using remdesivir in a compassionate use for covid-19 patients with severe symptoms, with the general feeling that it is helpful. although, only with a randomized, unbiased trial, remdesivir could be used in as an official treatment for covid-19 (holshue et al. 2020; bastola et al. 2020; cai et al. 2020; hao, li, and huang 2020; grein et al. 2020) .while a randomized trial with remdesivir took place in china with 237 patients who were in icu for 12 days, found no difference in time to recovery or mortality between the two groups (cao, deng, and dai 2020; ledford 2020; ko et al. 2020 ), very recently (april 2020) in an american trial with 1063 patients, remdesivir showed the most optimistic results so far for treatment of covid-19 in a randomized clinical trial where patients with serious case of the illness from sars-cov2 treated with remdesivir had a 4 to 5 days faster relief from symptoms and were able to exit icu in comparison with patients treated with a placebo. due to the positive and statistically significant result of this study, all patients in placebo were treated with remdesivir as well after a data safety monitoring board (dsmb) which showed significantly positive results even before the study had finished. this is the norm for such studies, because it would be unethical for patients on the placebo to not receive a treatment that would help them recover faster and easier (https://www.nih.gov/newsevents/news-releases/nih-clinical-trial-shows-remdesivir-accelerates-recoveryadvanced-covid-19) .another very interesting compound that could have positive effects on the prevention of the sars-cov2 infection is this of famotidine. this started when dr. michael callahan from massachusetts general hospital visited china and reviewed about 6212 charts of patients who survived or died by covid-19. some of these patients had heartburn, which is one of the most common problems to have in the general population, and some of them were taking a medication called famotidine (known by its trade name as pepcid), while another group of patients were taking a more expensive and newer medication for suppressing acid with totally different structure, omeprazole (known trade name: prilosec or nexium). what was interestingly observed was that those patients that who were taking the cheaper medication (pepcid) had a mortality rate of in only 14%, whereas in the group of patients with omeprazole the mortality was 27%. despite that, when they looked at the statistical significance of that they found that the p-value was greater than 0.05 which means that they couldn't tell whether or not there was a greater than 95 percent chance of confidence that this was random or not. (https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/04/new-york-clinicaltrial-quietly-tests-heartburn-remedy-against-coronavirus#)in an unrelated study with these observation, famotidine was one of the three mostly fitted protein to be predicted computationally as possible targets ofviral protein of sars-cov2, important for its successful infection and replication. important targets such as 3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3clpro), spike, rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), and papain like protease (plpro) were matched structurally with already known compounds, with famotidine having one of the highest scores against plpro. . plpro is responsible for the cleavages of n-terminus of the replicase poly-protein to release nsp1, nsp2 and nsp3, which is essential for correcting virus replication (harcourt et al. 2004 ) and can antagonize the host's innate immunity baez-santos, st john, and mesecar 2015; matthews et al. 2014 ) (figure 1). as an indispensable enzyme in the process of coronavirus replication and infection of the host, plpro is a popular target for coronavirus inhibitors and famotidine is structurally shown to be a very plausible candidate.taken together with the results from patients taking pepcid as opposed to patients taking isomeprazole for common heartburn, on 14 april the u.s. biomedical advanced research and development authority (barda) has funded scientists in the united states who have now started a randomized placebo controlled trial for intravenously given famotidine in the effort to a successful treatment for covid-19 (https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/04/new-york-clinical-trial-quietly-testsheartburn-remedy-against-coronavirus#)ivermectin is, like hydroxychloroquine, an fda approved medication that already serves a purpose for some other infections but might be helpful with covid-19 as well. ivermectin is usually used for parasites and it has been investigated in other viruses like west nile virus and influenza but now several research groups are looking into its use for treatment from the novel coronavirus (mercorelli, palu, and loregian 2018; azeem et al. 2015) . several viral proteins are believed to be imported in the nucleus of the human cells, upon infection with sars-cov2. there's a specific target in the host's nuclear membrane for this transporting which is conveniently called importin, which comes in versions alpha and beta, both important for the viral infection. what ivermectin does is that it shuts down this ability to transport viral proteins through importins into the nucleus and thus diminishes the ability of the virus to cause harm to the cell (figure 1). on april 2020, scientists from australia showed that ivermectin is an inhibitor of the virus sars-cov-2 in vitro, when a single addition to vero cells with signaling lymphocytic activation molecule expression (vero-hslam cells) 2 h post infection with sars-cov-2 it was able to create a ~5000-fold reduction in viral rna at 48 h (caly et al. 2020) .maybe the most recent small molecule (as of may 2020) to be considered as a potential tool against covid-19, is nicotine. two independent groups, one from france (changeux et. al, 2020) and one from greece (farsalinos et al. 2020) , have found that except ace2 which is the main receptor of sars-cov2, a secondary receptor for the virus could be the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nachr) (bencherif et al. 2011 ). this notion is firstly possible due to the fact that about a third of the patients experience anosmia and dysgeusia (smell and taste impairment) as an early symptom of covid-19 which is connected with nachr mechanisms (giacomelli et al. 2020) . secondly and maybe more importantly, even if a high smoking prevalence among patients with covid-19 would be expected due to smokers' higher rate of cardiovascular and respiratory defects, a 3 fold less from the expected population of smokers was identified with the disease in a chinese study (farsalinos et al., 2020) (wu and mcgoogan 2020) . finally, it has lately been reported that nicotine is a direct mediator of ace2 receptor (leung, yang, and sin 2020) .nicotine is a cholinergic agonist and acts as an important inhibitor of proinflammatory cytokines acting through the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway via α7-nachrs (image 1). nicotine inhibits tnf, il-1, il-6 and hmgb1, proinflammatory cytokines which are known to be elevated among covid-19 patients , creating a cytokine storm which leads to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multi-organ failure, very usually seen in severe covid-19 cases (turner et al. 2014; ulloa 2005) . while undoubtedly smoking cannot be a possible solution for covid-19 prevention, it seems really interesting to further investigate the function of nicotine on restoring the function of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory system in combination to sars-cov19 infection and replication mechanism in future studies. unfortunately, a clear and confirmed treatment for covid-19 remains yet to be found. still, the most successful way to prevent the spread of sars-cov2 so far is quarantine for affected individuals and physical distancing measures, while it is of outmost need to generate a drug or a combination of drugs in order to add another tool against this international pandemic, until the development of a vaccine against the novel coronavirus. in figure (1) we show how some of the most promising known drugs for other diseases can block the novel coronavirus' transport or replication into the host cell. currently, more than 200 studies with different compounds or other potential treatments with various ways are ongoing in the united states and more than 1000 worlwide (source: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results/map?cond=covid-19&map= ), but due to the rapid emergence for research many of the efforts lack organizing and randomized clinical trials and remain on the level of anecdotal evidence about their ability to fight covid-19. even with researchers working around-the-clock there still seems to be lack of a centralized national strategy, and small-scale trials do not lead to definitive answers for which society is in need now of all times. this seems to be stabilized week to week and collaborations among research groups from all over the world and from different fields of expertise give place to small scale efforts, such as the remdesivir clinical trial stated above. we hope that with efforts like this, we will be able to produce solid results in the near future where physicians all over the world will put into practice as soon as possible. except for remdesivir, we believe that more wide range randomized clinical trials must be done for the compounds stated or other drugs that we didn't discuss in this review, in order to have alternative ways to treat patients that inevitably will not be responsive to a certain treatment or this treatment will be prohibited for them due to other conditions that they might have.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) is an acute respiratory viral infection related to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the disease outbreak started in china in late december 2019 and quickly spread to the rest of the world, resulting in a pandemic affecting 210 countries and territories worldwide so far [1] . the current mortality rate of the disease is estimated at 6.1%, with the total number of cases at 1.77 million by april 11, 2020 [1] . the incidence of new cases is increasing in devastating proportions in the united states and is declared a public health emergency [2] . this article provides a comprehensive review of the disease epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, mitigation measures, and treatment options. it also provides insights into the ongoing clinical trials aimed at limiting the disease progression.(rna) strand (non-segmented, positive sense) and measure about 60-140 nm in diameter [3] . the outer surface contains spikes measuring 9-12 nm in length, which looks like a crown when looked under a microscope [4] . the outer surface of the virus possesses four vital structural proteins, which are spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins [5, 6] . the s glycoprotein has the ability to attach to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor (ace-2), which helps in the fusion and eventual entry of virion particles into the host cell [5, 6] . coronaviruses are zoonotic viruses and are spread from animals to humans. there are two incidents in the past where human infections have resulted in severe disease. the first event was the 2002-2004 sars outbreak, where humans got infected by a betacoronavirus named sars-cov that was usually found in bats. the epidemic started in china, affecting 8,422 people and resulting in as many as 916 deaths worldwide [7] . later in 2012, another beta group coronavirus, mers-cov of bat origin, resulted in an outbreak that started in saudi arabia, affecting nearly 3,000 people and resulting in 858 deaths. the mortality rate of the disease was high (34%) [8] .in december 2019, a novel coronavirus was discovered in wuhan city, china, which was linked to a group of pneumonia cases. later, the virus was assumed to be transmitted by wild animals to humans, and all of the cases were associated with a seafood market [9] . on december 31, 2019, the world health organization (who) was informed by the chinese health department about the outbreak [10] . the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) named the virus as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and who announced the name coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) to refer to the disease caused by the virus [11, 12] . studies have shown that the virus is capable of spreading among humans through droplets, fomites, and direct contact. this was confirmed in an epidemiological investigation on january 20, 2020, where two patients with no travel history to wuhan were detected with the virus in guangdong province, china, far from the original outbreak [13] . in january 2020, there was a rapid increase in the number of cases, which, coupled with global travel, resulted in the spread of infection around the globe. the who declared the outbreak as the sixth international public health emergency on january 30, 2020 [10] . by march 2020, china had reported a total of 82,160 cases of sars-cov-2 infection, and the mortality rate was 4%, resulting in 3,341 fatalities [14] . by the middle of february 2020, the infection spread to other countries such as italy, iran, united kingdom, spain, france, and the united states [15] . on january 20, 2020, the first case was reported in the united states in the state of washington [16] . since then, the infection spread to all the 50 states by march 20, 2020 [1] . by april 5, 2020, it has affected 375,000 people and resulted in almost 10,000 deaths [1]. the disease is more severe in people with underlying conditions, resulting in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiorgan dysfunction [13] . as of april 9, 2020, the disease has spread to 205 countries and territories worldwide, affecting nearly 1.6 million people, and the mortality rate was estimated to be 5.95% (95,400 deaths as of april 9, 2020) [1].the initial symptoms of covid-19 consist of fever, chills, dry cough, sore throat, nausea, headache, myalgias, which are similar to those of influenza [17] . the unique symptom reported in sars-cov-2 infection is the involvement of the gastrointestinal system (vomiting and diarrhea), which was not found in the case of sars and mers [18] . another interesting feature of covid-19 infection is the presence of asymptomatic carriers who can shed the virus up to 21 days without any clinical signs or symptoms. patients with severe illness can present with shortness of breath (sob), severe respiratory distress, and pneumonia. there is also increased reporting of new-onset anosmia and ageusia as the only presenting symptoms in some cases [19] . the average incubation period for covid-19 is 2-14 days [19] . however, studies have reported an incubation period of as long as 19-27 days in some cases. the incubation period of covid-19 is longer compared to that for mers (5 days) and sars (2-7 days). a study by wang et al. of 138 hospitalized patients reported that the most common symptoms included fever (98.6%), dry cough (59.4%), and fatigue (69.6%). also, in that study, the median time observed from the first symptoms to complications was five days for dyspnea, seven days for hospitalization, and eight days for ards [20] . these findings are helpful for clinicians who are managing at-risk populations with comorbidities where early identification of complications and timely treatment helps in patient survival. chen et al. conducted a study of 99 hospitalized people and reported the common symptoms as fever (83%) cough (82%), and sob (31%) [21] .the findings of the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) report of china comprising 72,314 case records including confirmed, suspected, diagnosed, and asymptomatic cases were as follows: the overall fatality rate was 2.3% (out of 62% confirmed cases) and the mortality was higher in the elderly (15% in those aged >80 years and 8% in those aged 70-79 years) [22] . another interesting finding of the report was that more than half of the critically ill patients had underlying comorbidities such as diabetes, chronic lung disease, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. studies have shown that older patients with comorbidities are more susceptible to complications such as respiratory failure, multiorgan dysfunction (such as shock, acute cardiac injury, acute kidney injury), and even death in severe cases [22] .several diagnostic tests were developed to detect the presence of covid-19 infection, such as real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr), reverse transcription polymerase chain (rt-pcr), reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) assay, and enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (elisa) [23] . recently in the united states, on march 28, 2020, abbott laboratories got the fda approval for the portable point-of-care antibody test kit that can deliver test results within 15 minutes [24] . studies have shown that the blood cell profile of covid-19 patients consists of decreased white blood cell (wbc) count, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, rnaemia, elevated aspartate aminotransferase (ast), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) and c-reactive protein (crp), and mildly elevated procalcitonin (secondary infection) levels [25] . moreover, severe cases were associated with elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), alanine transaminase (alt), creatinine, and prothrombin time [13] . radiological findings of covid-19 patients show a variety of changes such as ground-glass opacities, bilateral lung involvement with multiple lobular and subsegmental areas of consolidation, mottling, and pneumothorax [13] . in addition, histological findings such as hyaline membrane formation, fibromyxoid exudates, diffuse alveolar damage, and desquamation of pneumocytes were observed in critically ill patients [13, 25] . the leading cause of mortality in critically ill covid-19 happened to be due to respiratory failure from severe bilateral pneumonia [13] .studies have shown that sars-cov-2 causes cytopathic damage to airway epithelial cells, which can result in the activation of severe and dysregulated immune responses, ultimately leading to ards [13] . histological examination of patients with ards has shown hyperactive cytotoxic t-cells filled with large volumes of cytotoxic granules [13] . in addition, studies have shown that critically ill patients with covid-19 have elevated levels of interleukin (il) 6) due to a hyperinflammation process called cytokine storm syndrome [26] . high levels of il-6 are responsible for shock, respiratory failure, and multiorgan failure in these patients [26] . in addition, cellular immune mechanisms are also thought to be responsible for the grave prognosis in severe disease. damage to t lymphocytes resulting in lymphopenia and increased susceptibility to secondary infections were also observed in critically ill patients [13] . elevation of proinflammatory cytokines along with the suppression of anti-inflammatory cytokines suggests the cellular immune response against the sars-cov-2 [13] .the humoral immune response has a role in the pathogenesis of covid-19. there is a decrease in levels of immunoglobulins in covid-19, which indicates the effects on antibody-producing b lymphocytes [21] . though antigens of sars-cov-2 have shown potential for stimulating antibody production, the impact of overall lymphopenia may have caused depletion of immunoglobulins [21] . the s and n proteins on the surface of the coronavirus are thought to elicit immune responses [27] . in severely ill covid-19 patients, the virus-specific antibodies are thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of hyperinflammation, cytokine storm, and depletion of lymphocytes through a process called antibody-dependent enhancement [28] . the blood profile of hospitalized patients showed an elevated neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio, along with a decrease in monocytes, basophils, and eosinophils [29] . in addition, a depletion of both t and b lymphocytes and natural killer (nk) cells was seen in critically ill patients, with suppression of all subsets of t cells such as helper t cells, regulatory t cells, and suppressor t cells was observed. the cytokine storm in severely ill patients results in elevation of proinflammatory cytokines in the plasma, including interferon gamma (ifn-γ), il-1 beta, tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnf-α), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (g-csf), and il-8, il-10, il-6, and il-2 [29] . therefore, detection of il-6 can play a significant role in estimating the severity of the disease. studies have shown that sars-cov-2 can result in hyperinflammation of lungs and further fibrosis by the release of il-1β mediated by the attachment of the virions to toll-like receptors (tlr) [30] . therefore, drugs targeting il-1β could be potentially beneficial in severely ill patients.prevention is the mainstay of blocking the disease spread and lowering the mortality rate. proper handwashing, maintaining at least 6 feet of social distancing while in public, and selfisolation and quarantining when suspicious of disease contraction are a few ways of preventing disease transmission. there are several ongoing studies dedicated to assessing the treatment options for covid-19. some of the drugs under investigation include remdesivir, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, tocilizumab, and convalescent serum. wang et al. conducted in vitro studies on the sars-cov-2 specimen and investigated the effectiveness of antiviral drugs such as ribavirin, penciclovir, remdesivir (gs-5734), and favipiravir (t-705), and few other medications such as nitazoxanide, nafamostat, and chloroquine in the treatment of covid-19 [31] . the findings of their study showed that remdesivir and chloroquine had the potential of inhibiting the virus in cell cultures. remdesivir is a nucleotide analog that exhibits antiviral properties through incorporation into the nascent viral rna chains and further resulting in their early termination. studies of remdesivir on the mice cell lines and nonhuman primate (nhp) cell lines have shown positive results against coronaviruses such as sars and mers-cov and on ebola virus [31] . the results of the study by wang et al. showed that remdesivir was able to attain the required concentrations inside the monkey cell lines infected with the virus. moreover, remdesivir was able to inhibit the infection effectively in the human liver huh-7 cells. the second drug, chloroquine, is an immunosuppressive and anti-malarial drug traditionally used in rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. in vitro studies have shown that chloroquine has the potential to inhibit sars-cov-2 through mechanisms including raising the ph inside the endosomes, which prevents the fusion of the virus with the infected cell and interrupting the glycosylation of viral receptors [31] . in addition to the antiviral properties, the immunosuppressive properties of chloroquine showed a cumulative benefit in viral inhibition in cell lines [31] . with that said, in vivo studies and studies on patients infected with sars-cov-2 are necessary to assess the potential of these drugs in treating covid-19 with minimal to no side effects.in france, gautret et al. conducted an open-label, non-randomized, small population study on hospitalized patients with covid-19 [32] . in their study, patients were given a combination of chloroquine and azithromycin. the criteria for patient selection were age > 12 years and detection of sars-cov-2 antigens in the nasal swab on pcr test at admission irrespective of their clinical status [32] . patients who were pregnant and breastfeeding and those with contraindications to chloroquine such as retinopathy, qt prolongation, and deficiency of glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase (g6pd) enzyme were excluded from the study. the primary endpoint of the study was a negative test result on the nasopharyngeal swab test after six days of treatment. the study enrolled 42 patients based on the above criteria, out of which 26 people were put on hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin (as needed), and the remaining 16 were put on the control group [32] . patients were classified into three groups based on their symptoms: asymptomatic, upper respiratory tract infection (urti) group with symptoms such as fever, body aches, rhinitis, and pharyngitis, and lower respiratory tract infections (lrti) group with symptoms of bronchitis and pneumonia [32] . the results of the study were as follows: 100% of the patients who received both the drugs showed resolution of the viral load when compared with patients receiving hydroxychloroquine alone (57.1%) and control population (12.5%) [32] . moreover, the effectiveness of the treatment was more significant in urti and lrti groups compared with asymptomatic patients.by the end of february 2020, there were almost seven clinical trials that reviewed the effectiveness of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in covid-19 people in china [33] . liu et al. conducted in vitro studies evaluating the effect of both the drugs against sars-cov-2 [33] . their study demonstrated a similar drug profile to chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in terms of cytotoxicity, drug concentration in target cells, and tissue distribution. previously, several clinical studies have shown that hospitalized and critically ill patients with covid-19 exhibit excessive levels of cytokines in their plasma compared to the less symptomatic people, suggesting the role of cytokines in disease severity [33] . hydroxychloroquine possesses good anti-inflammatory properties and is thought to be more effective in these patients. liu et al. concluded their results by stating that hydroxychloroquine has the potential to inhibit sars-cov-2 infection effectively. the study also highlighted the adverse effects of the drug and its low safety index [33] . at this point, further clinical trials are necessary to assess the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine in covid-19.studies have reported that hyperactivation of humoral immune responses and release of il-6 was observed in critically patients with covid-19 [26] . therefore, drugs targeting il-6 receptors such as tocilizumab could be a potential benefit for these patients. tocilizumab is a biological agent used in moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis that acts by binding to il-6 receptors, thereby inhibiting the effects of il-6. in china and italy, a non-randomized openlabel study was conducted where 21 critically ill patients with covid-19 were treated with tocilizumab [34] . all the patients were put on a standard therapy consisting of lopinavir and methylprednisolone in addition to intravenous tocilizumab 400 mg. all the patients in the study reported resolution of symptoms such as fever within 24 hours of the start of the treatment [34] . moreover, 75% of the patients reported a significant decrease in oxygen requirement within two to five days after receiving treatment, and 90% of the patients had resolution of pneumonia radiologically as well [34] . the study did not report any side effects of the treatment. however, more evidence in terms of positive outcomes in large patient groups is necessary to substantiate the results of the study.in late april 2020, wang et al. published the findings of their randomized case-control study on the effectiveness of intravenous remdesivir in severely ill covid-19 patients [35] . the study recruited 237 patients from 10 hospitals in wuhan, china, who met the following criteria: age ≥ 18 years, lab-confirmed infection with sars-cov-2, onset of symptoms to enrollment ≤ 12 days, oxygen saturation ≤ 94% on room air, and chest x-ray findings positive for pneumonia. patients who were pregnant or breastfeeding, those with complications of liver disease such as cirrhosis, elevated liver enzymes (≥5 times normal), and renal impairment, and dialysis patients were excluded from the study. concurrent therapy with other medications such as steroids, lopinavir-ritonavir, and interferons was allowed. clinical improvement within 28 days of starting remdesivir was the primary endpoint of the study. the study reported that patients in the remdesivir group achieved clinical improvement faster when compared with placebo in patients with symptoms for ≤10 days (hazard ratio: 1·52; 95% ci: 0·95-2·43) [35] . however, the results were not statistically significant, and the relatively small patient population might be one of the reasons. other limitations of the study include remdesivir introduction in the late stage of the disease and insufficient data on patient recovery as remdesivir was stopped early because of adverse effects (anemia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated bilirubin) [35] .apart from the drug trials, other notable studies include the effectiveness of passive immunization and the use of convalescent plasma/antibodies in critically ill covid-19 patients. antibody treatment has been successfully used in the treatment of infectious diseases in the past. a meta-analysis of the effectiveness of convalescent plasma in acute viral infections such as sars-cov and mers-cov has shown positive results in terms of decrease of viral load and case fatality rates [36] . a study in china has reported that 10 critically ill people have shown positive results when treated with antibodies from recovered people, including improved o2 saturation and decreased viral load [37] . studies have postulated that the antibodies have the potential to neutralize the viral particles and inhibit further infection of new cells and to activate complement and phagocytosis. however, the treatment is associated with few adverse effects. in addition to ethical issues and careful donor selection, antibody treatment is associated with the risk of thrombosis (0.04-14.9%) [38] . in addition to these studies, there are some ongoing vaccine trials across the globe against the coronavirus. finally, there are more than 600 (including withdrawn) clinical trials dedicated to the management of covid-19. in the united states, more than 50 active studies are currently being conducted, and some of the clinical trials are shown in the covid-19 outbreak has been overwhelming to the nations in terms of economy and public health aspects of curbing the disease spread and keeping the incidence of cases to the lowest level possible. furthermore, disease management has been challenging for the clinicians and other medical personnel in terms of treatment options and the availability of personal protective equipment. the off-label use of some drugs such as hydroxychloroquine and emergency use authorization of remdesivir can hopefully help the clinicians while treating critically ill patients. the use of convalescent serum has also shown some interim benefit until a definitive treatment and preventive options are uncovered, such as vaccines and other effective treatment regimens.disclosuresthe 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19 coronavirus (cov) or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)) has spread rapidly to cause serious outbreaks and eventually a pandemic around the world. as of april 2020, covid-19 has been reported in 210 countries and almost 3 million cases have been confirmed, resulting in more than 200,000 deaths with an estimated mortality risk of 6.91% 1 . the new cov has been declared a global emergency by the world health organization, as the outbreak continues to spread globally and no clinically approved interventional therapy is currently available to curb this health crisis. antiviral agents are urgently needed to treat covid-19 patients. it could take up years to develop new interventions, including therapeutic antibodies, cytokines, nucleic acid-based therapies, and vaccines. hence, repurposing clinically approved or investigative drugs for other diseases provides a promising approach to develop covid-19 treatments. cov has a capsid that envelops the single-stranded rna genome 2 . three structural surface proteins are shown to be associated with the capsid: viral membrane, envelope, and the spike protein 3 . because sars-cov-2 and sars-cov share 89% nucleotide identity 4 , chemical compounds and monoclonal antibodies that target sars-cov surface proteins or interrupt its binding to host viral receptor have been under investigation for treating sars-cov-2 [5] [6] [7] . in addition, new vaccines targeting the viral surface antigens are under intense development for the prevention of covid-19. unfortunately, drugs and vaccines with inhibitory mechanisms targeting surface receptors may not be effective due to the constant evolution of surface receptors to acquire drug resistance and evade host immune response 8 . in contrast, viral rna-dependent-rna polymerase (rdrp) is a protein that is deeply buried inside the viral capsule and is functionally conserved for viral replication, rendering it resistant to the propagation of drug-resistant virus. thus, rdrp serves as a promising drug target for virus infections 9 . indeed, inhibitors targeting polymerase of sars-cov-2 is currently at late stages of clinical trials.compared with other viral rdrp such as influenza virus and rhinovirus, sars-cov-2 rdrp is more challenging for drug development due to its intrinsic proofreading exoribonuclease (exon) function. non-structural protein (nsp) 12, along with cofactors nsp8 with nsp7, is involved in nascent rna priming and nucleotide addition [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . ntp analogues that inhibit nucleotide addition in nsp12 supposedly should inhibit rna replication. however, in sars-cov-2, exon of nsp14 has been shown to play a pivotal role in proofreading 17 . to counteract the efficacy of the ntp analogues, nsp14 excises the incorporated ntp analogues [18] [19] . for example, the ntp analogue ribavirin is being incorporated in the nascent rna to inhibit nucleotide addition of sars-cov rdrp. however, ribavirin is readily excised from nascent rna by nsp14, which may explain its limited efficacy in vivo 16 .remdesivir is a promising drug candidate to treat covid-19 infection [20] [21] [22] . it has been shown to be effective as compassionate-use basis to patients hospitalised with covid-19 22 , including those suffering from pneumonia 20 . subsequently, clinical trials on using remdesivir to treat covid-19 have been conducted 1 . remdesivir has shown to be a potent inhibitor of cov replication including the mers-cov, sars-cov, and circulating human covs 19, 23 . even though remdesivir is an ntp analogue incorporated by rdrp, it exerts superior antiviral activity over other ntp analogues because the rate of incorporation of remdesivir to nascent rna by nsp12 is higher than that of its cleavage by nsp14 exon 19 . recently, enormous amount of efforts has been placed in understanding the molecular basis of remdesivir's inhibitory mechanisms on rna synthesis [14] [15] [24] [25] [26] [27] . due to the high sequence similarity between sars and sars-2, the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 and nsp14-nsp10 of sars-cov serve as reliable models to study the mechanisms of rna replication of sars-cov-2. furthermore, the cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2 nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 have been recently solved [14] [15] , with the catalytic domain of nsp12 showing very high structural similarity to that of sars-cov 12, 16 . however, only one of these sars-cov polymerase structures contains the nascent and template strands, which is in the pre-translocation state with pyrophosphate ion (ppi) still bound at the active site 15 . hence, molecular mechanisms, particularly the dynamics of the nucleotide addition cycle of either ntp or ntp analogues remain largely unknown. biochemical assays have shown in mers cov 24 and recently in sars-cov-2 15, 25 that remedivir causes "delayed chain termination" in rna synthesis, wherein several rounds of nucleotide additions can still proceed after remdesivir incorporation prior to completed termination. however, the molecular mechanisms underlying this delayed termination induced by remdesivir remain largely elusive. furthermore, it is also not clear how remdesivir can evade the proofreading activity of sars-cov-2 to prevent itself from being cleaved by exon.to elucidate the mechanisms of remdesivir inhibition on rdrp and exon, we conducted an aggregation of 12.6 µs all-atom molecular dynamics (md) simulations of the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 and nsp14-nsp10 complexes in sars-cov-2. for rdrp, our md simulations show that remdesivir at the 3'-terminal can reduce the efficiency of nucleotide addition in nsp12. more interestingly, we found that remdesivir at an upstream site (i+3 site) can block translocation via interactions formed by its 1'-cyano group and thus results in delayed chain termination. for exon, we found that the relatively bulky 1'-cyano group on the ribose of remdesivir introduces steric interactions and effectively disrupts the stability of the catalytic active conformation, and thus effectively inhibit the exonuclease activity of exon. furthermore, our md simulations of three additional ntp analogues containing other base and ribose modifications (favipiravir, vidarabine and fludarabine) suggest that they are all prone to be cleaved by exon, underlining the important role of the 1'-cyano substitution in remdesivir. our simulation results are supported by an in vitro assay to examine the efficiency of ntp analogues in inhibiting sars-cov-2 live virus growth. we found that only remdesivir shows inhibitory effect, consistent with our md simulations.remdesivir can reduce the efficiency of nucleotide addition in rdrp our structural model of sars-cov-2 rdrp (nsp12-nsp7-nsp8) has been constructed based on the cryo-em structure of sars-cov rdrp (pdbid: 6nur 12 , see fig. 1a ). template and nascent rna strands have been constructed by the structural alignment of modelled sars-cov-2 rdrp to the norovirus rdrp (pdbid: 3h5y 28 , see methods and si section 1.1 for details). twenty replicas of 30-ns md simulations were performed for the rdrp in the posttranslocation state, in which the active site (i site) is occupied by adenosine triphosphate (atp) ( fig. 1a and 1c, see si section 2.2.1 for details). to validate this model (named as "wildtype-rna"), we first examined the stability of the active site by assessing the distance between the a phosphate (pa) of atp and o3' atom of the 3'-terminal nucleotide ( fig. 2a) . typically, such distance is required to be below 4 å to allow efficient catalysis to form the phosphodiester bond (e.g. 3.4 å in the structure of norovirus rdrp 28 and 3.5~4.0 å suggested by previous computational studies [29] [30] ). consistent with this distance requirement, we found that the distribution of the o3'-pa distance peaks at ~3.5 å (see the gray curve in fig. 2a) . furthermore, the base-to-base distance between atp and its base-paired template nucleotide was also measured as an estimation of base-pairing stability 31 . we found that such base-to-base distance is most populated at ~7.5 å, similar to the distance of 7.4~7.6 å as observed in structures of other viral polymerases 28, 32 (fig. 2d ). in addition, we investigated base stacking stability as another criteria for the propensity of nucleotide addition 31 . we found that the distance between the base of ntp and the base of 3'-terminal nucleotide is most populated at ~4.5 å (fig. 2g) , consistent with the distance of 4.2 å as observed in norovirus 28 and poliovirus 32 rdrps.in addition to assessing the active site stability, we further validated our structural model against three recently solved cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2 rdrp 14-15 (see fig. 3 and si section 4.2 for details). for the two apo structures, the root-mean-square-deviation (rmsd) of ca atoms was used as comparison to our model. we found that the averaged rmsds are 2.36 å (pdbid: 6m71) 14 and 2.30 å (pdbid: 7bv1 15 ), indicating that the overall architecture of our nsp12 model is similar to that of the apo cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2. for the holo structure, the rmsds of ca atoms and nucleotides between our structural model and the holo cryo-em structure (pdbid: 7bv2 15 ) were 2.12 å and 2.23 å, respectively. this further validated our wildtype-rna model. finally, we also examined the interactions between upstream rna and proteins, and found that most of the interactions (73%) observed in the holo cryo-em structure are well maintained in our md simulations (fig. s1 ).after validating our structural model, we next performed twenty 30-ns md simulations with remdesivir-tp replacing atp at the active site (i site) (see si section 2.2.2 for details). interestingly, we found that the distribution of the critical o3'-pa distance in the remdesivir-tp system is still largely below 4 å, even though it is substantially broader compared to atp ( fig. 2a) . these results suggest that the incorporation of remdesivir-tp is still allowed but with a reduced efficiency compared to atp. furthermore, no obvious negative effect on base pairing and base stacking stability is induced by remdesivir-tp at i site ( fig. 2d and 2g ). altogether, our observations suggest that remdesivir-tp can largely maintain a catalytically active conformation, and thus can be added to the 3'-end of the nascent rna chain even at a reduced efficiency. therefore, remdesivir satisfies the pre-requisite condition to act as a chaintermination inhibitor.after remdesivir is added to the rna chain and translocated to the adjacent upstream site (i+1 site), we found that remdesivir can reduce the efficiency of addition for the next nucleotide at the active site. in this case, we also performed twenty 30-ns md simulations with remdesivir at 3'-terminal (i+1 site) to examine atp incorporation at the active site (see si section 2.2.2 for details). we found that the incoming atp becomes less stable when remdesivir is at the i+1 site. in particular, the pa-o3' distance becomes larger and shifts to ~3.7 å on average (fig.  1b) . moreover, the base stacking stability is substantially weakened, with more md conformations showing larger base-to-base distance than wildtype-rna (fig. 1h ). these observations suggest that remdesivir at i+1 site can reduce the efficiency of the next ntp addition at i site.to examine if remdesivir at further upstream positions of the nascent rna strand can interfere with ntp incorporation, we performed twenty 30-ns md simulations for each of the systems with remdesivir at i+2, i+3 and i+4 sites (see si section 2.2.2 for details). the histogram of critical distances of ntp incorporation shows no obvious discrepancy from that of wildtype-rna (figs. 1c, 1f, 1i and s2). this suggests that remdesivir at i+2, i+3 or i+4 site has negligible impact on the nucleotide addition at the active site. altogether, we expect that remdesivir-tp can be incorporated into the nascent strand, and subsequently would reduce the efficiency of addition of the next incoming ntp. however, we expect that this reduction may not be sufficient to completely abolish the rna synthesis, suggesting that other mechanisms may exist for remdesivir to inhibit rdrp function.remdesivir has been proposed as a delayed chain terminator for the rdrps of respiratory syncytial virus 33 , nipah virus 34 , and mers-cov 24 . recent biochemical experiments for sars-cov-2 rdrp also demonstrated delayed chain termination by remdesivir-tp at physiological concentrations 15, 25 , although nucleotide addition may be terminated earlier when excess amount of remdesivir-tp is present 15 . for mers-cov 24 and sars-cov-2 15, 25 rna replication, remdesivir induced delayed chain termination wherein the addition efficiency of the first few nucleotides is maintained. however, nucleotide addition is abruptly abolished at a specific upstream site with a 3-nucleotide delay. the molecular mechanisms underlining this delayed chain termination remain largely elusive.to elucidate mechanisms of the delayed termination, we performed md simulations for rdrp with remdesivir added to the nascent rna strand and at different sites (i to i+4 site) during the translocation process. to obtain statistically meaningful results, we performed twenty 30-ns md simulations for each of these systems (see si section 2.2.2 for details). to investigate the propensity of translocation, we first inspect how remdesivir may impact stability of the rdrp complex by examining probability of hydrogen bonds formed between remdesivir and its template uracil. as shown in fig. 4a and fig. s3 , the hydrogen bonds of remdesivir:u are nearly intact when remdesivir is at i, i+1, and i+2 sites in both pre-(pre-t) and posttranslocation (post-t) states, suggesting that translocation of remdesivir is allowed in these systems. it is worth mentioning that interactions between remdesivir (at i site) and surrounding residues in our model are consistent with those in the recently solved sars-cov-2 rdrp holo structure 15 (fig. s4 ). our observations are also consistent with a recent structural modelling study, which suggests that remdesivir at the active site (i site) cannot hinder translocation 26 .in sharp contrast, we found that remdesivir at i+3 site greatly weakens the hydrogen bond probability of base pairing with its template uracil (fig. 4a ). further investigations show that the presence of the highly polar 1'-cyano group on remdesivir will exert strong electrostatic attractions (~16.1 kj/mol) with the salt bridge formed by lys593 and asp865 of rdrp (fig.  4b ). these electrostatic attractions will further pull remdesivir away from its canonical conformation and cause the destabilization of its base pairing (fig. 4b) . indeed, the hydrogen bonds for the base pairing of remdesivir:u are subsequently disrupted, rendering the corresponding rdrp complex unstable (fig. 4a) . recently solved cryo-em structure 15 also shows that lys593 (d=4.6 å) and asp865 (d=4.3 å) are in spatial proximity with 1'-cyano group when remdesivir was modelled at i+3 site. for translocation of rna polymerases, a post-t state with the empty active site often has comparable stability with its corresponding pre-t state, and subsequent binding of ntp can greatly stabilize post-t state and favor forward translocation 35 . we thus anticipate that translocation of remdesivir into i+3 site (post-t) will still be allowed due to the stabilization of ntp binding, but after ntp incorporation, the unstable complex with remdesivir at i+3 site may hinder the rna extension. next, we investigate if this instability induced by remdesivir at i+3 site can affect the dynamics of subsequent translocation to i+4 site by generating a translocation pathway using the climber algorithm [35] [36] (see methods and si section 3 for details). interestingly, we found that the 1'cyano group need to first move closer to the negatively charged asp865 before it translocates away to i+4 site, while its distance with lys593 is noticeably larger than that with asp865 during translocation (fig. 4c ). as the electron-withdrawing 1'-cyano moiety exhibits d --anion repulsion with asp865, the intermediate conformation with reduced distance to asp865 will experience unfavorable repulsions (~10.5 kj/mol raised energy, see fig. 4d ), and we expect that this may hinder forward translocation (fig. 4c) . altogether, the above observations suggest a delayed termination of three nucleotides as observed in sars-cov-2 25 and mers-cov 24 .gordon et al. 25 proposed an alternative explanation where the steric clash between ser861 and remdesivir would inhibit translocation from i+3 site to i+4 site. in our translocation simulation, we found that the 1'-cyano group of remdesivir constantly approaches ser861 with their distance monotonically decreased from 7 å to around 3 å (fig. 4c) . however, we did not observe strong steric clashes between ser861 and remdesivir. nevertheless, due to its spatial proximity, we anticipate that ser861 may still play an auxiliary role to the inhibition of translocation. based on homology modelling, shannon et al. 26 proposed another mechanism where translocation is inhibited due to the steric clash between arg858 and remdesivir's ribose at i+4 site. however, our md simulations with remdesivir at i+4 site show a large distance (~11.4 å) between arg858 and 1'-cyano group of remdesivir (fig. s5a) . consistent with our simulations, a large separation of 9.5 å between arg858 and the 1'-cyano group of remdesivir was also observed when we modelled remdesivir at i+4 site using the recent cryo-em structure (pdbid: 7bv2 15 , see fig. s5b ). to obtain the translocation pathway, we adopted the climber method [35] [36] , in which the rdrp complex is progressively driven from pre-t to post-t state by external energy. to rigorously study dynamics of large-scale conformational changes during translocation, we need to apply more advanced methods such as markov state model 35, 37-42 , which is beyond the scope of our current study. finally, comparison of the sequences between sars-cov-2 and other coronaviruses indicates that the asp865 --lys593 + salt bridge is conserved except that lys was replaced by another positively charged arg in two human covs (fig. s6) , implying that our proposed mechanism may be employed by other cov rdrp.one main challenge for drug design targeting sars-cov-2 rdrp is due to the existence of an exon domain in nsp14, which binds to nsp12 and performs proofreading function that can remove incorporated ntp analogues and counteract the efficacy of the inhibitory compounds. therefore, an additional criterion to be an effective inhibitor sars-cov-2 viral replication is the ability to escape from the cleavage by exon. next, we examine how efficient remdesivir is being cleaved by exon.we built the structural model for nsp14 bound with its activator nsp10 based on the crystal structure of nsp14-nsp10 of sars-cov (pdbid: 5c8s 43 ). as previous work suggests that three nucleotide base pairs are melted in the active site of exon 44 , we modelled a singlestranded rna containing three nucleotides based on structural alignment to dna polymerase i klenow fragment 44 and dna polymerase iii e subunit 45 (see method and si section 1.2 for details). twenty 30-ns md simulations were performed for the wildtype-rna, in which the 3'-terminal is occupied by adenine (see si section 2.3.1 for details). to assess the stability of cleavage site, we examined the distance between mga and the o3' atom of the second last nucleotide at the 3'-terminal as it is essential for cleavage [46] [47] [48] (fig 5a) . this distance is well maintained in most of the simulations (fig. s7 ), and the histogram shows only one peak in the region of 2.0~2.5 å (fig. 5a ) suitable for cleavage [46] [47] [48] . mga-mgb distance is also critical for cleavage [46] [47] [48] [49] and our calculations show a sharp peak at ~ 3.6 å (fig. 5b) , a distance permissible for cleavage [46] [47] [48] [49] . by sharp contrast, md simulations with remdesivir at 3'-terminal show destabilization of cleavage site in exon, with the coordination between mga and o3' atoms more frequently disrupted (fig. s8 ). consistently, a second peak appears at ~3.7å in the distribution of o3'-mga distance, indicating that remdesivir causes an increase in the population of cleavage-inhibited configurations (fig. 5a) . this increase was also observed in the histogram of mga-mgb distance with a second peak clearly appearing at ~4.9 å (fig. 5b) . further examination of the base stepping twisting angle (fig. s9) shows that the base of remdesivir twists more significantly than that of adenine (fig. 5c) , which also suggests that remdesivir is experiencing unfavorable interactions at the 3'-terminal. all these observations indicate that remdesivir is not stable in the cleavage site and hence not prone to be cleaved.structural analysis based on md conformations with remdesivir at the 3'-terminal indicates that the bulky 1'-cyano group plays a key role in protecting remdesivir from exon cleavage. the cleavage site is on the surface of nsp14 protein and the base of nucleotides are exposed to the solvent. in contrast, the ribose ring is more buried within the protein environment, thus it is more susceptible to any instability incurring at the cleavage site. the wildtype nucleotide does not have a bulky group attached at the ribose ring. hence, no specific steric effect is observed in the cleavage site as shown by a representative conformation of wildtype-rna (fig.  5e) . conversely, the 1'-cyano group of remdesivir causes steric clash with the side chain of protein residue asn104. this steric repulsion separates asn104 and remdesivir apart from each other, as consolidated by the larger distance between the base of asn104 and nitrogen atom in the amide group of asn104 (fig. 5d ). this steric interaction is clearly demonstrated in representative conformations as shown in fig. 5f . on one hand, if remdesivir adopts a similar conformation as wildtype-rna at 3'-terminal, the cyano group will push down the side chain of asn104. on the other hand, if the side chain of asn104 maintains its configuration as in the wildtype-rna, the steric interaction will push the ribose along with the base of remdesivir rotating away (fig. 5f ). therefore, we attribute the destabilization of remdesivir at cleavage site to the steric repulsion between 1'-cyano group of remdesivir and asn104. this observation from md simulations is consistent with a recent study based on static structural model of nsp14 of sars-cov-2, which also proposes that the 1'-cyano group has steric clash with the cleavage site 26 . this destabilization would reduce the possibility of remdesivir to be excised by exon, enabling remdesivir to be an effective inhibitor for sars-cov-2.to further understand important chemical features of remdesivir allowing it to inhibit nucleotide addition and cleavage in the viral replication of sars-cov-2, we explored the inhibitory effects of three additional ntp analogues containing various chemical structure features: favipiravir, vidarabine and fludarabine. all these three compounds are fda approved drugs and display the same hydrogen bonding pattern as the corresponding natural adenine nucleotide (fig. 6a) . however, they are structurally different from adenine in either the base (favipiravir) or the ribose (vidarabine). like remdesivir, fludarabine has modifications in both the base and ribose. therefore, examination of these ntp analogues can provide insights on the types of modifications that may benefit inhibitor design.we first performed md simulations by placing the triphosphate form of the ntp analogue in the active site (i site) (see si section 2.2.2 for details) to evaluate if these ntp analogues could satisfy the criteria of being incorporated into the nascent strand in rdrp as potential chain terminators. favipiravir-tp and vidarabine-tp were shown to possess similar mean pa-o3' distance (~4.0 å) compared with remdesivir (fig. 6b ). this distance is significantly raised to ~5.0 å for fludarabine-tp, implicating the difficulty of fludarabine to be incorporated into the nascent rna strand. further inspection of the md conformations revealed that the instability of fludarabine-tp in the active site could be attributed to the fluoro-substitution on the base. fluorine atom is electronegative, and causes a d --drepulsion with the oxygen atom in the base of the template uracil (fig. s10) , thus destabilizing its configuration at the active site. the baseto-base distance between the ntp analogue and the template nucleotide in the active site only marginally increased by < 0.25 å for all the ntp analogues compared to wildtype-rna (fig.  s11a) . similarly, the mean base stacking distances for the ntp analogues are equal to or even shorter than that for atp (fig. s11c) . these observations suggest that all ntp analogues except fludarabine-tp satisfy the structural feature criteria to be incorporated into the nascent strand.we next examined if these ntp analogues can inhibit nucleotide addition by placing them at 3'-terminal (i+1 site) with atp in the active site (twenty 30-ns md simulations were performed for each of these systems, see si section 2.2.2 for details). for favipiravir, we found that the averaged o3'-pa distance is ~3.6 å when favipiravir is at i+1 site, similar to that when remdesivir is at i+1 site (fig. 6c) , demonstrating favipiravir's weak capability to reduce the efficiency for the next ntp incorporation. vidarabine and fludarabine were shown to have even shorter distance (~3.3 å) than wildtype-rna, due to an extra hydrogen bond formed between their 2'-hydroxyl group of the ntp analogue and 4'-oxygen of ntp (hydrogen bond probability of 89% and 94% for vidarabine and fludarabine, respectively). base-to-base distance between ntp and the template nucleotides are not perturbed by the presence of the ntp analogue at i+1 site (fig. s11b) . favipiravir also shows similar base stacking distance as wildtype-rna, while this distance is slightly increased by around 0.3~0.4 å for vidarabine and fludarabine (fig. s11d ). in addition, as none of these three ntp analogues contains a bulky substitution group on the ribose like 1'-cyano on remdesivir (fig. 6a) , we anticipate that it will be unlikely for them to inhibit rna synthesis via a delayed termination mechanism. altogether, we expect that favipiravir can reduce ntp incorporation to a similar extent as remdesivir, while vidarabine and fludarabine at i+1 do not reduce ntp incorporation due to the shortening of the o3'-pa distance. therefore, based on the comprehensive analysis of three ntp analogues' performance in rdrp, favipiravir is the most possible candidate.next, we examined if these ntp analogues could inhibit proofreading of exon by placing them at the 3'-terminal of the nascent rna strand (see si section 2.3.2 for details). for all three ntp analogues, the o3'-mga and mga-mgb distances were comparable to that when adenine is at the 3'-terminal, implicating that they are more prone to be excised by exon (figs. 6d and s12a). furthermore, these three ntp analogues adopt similar configuration as adenine in the cleavage site (fig. s13) and do not experience any steric clashes with asn104 (fig. 6e) . we anticipate that the stability of the three compounds at the cleavage site can be attributed to the lack of bulky substitutions at 1'-ribose. this is consistent with our proposal that the bulky 1'-cyano group causes steric effect, contributing to the instability of the cleavage site. altogether, our results suggest that these three ntp analogues are more prone to be excised than remdesivir, implicating that they are not effective to inhibit rna replication of sars-cov-2.to consolidate the above-mentioned simulation results, we performed in vitro experiments in vero e6 cells and show that ntp analogues favipiravir, vidarabine and fludarabine indeed fail to inhibit sars-cov-2 replication (fig. 6f ). in particular, we performed in vitro tissue culture assays using live sars-cov-2 virus to examine the antiviral effect of remdesivir, favipiravir, vidarabine, and fludarabine against sars-cov-2 virus. among the four ntp analogues tested, only remdesivir was found to inhibit sars-cov-2 replication in vero e6 cells with ec50 under 100 µm (fig. 6f ). this is consistent with our previous work 50 , which determined the ec50 of vidarabine to be 23.15 µm and 26.90 µm using virus titer and real-time pcr, respectively. other ntp analogues (vidarabine, fludarabine and favipiravir) did not inhibit viral replication under 100 µm (fig. 6f) . however, it is worthy to note that ntp analogues require conversions into their triphosphate forms by host nucleoside kinases, whose activity may differ among cell types. hence, further evaluation of the effect of these ntp analogues in primary cells such as primary human airway epithelial cells that more clinically relevant is needed.considering the inhibition effect of all three ntp analogues in rdrp and exon, we found that none of them exhibits superior inhibitory activity than remdesivir. our work elucidates the molecular mechanism for their lack of inhibitory effects on rna synthesis. fludarabine has the lowest tendency to be incorporated into the nascent strand, while vidarabine could not reduce the efficiency of incoming ntp incorporation in sars-cov-2 rdrp. favipiravir demonstrates similar performance as remdesivir in rdrp; however, favipiravir is highly likely to be cleaved in exon. hence, only remdesivir can inhibit rna synthesis in rdrp and simultaneously avoid its excision by the exon of sars-cov-2 rdrp.in this study, we have elucidated the important role of 1'-cyano group on the ribose in remdesivir's inhibition effect targeted rna replication (fig. 7) . extensive md simulations were performed based on the structural model of rdrp and exon of sars-cov-2. remdesivir at i+1 site can reduce nucleotide addition at the active site but cannot fully inhibit nucleotide addition. instead, remdesivir mainly inhibits nucleotide addition via a delayed chain terminating mechanism, where the growing rna chain will be terminated once a few nucleotides are added after remdesivir incorporation. we propose a model where the polar 1'cyano group of remdesivir at the upstream i+3 site will cause instability of the rdrp complex, because the salt bridge (asp865 --lys593 + ) will pull remdesivir away from its canonical conformation to break its base pairing. furthermore, the dynamic transition of translocation from i+3 site to i+4 site will be further hindered due to unfavorable anion-drepulsion between asp865 and the 1'-cyano group of remdesivir. as a result, remdesivir leads to a delayed termination of three nucleotides. in addition, remdesivir was found to be capable of inhibiting the proofreading function of exon. the 1'-cyano group of remdesivir exhibits steric clash with a nearby residue asn104, which destabilizes remdesivir at the active site, rendering it resistant to exon cleavage. further investigation using three other ntp analogues showed different inhibiting effects on nucleotide addition in rdrp, albeit all of them are more prone to be cleaved than remdesivir. comparison among the structural modifications of remdesivir with other three ntp analogues suggests that the modification on the ribose, possibility by using a bulky group substitution may be a better strategy than on the base to inhibit the rna synthesis of sars-cov-2. our work provides mechanistic insights at atomistic details on how remdesivir can effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 rna synthesis. we also revealed that the chemical modification at the ribose of remdesivir that carries the dual inhibitory function to terminate both nucleotide addition and proofreading could be a promising general strategy for designing prospective nucleoside-analog inhibitors to treat covid-19.the cryo-em structure of nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex (pdbid: 6nur) 12 and the norovirus holo-rdrp (pdbid: 3h5y 28 ) were used as the structural basis to construct the ncov rdrp containing dsrna strands with atp bound at the active site (see si section 1.1 for details). the protonation states of histidines were predicted using propka3.0 module 51 in the pdbpqr2.2.1 52 package, followed by manual investigation to ensure that the coordination with the zinc ion can be formed. the whole complex was placed in a dodecahedron box with the box edges at least 12å away from the complex surface. the box was filled with tip3p water molecules 53 , and enough counter ions were added to make the whole system neutral.the crystal structure of nsp10-nsp14 complex of sars-cov (pdbid: 5c8s 43 ) serves as the structural basis to construct the nsp10-nsp14 of sars-cov-2 (see si section 1.2 for details). missing residues in nsp14 were modelled by modeller9.21 54 water in a dodecahedron box, the edge of which was at least 12 å away from the complex surface. sufficient counter ions were added to neutralize the system.we used the amber99sb-ildn force field 55 to simulate protein and nucleotides. the force field parameters for ntp analogues were derived based on the existing amber99sb-ildn force field parameters or general amber force field [56] [57] (see si section 2.1 for details). partial charges of ntp analogues were generated following the restricted electrostatic potential scheme [58] [59] (see si for details). for atp or ntp analogues in the triphosphate form, parameters for the triphosphate tail were taken from those developed by meagher et al. 60 . the system was gradually relaxed before the production simulation under nvt ensemble (t=300 k). v-rescale thermostat 61 was applied with the coupling time constant of 0.1 ps. the long-range electrostatic interactions beyond the cut-off at 12 å were treated with the particle-mesh ewald method. 62 lennard-jones interactions were smoothly switched off from 10 å to 12 å. the neighbor list was updated every 10 steps. an integration time step of 2.0 fs was used and the lincs algorithm 63 was applied to constrain all the bonds. we saved the snapshots every 20 ps. all simulations were performed with gromacs 5.0 64 . the equilibrated system containing wildtype rna serves as the structural basis for modelling ntp analogue at the corresponding site to investigate their inhibitory effects. the details of md simulations are in si section 2.2 and 2.3.translocation pathway of remdesivir from i+3 to i+4 site we used climber algorithm [35] [36] to generate a pathway for the translocation of remdesivir from i+3 to i+4 site (see si section 3 for details). the pre-t and post-t conformations were constructed based on the pre-t model with remdesivir at i+3 site and post-t model with remdesivir at i+4 site, respectively. we performed a 500-step climber simulation, where double stranded rna was gradually driven from the pre-t state to the post-t state by external energy.in vitro assays with live sars-cov-2 virus for the determination of ec50 of ntp analogues sars-cov-2 virus, named betacov/hong kong/vm20001061/2020, was isolated from the nasopharynx aspirate and throat swab of a confirmed covid-19 patient in hong kong. stock virus (107.25 tcid50/ml) was prepared after 3 passages in using vero e6 cells (atcc: crl-1586) in infection media (dmem supplemented with 4.5 g/l d-glucose, 100 mg/l sodium pyruvate, 2% fbs, 100,000 u/l penicillin-streptomycin, and 25 mm hepes). compounds (medchemexpress) and the stocks were prepared with dmso. to evaluate the effect of compounds in vitro, vero e6 cells were pre-treated with compounds diluted in infection media for 1 h prior to inoculation by sars-cov-2 virus at multiplicity of infection at 0.02. antiviral compounds were present with the virus inoculum during the 2-h incubation period, after which the inoculum was removed. then, vero e6 cells were overlaid with infection media containing the respective diluted compounds. after 48 h incubation at 37 °c, supernatants were collected to quantify viral loads by tcid50 assay or quantitative real-time rt-pcr (taqman™ fast virus 1-step master mix, thermo scientific) based on a previous protocol 65 . logistic regression was used to fit the dose-response curves to determine the 50% effective concentrations (ec50) of the compounds that inhibit live viral replication. cytotoxicty of selected compounds was evaluated in vero e6 cells using the celltiter-glo luminescent cell viability assay (promega). (b) comparison between our model (grey) and apo cryo-em structure (pdbid: 7bv1, in green). (c) comparison between our model (grey) and holo cryo-em structure (pdbid: 7bv2, in orange). in the right panel, the template strand (in cyan) and nascent strand (in red) of our model are compared to those in the cryo-em structure. see si section 4.2 for calculation details. the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) epidemic spread within china, and secondarily also outside china, with a basic reproductive number estimated to be from 2·2 1 to 3·3 2 and a mortality rate of around 2·3%. 3 in the eu (and european economic area) and the uk, as of march 6, 2020, 5544 cases have been reported (423 in france), including 159 deaths (seven in france). 4 so far, several studies have described demographic, clinical, and biological characteristics of patients with covid-19, and radiological or pathological findings associated with covid-19. more specifically, these studies have reported the most common symp toms, incubation periods, biological abnormalities, radio graphic abnormalities, ct abnormalities, and treatment data. in addition, they have described varying degrees of illness and their severity: mild, severe, or critical. they have reported proportion of complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, or case fatality rates, and variables associated with these complications and death. 1, [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] in this article, through a detailed and comprehensive sampling strategy, we report the clinical and biological features of the first five cases of confirmed covid-19 in europe, which occurred in france, and their dynamics in parallel with changes in their viral load, based on severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) rna detection.this case series is part of an overall french clinical cohort assessing patients with covid-19 (nct04262921). all patients at french hospitals who were diagnosed with covid-19 according to the french national health agency criteria were enrolled in this cohort from jan 24 to jan 29, 2020. 5 together with the french national regulatory authorities and french ministry of health, on jan 25, 2020, we determined the indication criteria for compassionate use of an investigational antiviral treatment (remdesivir) as signs of severe illness at diagnosis or secondary clinical aggravation (respiratory symptoms or general signs) based on who criteria for severe pneumonia caused by sars-cov-2 10 (appendix p 2). on the basis of expert opinion and available data in january, 2020, we considered that remdesivir might be the best potential drug for the treatment of covid-19, although restricted to patients with severe disease (intravenous route, a loading dose of 200 mg, then maintenance daily dose of 100 mg for a total duration of 10 days). criteria for discharge with total recovery were from european centre for disease prevention and control guidelines: asymptomatic patients with two rt-pcr negative naso pharyngeal samples at least 48 h apart. 11 the five patients in this case series, at different stages of infection, include two patients with a mild disease at admission and a secondary worsening that resulted in their admission to an intensive care unit (icu), one initially severely ill patient directly admitted to an icu for an acute respiratory failure, and two patients with a mild disease diagnosed very early after infection.we used the open-access clinical characterization protocol for severe emerging infections of the international severe acute respiratory and emerging infection consortium, supported by who, 12 which has been updated in response to covid-19. this study was approved by the french ethics committee, and written informed consent was obtained from each patient involved or their next of kin.evidence before this study we searched pubmed central for all studies or reports presenting clinical characteristics of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), using the terms "covid-19" and "clinical" or "2019-ncov" and "clinical" from database inception to feb 24, 2020 . no language restrictions were applied. our search returned 134 publications. these papers described demographic, clinical, and biological characteristics of patients with covid-19, and radiological or pathological findings associated with, covid-19. in particular, they reported most common symptoms, incubation periods, biological abnormalities, radiographic abnormalities, ct abnormalities, and treatment data. they also described varying degrees of illness and their severity: mild, severe, or critical. they reported proportion of complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, or case fatality rates and variables associated with these complications and death. in addition, these studies reported data on virus shedding. they studied in particular dynamics of the viral load in sputum, urine, throat swab, and stool samples in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. they also evaluated virus shedding in patients who had recovered.this study reports clinical data from the first patients diagnosed with covid-19 in europe. the study also brings to the field some new and original findings by including patients at different stages of infection (ie, at very early stages or later in the course of the disease) and through a detailed and comprehensive sampling strategy; patients enrolled early being contacts of patients enrolled later during the course of the disease. to our knowledge, the association between clinical evolution and the virological dynamic has not been reported in the past. it allowed us to describe three patterns: paucisymptomatic patients diagnosed very quickly over their disease course, with an early high nasopharyngeal shedding of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) within the first 24 h of the illness onset (5·2 and 7·4 log 10 copies per 1000 cells, respectively); patients with a two-step disease progression, with a secondary worsening around 10 days after disease onset despite a decreasing viral load in nasopharyngeal samples; and a patient with a rapid evolution towards multiple organ failure and a persistent high viral load in lower and upper respiratory tract with systemic virus dissemination and virus detection in plasma (ie, an old patient).paucisymptomatic patients, because of high viral loads in upper respiratory tract samples, might potentially transmit the disease during the very first days of symptoms despite having a mild presentation of the disease. the implication is that covid-19 control measures should combine immediate isolation of cases after symptom onset together with a rapid screening and monitoring of the contacts of infected patients. in patients with severe disease, two patterns were identified. the first pattern was a biphasic evolution starting with a mild presentation followed by a secondary respiratory worsening despite a decreasing viral load in the nasopharyngeal samples, suggesting that the lung damage at this phase is more related to immunopathological lesions. the second pattern, observed in the most severely ill patient who died, was a persistent and high viral excretion in the upper respiratory tract samples combined with a positive virus detection in other body fluids including blood. these findings will contribute to better understanding of the natural history of the disease and in tailoring treatment strategies.see online for appendixclinical samples for sars-cov-2 diagnostic testing were obtained according to who guidelines. 13 for each patient, a sampling strategy was implemented in which samples were obtained once daily for 3 days from hospital admis sion, and subsequently once every 2 or 3 days until patient discharge or death. upper and lower (when possible) respiratory tract samples, and also blood, urine, and stool samples (or rectal swabs, if appropriate) were obtained. upper respiratory samples were either nasopharyngeal aspirates or nasopharyngeal swabs (sigma virocult, medical wire instrument, corsham, uk), stool samples were either faecal swabs or stools, and blood samples were edta tube adapted for rt-pcr. all samples were refrigerated and shipped to the laboratories of the national reference center for respiratory viruses (the institut pasteur, paris, and hospices civils de lyon, lyon, france), where procedures for rna extraction, real-time rt-pcr (rtrt-pcr), and virus isolation and titration were undertaken. rna extraction was done with the extraction nucleospin dx virus kit (macherey nagel, düren, germany) or by the automated nuclisens easymag (biomérieux, marcyl'étoile, france), using the manufacturers' instructions. rdrp-ip1 and rdrp quantitative rtrt-pcr (appendix p 4) was used for detection of sars-cov-2. the rdrp rt-pcr corresponds to the charité protocol. 14 when a sample (respiratory samples, plasma, or stool) was positive with rdrp-ip1, quantification of the number of rna copies was done according to a scale ranging from 10³ to 10⁶ copies per μl. the viral load in stools was calculated as previously described 15 and expressed in number of rna copies per g of stool. the quality of nasopharyngeal swabs was checked using the cell control r-gene kit (biomérieux). this kit is provided with quantified plasmid for cellular quantification. all viral loads for respiratory samples were calculated with the same method as for stools 15 and normalised according to the cellular quantification as the number of rna copies per 1000 cells. all positive plasma samples were quantified the funder of this study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, and writing of the report. the corresponding author had full access to study data and final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.the main clinical and biological characteristics of the five patients at hospital admission are presented in table 1. all patients but patient 3 were diagnosed with covid-19 on the day of their hospital admission. patient 3 was diagnosed 3 days after because he did not fulfil the national health agency case definition at admission (no history of travel to or residence in the city of wuhan). on feb 19, 2020, all patients except patient 3 had fully recovered and were discharged. patient 3 died on feb 14, 2020. schematic presentation of major events for each case are presented in figure 1. clinical and biological characteristics day by day for each case are presented in the appendix (pp 7-11).patients 1 and 2 had mild disease at admission and secondarily severe disease, following the definition of the chinese center for disease control and prevention. 9 patient 1 was a 31-year-old chinese male tourist from wuhan who was admitted to bichat-claude bernard university hospital (paris, france). he was diagnosed with covid-19 on jan 24, 2020 (illness day 6), 5 days after his arrival in paris with his wife (patient 4). he visited a hospital in wuhan on jan 16 for a gout episode. he had influenza-like symptoms (table 1) from jan 19 (illness day 1), and was admitted to hospital on the day of the diagnosis with mild lymphopenia, thrombopenia, and no abnormalities on the chest x-ray. on illness day 10, he was transferred to an icu because of worsening of oxygen saturation (po 2 =58 mm hg; flow nasal cannula 4 l/min), and bilateral lung abnormalities including ground-glass opacities, reticulo-nodular syndrome, and alveolar opacities on chest ct scan (appendix p 6). a loading dose of remdesivir was administered on jan 29 (illness day 11), followed by maintenance treatment. on jan 31, he was discharged back to the infectious diseases ward. on illness day 15, remdesivir treatment was discontinued because of alanine aminotransferase elevation (levels three times higher than the upper limit of normal) and a maculopapular rash, without any anaphylaxis, eosinophilia, or systemic symptoms. the patient was screened for hepatitis b and c, cytomegalovirus, epstein-barr virus, and herpes simplex virus, and no active infection was detected. skin and liver abnor malities decreased within 3 days. the patient became asymptomatic the following day. he was discharged on feb 12.patient 2 was a 48-year old man of chinese origin, based in france. he travelled for business to china and flew back from shanghai to france on jan 22, 2020. he did not report any specific exposures within the 14 days before symptom onset except a 3-day stay at wuhan. arterial hypertension was his only underlying disease. influenza-like symptoms started on jan 16, and he was diagnosed on jan 24 (illness day 9) at pellegrin university hospital and admitted to this hospital. on illness day 11, he was transferred to an icu with fever of more than 38·5°c and skin mottling suggesting sepsis. on jan 29, a ct scan showed bilateral lung abnormalities including ground-glass opacities, reticulo-nodular syndrome, and scarce alveolar opacities. in the icu, a loading dose of remdesivir was administered on jan 30 (illness day 15), followed by maintenance treatment until feb 8. after full recovery, he was discharged on feb 14.patient 3 had a rapidly progressive disease classified as critical at diagnosis. patient 3 was an 80-year-old chinese male tourist from yichang (hubei province, china) and was diagnosed with covid-19 on jan 28, 2020 (illness day 7), 11 days after his arrival in europe with his however, airborne and contact precautions were observed during his hospital stay before covid-19 diagnosis. on jan 26, an acute respiratory failure triggered his icu admission to bichat-claude bernard university hospital. he subsequently developed multiple organ failure with acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute kidney injury, liver failure, and sepsis-like shock. after the covid-19 diagnosis was confirmed on jan 28, he was transferred to the referent icu at bichat-claude bernard hospital in paris, where broad-spectrum antibacterials were started for a possible superinfection. remdesivir was started with a loading dose. as two pathogens were identified, a susceptible acinetobacter baumannii (multiplex pcr, confirmed by tracheal aspirates culture) and an aspergillus flavus (tracheal aspirates culture), the anti-infective treatment was adapted. we treated a baumanii with meropenem, tigecycline, and colimycin followed by meropenem and levofloxacin. we initially treated a flavus with voriconazole but switched to isavuconazole because voriconazole and remdesivir both contain sulphobutyletherβ-cyclodextrin, and the safety of this association has not been evaluated yet. remdesivir was discon tinued on jan 30 because the patient needed renal replacement therapy. ct scan on jan 31 showed a bilateral pleuropneumopathy including pleural effusion, alveolar condensations, ground-glass opacities, and pulmonary cysts. on feb 5, because of the severity of the disease and persistence of viral detection, and as the risk-benefit assessment was considered favourable, remdesivir was reinitiated. multiple organ failure persisted despite appropriate treatment against a baumannii and a flavus and no other superinfection was identified. the patient died on feb 14 (illness day 24).patients 4 and 5 were admitted to hospital early after the onset of the symptoms, and were classified as having mild disease. 9 patient 4 (patient 1's wife), a 30-year-old chinese woman, was diagnosed with covid-19 on jan 24, 2020, at bichat-claude bernard university hospital (illness day 2), 5 days after her arrival in paris. she had spent those days with patient 1. she had moderate influenza-like symptoms from jan 23 (illness day 1), with no abnormalities on the chest x-ray. after some days of persistent and incapacitating cough, her condition improved without any specific treatment. she became asymptomatic on feb 2 (illness day 11) and was discharged on feb 12.patient 5 (patients 3's daughter), a 46-year-old chinese woman, was diagnosed with covid-19 on jan 29, 2020 (illness day 2). she had stayed with patient 3 since their travel from china. she had mild symptoms, with sore throat and dry cough from jan 28 (illness day 1), and a normal chest x-ray. her cough, which was initially mild, increased transiently over time; she was asymptomatic from feb 4 (illness day 8) without any specific treatment, and was discharged on feb 17. patients 4 and 5 had nasopharyngeal samples collected within the first 24 h of illness onset, allowing an early diagnosis of covid-19. these early specimens had a high viral load, enabling whole-genome virus sequencing and virus isolation (table 2). the maximal normalised viral load obtained in their respiratory specimens were at 5·2 log 10 copies per 1000 cells for patient 4 and 7·4 log 10 copies per 1000 cells for patient 5 (based on the rdrp quantitative rtrt-pcr). this viral load in respiratory samples decreased over time (figure 2). sars-cov-2 detection by rt-pcr was negative on illness day 12 for patient 4 and on illness day 16 for patient 5 (figure 2). these patients also had a positive detection of sars-cov-2 in stools, with viral load as high as 6·8 log 10 copies per g of stool for patient 4 and 8·1 log 10 copies per g of stool for patient 5. however, the virus was not detected in the serum or the urine samples. patient 1 had nasopharyngeal samples collected at illness day 6 and patient 2 on day 9, which were positive by rtrt-pcr, with a sars-cov-2 viral load of 7·1 log 10 copies per 1000 cells, and detected but not quantifiable viral load, respectively. the whole-genome virus sequence was obtained by direct sequencing for patient 1 only; virus isolation was unsuccessful in both cases. the secondary evolution to severe disease in these two patients (days 10 and 11) was not correlated to any viral load increase (figure 2). both received intravenous remdesivir when the viral load had already decreased below the detection threshold. during the whole course of the disease of these two patients, sars-cov-2 detection by rt-pcr was negative in stools, serum, and urine. at illness day 6, patient 3 (whose disease was classified as critical) was positive by rt-pcr in both a nasopharyngeal sample and bronchoalveolar lavage, with cycle threshold values for the e gene target (charité protocol 14 ) of 30·3 and 27·4, and similar cycle threshold values for the house-keeping gene gapdh of 25·7 and 24·7, respectively (table 2). the sars-cov-2 titres in the nasopharynx were stable (from 6·7 to 4·4 log 10 copies per 1000 cells) over time, although with a trend towards decrease after the first intravenous remdesivir dose, and thereafter when remdesivir was reinitiated ( figure 2) . this patient had a rnaaemia on illness day 8 and subsequently, with a low viral load (detected but below the quantification limit). during the course of the disease, he developed a pleural exudative effusion, with sars-cov-2 detection positive in the pleural fluid and negative bacterial cultures. figure 3 illustrates the kinetics of the viral load in nasopharyngeal samples of all patients after disease onset. the viral load decreased over time and became negative between illness day 9 and 14 in four patients (patients 1, 2, 4, and 5). in the most severely ill patient (patient 3), nasopharyngeal virus detection persisted until death.when available, the sequence analysis of the virus of these patients showed that patients 1 and 4 compared with patient 5 correspond to two distinct events of importation. for patients 1 and 4, the virus was clustering with viruses from cases in wuhan, shenzhen (china), california (usa), australia, and taiwan, whereas for patient 5 the virus was clustering with those from chongqing (china) and singapore (the genetic epidemiology of sars-cov-2 is available online). furthermore, the very high degree of identity of the sequences from patients 1 and 4 supports the epidemiological link between these cases and the likelihood of transmission.in this case series of five patients with covid-19, we illustrated three different clinical and biological types of evolution: first, mild cases through two paucisymptomatic patients aged younger than 50 years who were diagnosed early, with high viral load in nasopharyngeal samples, suggesting a significant shedding of sars-cov-2, reflected by virus detection by rt-pcr; second, two young patients presenting with mild symptoms at admission and experiencing a secondary progression to pneumonia and severe disease by days 10-11; and third, an older patient with a rapid evolution towards critical disease with multiple organ failure and a long and sustained persistence of sars-cov-2 nasopharyngeal detection associated with viral rna detection in multiple sites, including blood.among the five cases investigated here, the two patients with mild disease were diagnosed at an early stage of the disease because they had a contact with a confirmed case. high viral loads in upper respiratory tract samples are suggestive of potentially high risk of transmissibility during the very first days of symptoms. this finding is in line with data reported by zou and colleagues, who analysed viral load in the upper respiratory tract in relation to day of onset of symptoms in 17 symptomatic patients in whom higher viral loads were detected soon after symptom onset. 16 this observation suggests that the virus shedding pattern of patients infected with sars-cov-2 is different from that seen with sars-cov, in which the virus load was very low at disease onset. [17] [18] [19] these findings might affect the implementation of infection control measures. the implication is that covid-19 control measures should combine immediate isolation of patients with the disease together with a blue lines represent the viral load in nasopharyngeal swab normalised using cell quantification. all positive samples below the quantification limit were represented on the quantification limit line. for readability, all negative results were represented on the x-axis, which correspond to our detection limit. / indicates not done, + indicates a positive result, and -indicates a negative result.nq=not quantifiable. *titre in log of copies per g of stools. for more on sars-cov-2 genetic epidemiology see https://nextstrain.org/ncov rapid screening and monitoring of the contacts of these patients to detect those with very mild symptoms. in two of five patients reported here, sars-cov-2 rna was detected in stool samples. this possible route of transmission must be investigated; detection of viral rna does not necessarily imply that infectious particles are present and transmissible, 20 particularly when patients, such as these two individuals, have no diarrhoea or other gastrointestinal symptoms.in this case series, except for the patient with critical disease, the viral load decreased over time and became negative between illness day 9 and day 14. of note, the virus was also detected by rtrt-pcr at low levels in the upper respiratory tract, even after full resolution of symptoms. whether infectious virus might be still present despite symptom resolution will require further attempts of virus isolation. this uncertainty justifies the european centre for disease prevention and control recommendation to obtain two rt-pcr negative nasopharyngeal samples before discharge of asymptomatic patients. 11 this conservative recommendation is, however, no longer feasible in many european countries that are in an epidemic situation.in this case series, three patients had a severe or critical disease with two different patterns. the first one, in patients with severe diseases (patients 1 and 2), is characterised by a biphasic evolution starting with a mild presentation followed with a secondary respiratory worsening despite a decreasing viral load in the naso pharyngeal samples: sars-cov-2 was no longer detected in the upper respiratory tract in one patient and at very low levels in the other. in patients with this pattern, a ct scan at the moment of the worsening showed ground-glass lung opacities, in line with those reported by others in patients with 20 time to worsening of respiratory symptoms was around 10 days after disease onset in these two cases, close to the median disease duration before worsening (8·0 days [iqr 5·0-13·0]), previously reported by huang and collaborators. 6 in these patients, one might postulate that th e lung damage is more related to immuno pathological lesions, resulting from an excessive pro-inflammatory host response, rather than to uncontrolled viral replication. 6 of note, we did not assess virus load in low respiratory tract samples from these two patients.the second pattern, observed in the patient classified as having critical disease and who died (patient 3), consists of a persistent and high viral excretion in the upper respiratory tract samples combined with positive virus detection by rtrt-pcr in other body fluids, including blood. by contrast with the previous pattern, this persistent high viral load suggests the ability of the sars-cov-2 to evade the immune response. indeed, we can speculate that, as shown during middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and sars coronavirus infections, 21,22 sars-cov-2 might be able to inhibit the interferon signalling pathways, resulting in higher respiratory virus load, positive viraemia, and eventually poor prognosis, as for mers-cov. 23, 24 indeed, the 80-year-old patient, unlike the other cases, had evidence of high viral replication in the respiratory tract and evidence for systemic virus dissemination beyond the respiratory tract, with virus detection in plasma and pleural effusion fluid. the impaired immune response might have facilitated the bacterial and fungal superinfections. patients with similar, severe patterns (sustained viral rna in the respiratory tract and detection of sars-cov-2 in the blood) have also been reported in china. 6 as reported in previous studies, 12, 25 severely ill patients are often older patient with comorbidities. patient 3 was aged 80 years and might have had an impaired interferon pathway.these different patterns, and especially the fact that patients with severe or critical disease might have different viral kinetics in the upper respiratory tract, might be important. the findings suggest that different therapeutic approaches, based on viral kinetics monitoring, might be needed in patients with a virus load decrease in the upper respiratory tract versus those with high viral replication and systemic virus dissemination. we should be cautious when analysing these data because of the small number of patients, but adapting treatment to the clinical course should be considered in future studies.there is no currently validated antiviral treatment to control such sars-cov-2 infections. among potential candidates, remdesivir is an antiviral prodrug (nucleosidic analogue family) that has broad-spectrum in-vitro and invivo activity against numerous rna viruses, including sars-cov-2. in animal models, compared with lopinavir plus ritonavir combined with interferon beta, two other potential candidates, remdesivir more significantly reduced the virus titre of mice infected with the mers-cov and decreased the lung tissue damage. 26 remdesivir treatment improved disease outcomes and reduced viral loads in sars-cov-infected mice 27 and is inhibitory for sars-cov-2 in vitro. 28 a phase 3 clinical trial assessed this drug for the treatment of ebola virus infection; therefore, data exist for the safety of use in humans. 29 hence, on the basis of expert opinion, we considered remdesivir use in the three patients with severe disease patterns. to the best of our knowledge, only one case of remdesivir use in covid-19 has been reported so far. 20 two randomised controlled trials are enrolling patients in china to assess the clinical benefit of this treatment (nct04257656; nct04252664). on the basis of our data, we cannot draw any conclusions on the potential efficacy of remdesivir on covid-19 infections. in two patients, the drug was initiated at the time of disease worsening, when the virus was already barely detectable in the clinical specimens. in one of them, remdesivir was discontinued after 5 days because of a combined alanine aminotransferase elevation and a rash, although it could not be confirmed that this adverse event was related to remdesivir. in the third patient, remdesivir was discontinued after a single dose because of renal replacement therapy to avoid risk of cyclodextrin accumulation. remdesivir contains cyclodextrin, an excipient whose clearance is linearly related to creatinine clearance. because the patient's condition was worsening and viral load was not decreasing, we reinitiated remdesivir.in this paper, we report clinical and virological data on the first cases of covid-19 in europe. although we acknowledge the fact that the results provided are based on a small number of cases, a detailed and comprehensive sampling strategy enabled us to illustrate the different courses of the disease we observed, and provide some relevant criteria regarding the severity of disease. we believe that these findings will contribute to better understanding of the natural history of the disease and will contribute to advances in the implementation of more efficient infection control strategies. fm has consulted for novartis, ipsen, servier, and da volterra, and received research grants from roche, and sanofi (outside the submitted work). j-cl has received lecture fees from merck sharp & dohme and research grants from anios (outside the submitted work). dd has served on advisory boards for gilead-sciences, viiv-healthcare, janssen-cilag, and merck sharp & dohme (outside the submitted work). dm has served on advisory boards for gilead and sigma tau (outside the submitted work). j-ft has served on advisory boards for gilead, pfizer, merck, bayer, menarini, paratek, and medimmune (outside the submitted work); received research grants from merck, 3m, and astellas (outside the submitted work); and received lecture fees from pfizer, merck, biomérieux, and gilead (outside the submitted work). bl is the co-chair of the global influenza and respiratory syncytial virus initiative, the chair of the scientific committee of the global hospital influenza surveillance network, and a member of the foundation for influenza and has received no personal remuneration for these activities, and has received travel grants to attend meetings by abbott, seegene, sanofi, and biomérieux. sd-v-w is a member of the european scientific working group on influenza and the scientific advisory council of global initiative on sharing all influenza data, and has lectured for sanofi (outside the submitted work), but has received no personal remuneration for these activities. all other authors declare no competing interests.(who) (2) , which has been updated in response to covid-19. all patients were hospitalized in an isolation room according to french policy for suspected or confirmed cases.epidemiological data were collected onto standardized forms through interviews of infected persons, and contacts and relatives when possible, that were conducted by physicians from regional health agencies and the national public health agency (santé publique france). we collected information on the dates of contact at risk, date of illness onset and details on travels in france.the illness severity was defined, according to who criteria for severe pneumonia in adults (who/ncov/clinical/2020.2 (3)) as fever or suspected respiratory infection, plus one of the following: respiratory rate >30 breaths/min, severe respiratory distress, or spo2 <90% on room air). the acute respiratory distress syndrome was defined, according to who criteria : (1) new or worsening respiratory symptoms within one week of known clinical insult; (2) bilateral opacities, not fully explained by effusions, lobar or lung collapse, or nodules;(3) respiratory failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload; (4) 200 mmhg < pao2/fio2 ≤ 300 mmhg (with peep or cpap ≥5 cmh2o,7 or non-ventilated).rna extraction was performed with the extraction nucleospin dx virus kit (macherey nagel), or by the automated nuclisens® easymag® (biomérieux, marcy l'etoile, france) using manufacturer's instructions. forrdrp-ip1 rt-pcr (table s1) , used for detection, rna was extracted from 100 µl of specimen or culture supernatant and eluted in 100 µl of water and used as a template for real-time (rt) rt-pcr. a 25 μl reaction contained 5 μl of rna, 12.5 μl of 2x reaction buffer provided with the superscript iii one step rt-pcr system with platinum taq polymerase (invitrogen, darmstadt, germany; containing 0.4 mm of each dntps and 3 mm magnesium sulfate), 1 μl of reverse transcriptase/ taq mixture from the kit, 0.4 μl of a 50 mm magnesium sulfate solution (invitrogen). thermal cycling was performed at 55°c for 20 min for reverse transcription, followed by 95°c for 3 min and then 50 cycles of 95°c for 15 s, 58°c for 30 s, on a light cycler 480 (96) thermocycler (roche) or on the quantstudio5 rtpcr systems (thermo fisher scientific). for rdrp quantitative rt-pcr, rna extraction was performed on the emag® platform (biomerieux, marcy-l'étoile, france), using manufacturer's instructions. rna was extracted from 200 µl of sample eluted in 50 µl of elution buffer. the rdrp gene rt-pcr corresponds to the charité protocol (4) using primers rdrp_sarsr-f2 and -r1 and the rdrp_sarsr-p2 (table   s1 ). amplification was performed using quantstudio 5 rtpcr systems (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, massachusetts, usa).when a sample (respiratory samples, plasma or stool) was positive with rdrp-ip1, quantification of the number of rna copies was done according to a scale ranging from 10 3 to 10 6 copies/µl. the viral load in stools was calculated as previously described (5) and expressed in number of rna copies/g of stool. the quality of nasopharyngeal swabs was checked using the cell control r-gene® kit (biomérieux). this kit is provided with quantified plasmid for cellular quantification. all viral loads for respiratory samples were calculated as described above and normalized according the cellular quantification as the number of rna copies/1 000 cells. all positive plasma samples were quantified and expressed as number of rna copies/ml.primer and probe sequences (eurogentec, seraing, belgium) are shown in supplementary table s1. they either correspond to the rdrp or e gene assay from the charité protocol (4) or to the rdrp-ip1 assay designed at institut pasteur to target the rdrp gene spanning nt 12669-12759 (positions according sars-cov, nc_004718) based on the first sequences of sars-cov-2 made available on the gisaid database on january 11, 2020 (supplementary table s2 ).rna from specimens or from virus culture was extracted using the rneasy mini kit (qiagen, courtaboeuf, france), and 100µl of sample mixed with 350µl rlt lysis buffer was incubated at 70°c for 5 minutes for virus inactivation. extraction was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions and rna was purified on spri beads rna clean xp (beckman coulter, brea, california, usa). cdna was synthetized using the maxima all experiments were conducted under strict bsl3 conditions. vero e6 cells (mycoplasma-free) seeded in 12well plates (4 × 10 5 cells/well) were cultured in dmem (thermo fisher scientific) containing 1% ps (penicillin 10,000 u/ml; streptomycin10,000 µg/ml) and supplemented with 5% fbs (fetal bovine serum). respiratory specimens were diluted 1:2 with dmem 1% ps without fbs and supplemented with 1µg/ml tpck-trypsin sequences pcr product size ref.nrcrv: national reference center for respiratory viruses, institut pasteur, paris, france table s2 -sars-cov-2 names and sequenceswe gratefully acknowledge the authors, the originating and submitting laboratories for their sequence and metadata shared through gisaid, on which this research is based. ward  ward  ward  ward  ward/i  cu  icu  icu  icu/  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward ward wardany of the following symptomswhite blood cell counts, 10 9 /l icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu/  ward   ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward ward wardany of the following symptoms white blood cell counts, 10 9 /l 4 nd 5. ward  ward  /icu   icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu  icu nd  nd  nd  nd  21  21  18  17  23  21  19  16  14  20  21  22  22  18  22  23  creatinine kinase, ui/l  nd  nd  nd  nd  47  47  34  38  39  82  84  157  294  294  561  558  474  329  251  448 alanine ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  ward  symptoms any of the following symptoms nd  38  nd  nd  36  nd  60  41  59  nd  21  31  nd  68  nd  nd  43  nd  nd  nd  c-reactive protein  nd  <5  nd  nd  <5  nd  <5  <5  <5  nd  <5  <5  nd  <5  nd  nd  <5  nd  nd  nd  lactate ui/l  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd coughthe recent outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and subsequent coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) has created a global health emergency with unparalleled worldwide burden. 1 the full epidemiological impact of this virus remains to be seen, but an understanding of the approximate denominator will be important when considering the clinical characteristics of these cases and the percentage of cases with more severe disease or resultant mortality. 2 in december 2019, the first reports of covid-19 included a cluster of patients hospitalized with pneumonia in wuhan, china. the most common presenting symptoms in these patients were fever (98%), cough (76%), dyspnea (55%), and myalgia or fatigue (44%). 3 characteristic laboratory and radiologic findings included lymphopenia (63%) and rapid development of multiple patchy consolidations and ground glass opacities bilaterally with a notable peripheral distribution seen on chest computed tomography (ct). 3, 4 patients may present with a chest ct suggestive of covid-19 even before developing a positive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay result. 5 epidemiology and diagnostics for covid-19 are rapidly evolving, giving us greater understanding of those at risk and elucidating more potential pharmacologic targets. 6 sars-cov-2 is a betacoronavirus, in the same subgroup as severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (sars-cov) that caused the sars outbreak in 2002 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) that caused the mers outbreak in 2012. 7 as such, a rational approach to initial therapies to target covid-19 would be those that were studied during the sars and mers outbreaks. novel therapies and repurposing of old drugs are now being studied as therapeutic strategies against covid- 19 .treatment strategies that have been identified thus far include medications uncommonly used in clinical practice. our understanding of important practical considerations is quite limited. in one study,~25% of patients with covid-19 required admission to an intensive care unit (icu). these patients were older (66 vs 51 yrs of age) and more likely to have underlying comorbidities (72% vs 37%). 8 a study in wuhan showed that of 52 critically ill icu patients infected with sars-cov-2, mortality was 61.5%; among all icu patients with covid-19, organ dysfunction included acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (67%), acute kidney injury (29%), and hepatic dysfunction (29%). 9 in the icu, the level of complexity required in the care of these patients involves the underlying disease state(s), multitudes of comorbidities, and polypharmacy.the intent of this review is to provide health care providers with foundational knowledge on the therapies that have been proposed for use against covid-19. we review critical key concepts for consideration in the use of these therapies in practice, particularly in the icu setting where the most severe patients will be managed.pharmacologic therapies against sars-cov-2 target its viral structure and genome ( figure 1 ). sars-cov-2 expresses viral proteins on its outer surface that facilitate attachment on to host cells via angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). sars-cov-2 is a single-stranded ribonucleic acid (rna) beta coronavirus that replicates by recruiting nonstructural proteins such as 3-chymotrypsin-like protease, papain-like protease, helicase, and rna-dependent rna polymerase. 10 these structural components have some similarities to other known viruses such as hepatitis b, hepatitis c, and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), prompting repurposing of currently approved antiviral therapies targeted at these viruses. nucleoside analogs available for hiv and respiratory viruses may have a therapeutic role in blocking rna synthesis by targeting the rna-dependent rna polymerase found in sars-cov-2. furthermore, the currently available hiv protease inhibitors have displayed some in vitro activity against the 3-chymotryspin-like protease found in sars and mers. 10 it is critical to be aware that currently available therapies have been specifically designed to target the viral genome of a certain virus, and the sars-cov-2 physical structure may differ, limiting in vivo efficacy. 10 other nonstructural or accessory proteins have a role for potential therapeutic targets in development as shown in figure 1 . as opposed to directly targeting viral replication, other therapeutic approaches can be aimed at modulating the innate immune system to attack the virus or inhibit cytokines that are upregulated during viral replication to dampen the physiologic response to disease. 11, 12 practical considerations for current therapies available against sars-cov-2 are summarized in tables 1 and 2 and discussed at length in the following sections. metabolized in cells and tissues to an active nucleoside triphosphate (gs-443902) that inhibits viral rna-dependent rna polymerases early in the viral infectious cycle. 18, 19 other potential mechanisms of this adenosine nucleotide analog may involve lethal mutagenesis and chain termination. 18 the incorporation of active nucleoside triphosphate via remdesivir at the beginning stages of replication of murine hepatitis virus in vitro had the most profound effect at 2 hours pre-and postinfection with a decreasing effect greater than 4 hours postinfection, suggesting a time-dependent effect for drug activity. 18 nucleotide analogs are used for viral rna or dna polymerase inhibition and have demonstrated decreased viral replication with their use. resistance to mutagens of other medications in vitro has resulted in exo-ribonuclease proofreading and removal. remdesivir has shown potential to avoid this proofreading and thus removal via the exo-ribonuclease. 18 in vitro studies in human airway epithelial cell cultures as a lung model have found activity against coronaviruses. 15 studies assessing the potency of remdesivir were efficacious among divergent coronaviruses in human airway epithelial cells. 18 based on the existing evidence for remdesivir activity against sars-cov and similar viruses, remdesivir is being investigated for its use against sars-cov-2. in the united states, remdesivir has been used for compassionate purposes for a duration of 4-10 days. in these patients, remdesivir was continued until improvement in respiratory symptoms. 20ongoing clinical trials are studying remdesivir with a loading dose of 200 mg intravenously followed by 100 mg/day intravenously for 5 to 10 days in adult patients. 21, 22 dosing for patients weighing less than 40 kg with a 5 mg/ kg loading dose followed by a 2.5 mg/kg once/ day maintenance dose has been studied for the treatment of ebola. 23 the existing remdesivir pharmacokinetic data are extrapolated from in vitro human cell data and in vivo mouse and nonhuman primate data. remdesivir is converted from the parent metabolite to the active metabolite, a triphosphorylated nucleoside, via anabolic intracellular kinase. 24, 25 mice received remdesivir subcutaneously as 50 mg/kg once/day or 25 mg/kg twice/day with a decrease in plasma concentrations of the prodrug and a steady concentration of the activated drug in the lung. 15 in the murine model, twice/day dosing maintained lung concentrations for a longer duration. in the in vitro human lung cell model and the in vivo nonhuman primate model, once/day dosing was found to reach sufficient concentrations with remdesivir demonstrating an activated nucleoside triphosphate half-life of~20 hours. 19, 26 no data are available to date regarding remdesivir dosing in patients with renal or hepatic impairment. data on clearance of remdesivir in renal replacement therapy are also not yet available. important pharmacokinetic considerations will need to be elucidated, given that patients receiving remdesivir are likely to be critically ill with end-organ failure. 9reported adverse effects of remdesivir after use in three patients in the united states included nausea, vomiting, gastroparesis, or rectal bleeding with no other reported symptoms. these patients also experienced elevated aminotransferase levels occurring 1-5 days after initiating remdesivir. 20 however, it is unclear whether this laboratory change is due to the drug itself or the virus because a third of critically ill patients with covid-19 have been observed with liver dysfunction. 9 in a study using remdesivir for ebola virus in humans, one patient experienced hypotension during infusion of the loading dose, necessitating discontinuation; that patient ultimately died due to cardiac arrest. 27 a patient experienced neurologic complications after receiving remdesivir for ebola treatment in a phase 1 study; however, it is not clear if this was due exclusively to having received remdesivir. 19 currently, the data on remdesivir use in humans are too sparse to have a clear adverse effect profile for this agent. current phase 3 randomized clinical trials will provide more conclusive insight into the adverse effects of remdesivir. 21, 22, 28 remdesivir is manufactured as a lyophilized powder that requires reconstitution and is administered intravenously over 30 minutes. the infusion duration has also been extended over longer times to obtain higher intracellular concentrations of the active metabolite. 29 no data are available regarding compatibility of remdesivir with other intravenous medications. to date, drug-drug and drug-nutrition interactions have not been reported.chloroquine analogs, chloroquine phosphate and hydroxychloroquine, have been used for the prevention and treatment of malaria since the early 1900s. 30 aside from their antimalarial properties, chloroquine analogs possess immunomodulatory effects lending to their utility for the treatment of autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. the multimodal properties of chloroquine analogs and their minimal toxicity profile have led to their investigation in the treatment of virus-induced illness where the pathologic features are driven by an inflammatory response, such as in hiv-associated immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. 31 chloroquine analogs are weak bases, that, in their non-protonated form, penetrate and concentrate within acidic intracellular organelles such as endosomes and lysosomes. once present intracellularly, chloroquine analogs become protonated and increase intravesicular ph, resulting in prevention of endosomal trafficking, dysfunctional cellular enzymes, and impaired protein synthesis. 30 chloroquine-mediated ph alterations have been proposed to result in early inhibition of viral replication through interference with endosome-mediated viral entry or late transport of the enveloped virus. this mechanism has translated to the potential role of chloroquine analogs in the treatment of covid-19 and also appears to interfere with the terminal glycosylation of ace2 receptor expression that prevents sars-cov-2 receptor binding and subsequent spread of infection. 32clinical data supporting the use of chloroquine analogs in the treatment of coronavirus have centered around several in vitro studies from the sars-cov outbreak in the early 2000s with the use of chloroquine. one group tested the cytotoxic potential of chloroquine against sars-cov in an in vitro cell culture. chloroquine demonstrated a potent cytotoxic response with a 99% inhibition of viral replication at day 3. 33 further in vitro models supported its cytotoxic response and observed that application of chloroquine before viral exposure resulted in favorable inhibition of viral spread, suggesting its potential role as an effective prophylactic intervention. 32 hydroxychloroquine, a hydroxy derivative of chloroquine with an improved safety profile, has also been studied in vitro against sars-cov-2 with a 3-fold higher cytotoxic potential compared covid-19 emerging pharmacotherapy barlow et al 421 with chloroquine. 34 one study demonstrated potent antiviral effect at both entry and post-entry states at plasma concentrations of 6.90 lm. this concentration can be safely achieved in humans. 35 clinical data in humans thus far have been limited, with the best available evidence to date from more than 100 patients from 10 different hospitals in china during the current covid-19 outbreak. this pooled analysis demonstrated superiority of chloroquine compared with control in inhibiting exacerbations of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting viral negative conversion, and shortening the disease course in the absence of any adverse effects. 36 the dual mechanism of antiviral and antiinflammatory effects of chloroquine were proposed to account for its utility in preventing covid-19-related pneumonia. ongoing trials for hydroxychloroquine are actively recruiting with hopes to further delineate its role in the treatment paradigm for covid-19. 37chloroquine is formulated as a tablet in a phosphate salt form for oral administration. in the treatment of covid-19, expert consensus recommends a chloroquine phosphate tablet at a dose of 500 mg orally twice/day for a duration of 10 days. 38 bioavailability after oral administration is complete (~60-100%) and rapid within 30 minutes. chloroquine is widely distributed into nearly every organ system including the eyes, heart, kidney, liver, and lungs where retention is prolonged. 39 chloroquine is metabolized into an active metabolite, desethyl chloroquine, via hepatic enzymes cytochrome p450 (cyp) 2c8 and cyp3a4. this metabolite accounts for a small portion of its pharmacologic activity.chloroquine is a major substrate of cyp2d6. this enzyme accounts for~30% of its inactivation; inhibitors of this enzyme should be avoided due to a heightened risk of accumulation and toxicity. chloroquine is predominantly eliminated in the urine with~50% of a dose recovered unchanged. no dose adjustments are needed if creatinine clearance (cl cr ) is above 10 ml/minute; however, administration of 50% of the dose is required in patients on intermittent hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, or if cl cr is below 10 ml/minute. patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy (crrt) should receive full-dose chloroquine. 39 hydroxychloroquine sulfate is available as a film-coated tablet for oral administration. dosing recommendations for covid-19 are not well-defined, and clinical trials and in vitro data are ongoing to assist with dose optimization. current in vitro pharmacokinetic models suggest a loading dose of hydroxychloroquine 400 mg orally twice/day on day 1, followed by 200 mg orally twice/day for 4 days. hydroxychloroquine has similar or possibly superior cytotoxic effects against sars-cov-2 as chloroquine 500 mg twice/day. translation of the cytotoxic effects of hydroxychloroquine in vivo remains unknown. 34 a clinical trial of hydroxychloroquine for covid-19 is actively recruiting, with a planned intervention of 400 mg by mouth once/day for a total duration of 5 days. 37 the major difference in dosing strategies is the utility of a loading dose. given that the terminal half-life of hydroxychloroquine is~50 days in blood and remains in the body for up to 3 months, a loading dose is a reasonable approach until the clinical outcomes from ongoing trials are published. hydroxychloroquine has rapid absorption after oral administration, a wide volume of distribution (vd), and prolonged halflife. metabolism and elimination of hydroxychloroquine differ from chloroquine because reliance on cyp enzymes for elimination is minimal and clearance is not correlated with renal function. no renal or hepatic dose adjustments are recommended; however, cautious use with severe impairment is advised. given the wide vd (~15.5 l/hr) and high lipophilicity of the compound, crrt is likely to have minimal impact on drug removal.chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are generally well tolerated. the most common adverse effects are gastrointestinal intolerances such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and a metallic taste. acute toxicity in the setting of supratherapeutic dosing may manifest as cardiomyopathy, neuropathy, or myopathy. retinopathy, a hallmark toxicity of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, is predominantly associated with high doses, long-term administration (i.e., hydroxychloroquine for systemic lupus erythematosus or rheumatoid arthritis), and are unlikely of concern in the setting of covid-19 treatment. although the manufacturer's labeling of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine cautions against their use in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (g6pd) deficiency, only limited data support this risk, and no incidence of hemolytic anemia was seen in patients with g6pd in 30 years of drug exposure. 39, 40 both agents are safe in pregnancy with minimal risk of congenital malformations. 41 albeit rare, use in patients with preexisting cardiac disease or qtc prolongation should be avoided due to the risk of torsades de pointes.concurrent administration of qtc prolonging agents and strong 2d6 inhibitors (chloroquine only) should be avoided to minimize cardiac adverse effects. notable dermatologic adverse effects can include photosensitivity, lichenoid reactions, and drug eruptions with chloroquine, and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with hydroxychloroquine. 39, 40 in postmarketing data, case reports of hypoglycemia progressing to loss of consciousness occurred with these agents in patients with a history of diabetes on concurrent antidiabetic agents. 39, 40 the proposed mechanism of hypoglycemia involves inhibited insulin degradation. patients have required up to a 30% reduction in insulin doses with concurrent hydroxychloroquine administration. 42 baseline and routine monitoring of blood glucose and electrocardiogram for the qtc interval are recommended for patients on chloroquine analog therapy.to mitigate nausea and vomiting, it is recommended to administer chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine with food. chloroquine can be crushed and mixed with flavored syrups or enclosed in gelatin capsules to mask the bitter taste. 39 in patients who are mechanically ventilated, chloroquine can be extemporaneously compounded into oral suspension. hydroxychloroquine tablets should not be crushed or split at the bedside for administration but covid-19 emerging pharmacotherapy barlow et al instead require removal of the film coating to be compounded extemporaneously into a solution for administration via enteral tubes. neither agent is available for intravenous administration and would be an unfavorable option in patients who are not permitted to take anything by mouth or have no enteral access.administration of antacids within 4 hours of chloroquine should be avoided due to a potential for chelation and reduced bioavailability. this interaction is not present with hydroxychloroquine. a theoretical drug-drug interaction exists between proton pump inhibitors (ppis) and chloroquine analogs because the blockage of h+, k+ àatpase by ppis in lysosomes can raise the ph and reduce drug accumulation that could weaken immunomodulatory effects. however, effects of this interaction in vivo are unknown. 39, 40 lopinavir/ritonavirlopinavir (lpv) is an aspartic acid protease inhibitor developed for the treatment of hiv. lopinavir is co-formulated with ritonavir (lpv/ r) to boost the pharmacokinetic activity and half-life of lpv through inhibition of cyp450. lpv/r provides potent and sustained viral load reductions for patients with hiv, which has prompted interest in assessing its efficacy in other viruses that function with similar machinery. 43 proteases are essential enzymes for the production and maturation of viral genomes. the primary antiviral effect of protease inhibitors is prevention of viral replication, thus limiting spread into host cells. 43 the therapeutic rationale for lpv/r arises from in vitro studies demonstrating inhibition of the 3-chymotrypsinlike protease found in novel coronaviruses. 44, 45 however, lpv was specifically designed to match the structure of the c2 catalytic site within the hiv aspartic acid protease. sars-cov-2 protease is a cysteine protease family and structurally dissimilar because it lacks a c2 catalytic site. 10 the therapeutic value of lpv/r emerged from in vitro studies testing its utility for sars and mers. in vitro testing of lpv/r was performed for severe mers-cov in marmosets. lopinavir/ritonavir improved clinical scores for weight loss and symptom burden, improved radiologic clearance, and decreased viral loads in necroscopied lungs. 45 the benefit of lpv/r has yet to be clearly replicated in human cell cultures, with some studies showing complete lack of in vitro activity. 46 clinical in vivo studies from sars and mers outbreaks demonstrated that the use of lpv/r 400-100 mg by mouth twice/day combined with ribavirin with or without corticosteroids initiated during the early phase of viral acquisition reduced rates of ards or death when compared with a matched cohort that received supportive care or ribavirin alone. 44, 47, 48 however, these findings did not remain significant if lpv/r was initiated later in the disease course, reiterating the lack of pharmacologic effect against a viral genome that has been integrated into host dna. 48 available literature to date for lpv/r in the treatment of covid-19 stems from a descriptive case series of five patients in singapore receiving lpv/r 200-100 mg twice/day for 14 days. three patients had reductions in ventilation requirements within 3 days of treatment initiation, but two had progressive respiratory failure. despite the lower dosing regimen compared with previous studies, four of the five patients had premature treatment discontinuation secondary to nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and increased liver function tests. no deaths occurred in the study, but efficacy outcomes are difficult to interpret based on the lower dosing strategy compared with previous data. this does raise concerns about the potential tolerability of the higher dose regimen. 49 another retrospective cohort showed that lpv/r has limited influence on the duration of viral shedding that can occur for a median of 20 days after initially contracting the virus. 49, 50 in a recent randomized controlled open-label trial including hospitalized patients with sars-cov-2 infection, patients receiving lpv/r 400à100 mg twice/day for 14 days versus standard of care found no benefit versus standard of care treatment. 51 multiple ongoing studies have evaluated the clinical utility of lpv/r as monotherapy and in combination with other therapies such as ribavirin and interferon (ifn). 52 56 the considerable potential for drug-drug interactions with lpv/r requires a thorough review of concomitant medications. ritonavir is a strong inhibitor of cyp3a4, a major enzyme responsible for the metabolism and elimination of many medications. in addition, ritonavir is a moderate inhibitor of p-glycoprotein (p-gp), organic anion transporter (oatp1b1), oatp1b3, and is an inducer of udp-glucuronosyltransferase. 55 patients requiring icu admission for covid-19 are often elderly with multiple comorbidities and polypharmacy. the potential therapeutic benefit of lpv/r should be weighed against considerable interactions with commonly used medications in the icu (e.g., midazolam, fentanyl, antiarrhythmics). 3treatment with lpv/r may result in intolerable gastrointestinal toxicities, although administration with food may ameliorate the severity of these symptoms. up to 24% of patients experience diarrhea, although it usually improves within 2 weeks. 55 adverse events particularly relevant to icu patients include potentially fatal pancreatitis, hepatitis, hepatic decompensation among those with preexisting liver disease, and increased pr intervals, especially in those with congenital qtc prolongation. 55 previous studies using lpv/r for sars demonstrated increased serum amylase and liver enzyme elevations compared with a matched cohort. routine monitoring of liver function tests is critical, and supportive care with antiemetics and antimotility agents should be considered. 44 cardiovascular and metabolic toxicities such as lipid abnormalities are commonly observed in patients with hiv receiving these therapies for prolonged periods; these are less likely when used for the abbreviated durations for covid-19.lopinavir/ritonavir tablets should not be chewed or crushed for patients unable to swallow. 55 in patients who are intubated or have limited oral access, an oral suspension is available for delivery via a nasogastric tube. 55 of note, the suspension does contain 42.4% ethanol. available data suggest administration with enteral nutrition does not adversely impact drug concentrations. 57 coadministration with food that contains a moderate to high fat content can enhance lpv/r bioavailability. 55 ribavirin is a purine nucleoside analog that elicits its antiviral affect through inhibition of viral rna synthesis. ribavirin is a prodrug that undergoes metabolic conversion by the liver, after which its metabolic structure closely mimics the purine analog guanosine that enhances its incorporation into rna. the structural elements prohibit the subsequent addition of nucleoside analogs, effectively halting the synthesis of rna. 58 ribonucleic acid is ubiquitous in many viruses, which is why ribavirin has been studied in a broad range of viral diseases including hepatitis b, c, and respiratory syncytial virus. 59the nonselective antiviral properties of ribavirin prompted investigators to evaluate its use during the sars and mers outbreaks. during the initial sars outbreak, ribavirin was used throughout hong kong in both oral and covid-19 emerging pharmacotherapy barlow et al intravenous formulations. 60 however, the distribution of the intravenous formulation, which is not available in all countries including the united states, was restricted in the midst of the epidemic given the concern for lack of in vitro susceptibility and considerable toxicity. in 126 patients treated with ribavirin, hemolysis and anemia occurred in up to 76% and 49% of cases, respectively. 61, 62 in vivo data suggest serum concentrations of ribavirin needed to blunt viral replication effectively is higher than what is safely achievable in humans. 61 in vitro data suggest rapid resistance against sars and mers when used as a monotherapy but potential activity when combined with other antivirals such as lpv/r or chloroquine analogs. 38, 63 outcomes for ribavirin use in combination with interferon (ifn)-a-2a for mers-cov is discussed in the ifn section.ribavirin is commercially available as an oral capsule, oral solution, and inhaled formulation. 59 the inhaled formulation has not been studied for sars, mers, or covid-19, and the intravenous form is not available in the united states. oral ribavirin has been dosed as a 4-g loading dose followed by 1.2 g every 8 hours in two small studies for sars. 44, 64 in the management of covid-19, data are limited to ongoing studies using a dosing strategy of 400 mg by mouth twice/day for 14 days as a part of a combination regimen.ribavirin has a prolonged half-life of~40 days. loading doses may aid in achieving steady state more rapidly. 65 ribavirin is metabolized to its active form via extrahepatic enzymes. 59 however, its use in hepatic impairment child-pugh class b and c is not recommended given that it is metabolized by cyp enzyme pathways. ribavirin is eliminated primarily by renal excretion, requiring strict dose reductions for renal insufficiency that varies based on indication. 59 a review on the use of ribavirin in sars recommended a 50% dose reduction for cl cr between 30 and 50 ml/minute, and a 75% reduction for cl of below 30 ml/minute. 65 there is no established safety of ribavirin in patients receiving renal replacement therapy; it should be restricted to those with stable renal function.ribavirin carries a boxed warning for hemolytic anemia. 59 in a study assessing the adverse effects associated with the use of ribavirin use for sars, the most common adverse effects were hemolytic anemia (61%), hypocalcemia (58%), and hypomagnesemia (46%). 66 the onset of hemolytic anemia occurs as early as 3-5 days after therapy with high doses (above 1-2 g) that were used as loading doses for coronavirus. 44, 67 the risk is highest in patients who are elderly or have poor renal function, but consideration should also be taken in patients with preexisting cardiac disease where reduction in hemoglobin increases the risk of decompensation. 59 ribavirin is a teratogen with a significant potential for embryonic toxicity and contraindicated in women who are pregnant and in male partners of women who are pregnant. if ribavirin is considered in women or men of childbearing potential, use of systemic and barrier contraception must be strictly enforced. because active metabolites of ribavirin persist in plasma for up to 6 months, contraception is required both during treatment and for at least 6 months after treatment is completed. 59 ribavirin does not have drug-drug interactions because its metabolism and elimination does not rely on the cypp450 system. however, certain therapies should be used cautiously with ribavirin due to the potential for enhanced toxicities. ribavirin in combination with other immunosuppressive therapies, particularly azathioprine or ifn, can lead to severe pancytopenia. 59 ribavirin administered orally as a solution or capsule has an absolute bioavailability of 40-50% compared with the intravenous or as an aerosol formulation. 59 oral formulations have enhanced bioavailability when taken with a high-fat meal, and it is recommended to administer both oral formulations with food. due to the teratogenic potential of ribavirin, it was identified as a hazardous medication on the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) list and requires significant safety precautions with its use. the capsules should not be opened, crushed, or broken. 59 health care providers handling ribavirin must also follow niosh recommendations to wear gloves when packaging, administering, or receiving intact capsules. when handling the solution, double gloving, a protective gown, and eye/face protection is required, especially for administration of the oral liquid through a feeding tube.pharmacotherapy volume 40, number 5, 2020nitazoxanidenitazoxanide is a 2-(acetyloxy)-n-(5-nitro-2thiazolyl) benzamide with an approved food and drug administration (fda) indication for its antiprotozoal activity to treat diarrhea caused by giardia parvum and giardia lamblia. 68 nitazoxanide has since been found to have activity against cryptosporidium and in vitro activity against anaerobic gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. 69, 70 another studied use of nitazoxanide was for the treatment of influenza. 71 when nitazoxanide was studied for severe acute respiratory illness, no benefit was seen in clinical outcomes, specifically length of hospital stays. 72nitazoxanide interferes with pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase enzyme-dependent electron transfer, thus impairing anaerobic energy metabolism of protozoa. 68 nitazoxanide is metabolized to its active circulating metabolite tizoxanide. 73 tizoxanide selectively blocks the posttranslational influenza viral hemagglutinin maturation and intracellular movement in addition to blocking protein implantation into the plasma membrane. 74 nitazoxanide may potentiate the production of type 1 ifns produced by host cell fibroblasts that may potentiate antiviral activity via hemagglutinin inhibition. 75 nitazoxanide has demonstrated in vitro activity against mers-cov. 71 an anti-coronavirus effect was observed with nitazoxanide in an in vitro screen of small molecules against a recombinant murine coronavirus. 76 in vitro studies of canine coronavirus found that the use of nitazoxanide inhibited viral replication. 71 based on this in vitro animal data, it is thought that nitazoxanide may have activity against sars-cov-2. human data are limited regarding the efficacy of nitazoxanide against human coronavirus. in a 260-patient double-blind placebocontrolled trial in patients with influenza-like illness, five participants who received nitazoxanide were coronavirus positive. 72 subgroup analysis of these five coronavirus-positive patients found no difference in the primary outcome of days of hospitalization (p=0.61).the recommended nitazoxanide dosing for cryptosporidium parvum or g. lamblia is 500 mg oral suspension or tablet every 12 hours for 3 days. 68 the dosing used for acute respiratory illness was twice/day for 5 days, and dose strength was based on age. patients 12 years of age and older received two 300-mg tablets, children 4-11 years old received 200 mg of the suspension, and toddlers 1-3 years old received 100 mg of the suspension. 72 it is recommended that nitazoxanide be administered with food because pharmacokinetic studies found increased area under the curve (auc) and maximum concentration (c max ) of tizoxanide. 68 specifically, a doubling of auc and 50% increase of c max was observed when the tablet was administered with food. when the suspension was administered with food, there was a 45-50% increase in auc and up to a 10% increase in c max . an important consideration is that the oral suspension is not bioequivalent to the tablet. the suspension has a bioavailability of 70%, necessitating dose adjustments when transitioning between these dosage forms. 68 in plasma, tizoxanide is more than 99% bound to proteins. metabolism of nitazoxanide to tizoxanide occurs via hydrolysis and then conjugation via glucuronidation. nitazoxanide has not been studied in patients with impaired renal and hepatic function, and no dosage adjustment recommendations exist. 68 data in geriatric and pediatric populations are not available.the most common adverse effects of nitazoxanide are gastrointestinal, mainly abdominal pain, nausea, and headache. patients may also experience discoloration of eyes and urine, diarrhea, dizziness, gastroesophageal reflux disease, skin rash, or urticaria. compared with patients receiving standard of care and placebo, patients receiving nitazoxanide did not have additional adverse effects, and both groups of patients experienced gastrointestinal and respiratory effects. 72 headache and diarrhea were reported most in patients receiving placebo versus low-dose nitazoxanide versus high-dose nitazoxanide for treatment of viral respiratory infection with no significant difference among all three groups. 77 nitazoxanide is available in dosage forms administered enterally including a controlled-covid-19 emerging pharmacotherapy barlow et al release film-coated tablet and oral suspension. nitazoxanide tablets can be crushed and mixed with food. there are no existing data regarding the absorption of nitazoxanide when administered via gastric feeding tubes. however, if gastric feeding tube administration is needed, the oral suspension can be used.drug-drug interactions with nitazoxanide are not attributed to cytochrome cyp enzymes because in vitro metabolism data found no significant effect of tizoxanide on these enzyme pathways. 68 most notably, nitazoxanide may have binding site competition with other highly protein-bound drugs. a narrow therapeutic index drug that would be of concern in this case is warfarin. however, a pharmacokinetic study in which patients received nitazoxanide twice/ day for 6 days with a onetime warfarin 25 mg dose compared with patients receiving warfarin did not result in pharmacokinetic or dynamic changes and was well tolerated. 78 nelfinavirnelfinavir is a hiv-1 protease inhibitor originally developed for use in combination with antivirals that target hiv via alternative mechanisms. with development of newer combination antivirals for hiv, nelfinavir has fallen out of favor for this indication. 79 nelfinavir binds to the site of hiv-1 protease activity and inhibits cleavage of viral gag-pol polyprotein precursors into functional proteins that are needed for hiv. what remains are nonviable hiv particles that are no longer infectious.during the 2002 sars outbreak, nelfinavir was identified as a potential agent with activity against sars-cov based on in vitro studies. 80 nelfinavir was found to inhibit the replication of sars-cov in vero e6 cells originating from the african green monkey. most recently, nelfinavir was identified via homology models based on three-dimensional sars structures specifically at the main protease or chymotrypsin-like protease. 81 these models assessed the ability of small molecule drugs to dock to the sars structures. the sars-cov was used because its sequence is 96% similar to that of sars-cov-2. of 30 drugs assessed, nelfinavir was found to have the most promising activity against sars-cov-2.nelfinavir has not been studied in humans for its efficacy against sars-cov or sars-cov-2. the recommended dosing of nelfinavir for the treatment of hiv is 750 mg by mouth 3 times/ day or 1250 mg by mouth twice/day. the halflife of nelfinavir is 3.5-5 hours. the effective dose for treatment of covid-19 is unknown. nelfinavir dosage adjustments do not need to be made with renal impairment because less than 2% of nelfinavir is excreted in the urine. 82 for patients with hepatic impairment, nelfinavir is not recommended in patients with child-pugh class b or c. 79, 83, 84 pharmacokinetics in patients using nelfinavir with chronic liver disease may be unpredictable. 85 no dosage adjustments are recommended for use in patients with child-pugh class a impairment.nelfinavir is metabolized by cyp3a4 and cyp2c19 and could potentially interact with medications that are inhibitors or inducers of these enzymes. in vitro data found that only cyp3a enzymes were inhibited by nelfinavir at therapeutic concentrations. 82the major adverse effect of nelfinavir is gastrointestinal intolerance, primarily diarrhea, nausea, and flatulence. a nonspecific rash may also occur. the incidence of other side effects are minimal, occurring less than 2% of the time in phase 2 and 3 trials. 82 nelfinavir is available in a tablet dosage form. the 250-mg tablets can be dissolved in water and readily dissolve. for patients with a gastric tube as enteral access, nelfinavir can be crushed, dissolved in water, and administered via gastric tube. after dissolving, nelfinavir should be taken or administered immediately. notably, nelfinavir may have a bitter taste if mixed with acidic food or juice. 82 absorption of nelfinavir was found to result in less pharmacokinetic variability and higher nelfinavir levels when taken with food. nelfinavir has a volume of distribution of 2-7 l/kg and is highly protein bound (more than 98%). 82 pharmacotherapy volume 40, number 5, 2020immunomodulating therapeuticsinterferon-ainterferons are endogenous signaling proteins released by host cells during response to infections or inflammation. upregulation of ifns stimulates the immune system to blunt viral replication and eradicate offending pathogens. 86 two ifns mediate host immune responses: a and b. interferon-a elicits a potent host-mediated immune cell response that has generated interest in the treatment of viral diseases such as hepatitis b and c and various cancers such as melanoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. interferon-b has been primarily used in the treatment of the autoimmune condition multiple sclerosis. 87 these nonspecific immunomodulatory effects have gained attraction by investigators for other viral illnesses including covid-19.during the 2002 sars outbreak, it was observed that after viral inoculation, sars-cov was able to effectively evade upregulation of ifns in human macrophages. this allowed for continued viral replication due to suppression of the innate immune response. 87 two ifn products are available, a and b. it is currently unknown whether both products would influence coronavirus disease expression. interferona has the most studies related to its use.thus far, human data for the use of ifn-a for novel coronaviruses are sparse. during the sars outbreak, pegylated ifn-a was assessed in an in vitro analysis of macaque cells at different periods of sars exposure. 88 when used before sars inoculation, ifn-a reduced viral replication and excretion. however, these results were not observed post-sars exposure. 88 an in vitro analysis assessing ifn-a as monotherapy for mers demonstrated the serum concentrations required to effectively inhibit viral replication were higher than what can be safely achieved in humans. 63 nevertheless, in vitro isolates of ifn-a or -b as a multimodal regimen with ribavirin for sars displayed potent synergy against the virus. 89, 90 in vivo studies have yet to be able to replica the same benefits, with some studies showing no influence on the disease course for mers, whereas others suggest a small improvement in survival at 14 days but not 28 days when used in combination with ribavirin. 91, 92 these viruses may display different in vitro and in vivo susceptibilities than the current sars-cov-2; extrapolation to the current covid-19 pandemic is difficult. this has not dampened the potential application of this therapy, and investigators await the results of ongoing studies assessing the efficacy of ifn-a-2b as a part of combination therapy with ribavirin for covid-19 to further elucidate any benefit from ifn treatment. 93, 94 dosing and pharmacokineticsinterferon-a-2b also comes as a pegylated form to prolong its half-life from 4.6 hours to 22-60 hours, permitting a lower dosing frequency. 87 due to the lack of established human data with ifns for covid-19, this therapy should only be considered for covid-19 as a part of a clinical trial. there is no established dosing regimen for ifn in the treatment of covid-19. the only in vivo data are with ifna-2a for the treatment of mers using a dose of 180 µg per week for 2 weeks, similar to hepatitis b virus. 92 there is no established dosing regimen for ifn in the treatment of covid-19. the only study currently recruiting at the time of this publication is using ifn-b-1b at a dose of 0.25 mg (8 million iu) on day 1, 3, and 5 in combination with other therapies (ribavirin, lpv/r). 93 additional studies evaluating ifn-a-1b are evaluating its utility as an inhaled therapy. 94 if used as a part of a trial, there are key clinical considerations to consider for safe use. the drug labeling provides a cautionary statement for use in child-pugh class b or c. 87 renal elimination accounts for 30% of total clearance dose reductions required for patients with a cl cr below 50 ml/minute when ifn-a is used in combination with ribavirin for hepatitis c. 87 given that these agents are both under investigation for covid-19, if used as a part of combination therapy, the same precaution should be considered. interferon therapies have an increased risk of adverse effects when used during renal replacement therapy; thus caution is recommended in this population. 95, 96 interferon does not pose a risk of drug-drug interactions through cyp enzyme pathways. concomitant medications that enhance the myelosuppressive or hepatotoxic effects of ifn should be used sparingly. 87 interferons are associated with significant adverse reactions, even when used as a shortterm therapy. injection site reactions resulting in flulike symptoms (fever, myalgias, and headaches) occur within the first 2-8 hours after administration. rotation of injection sites, application of ice before and after application, and premedication with acetaminophen can mitigate these reactions. additional adverse reactions include leukopenia, lymphopenia, autoimmune hepatitis, and thyroid disease. patients exposed to ifns for currently approved indications can develop neutralizing antibodies that reduce the therapeutic efficacy of this agent. the development of neuropsychiatric adverse effects is not expected to occur with short-term use. 97 the safety of ifn in pregnancy has not been established. 87 interferon is available in injectable and inhaled formulations. the current study is enrolling patients using b-1b injected subcutaneously in the abdomen or thigh. 93 baricitinib is a janus kinase (jak) inhibitor originally developed for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. it is approved by the fda for moderate or severe active rheumatoid arthritis in patients who have not responded to one or more tumor necrosis factor antagonists.baricitinib reversibly and selectively inhibits jak1 and jak2 with less inhibition of jak3 and tyrosine kinase. inhibition of jak results in inability of signal transmission from cytokine or growth receptors resulting in decreased hematopoiesis and immune cell function. 98 this inhibition of signal transmission prevents phosphorylation and thus activation of signal transducers and activators of transcription. baricitinib has a high affinity for associated protein kinase 1 (aak1) binding and could prevent the intracellular passage of viral cells and development of viral particles. 99 rationale for proposed therapy covid-19 may result in secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) as a result of viral infection. 100 patients with covid-19 have exhibited ferritin and inflammatory marker elevations similar to shlh including elevated interleukin (il)-2, il-7, granulocyte stimulating factor, and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-a. evaluation of risk factors for mortality of covid-19 cases in wuhan found ferritin and il-6 levels to be higher in those who ultimately died versus survivors (p<0.001). 101 considering the potential for increased lung injury with corticosteroid use in patients with covid-19 and reported use of tocilizumab for covid-19, jak-stat inhibitors were theorized to have an effect on the hyperinflammatory state that occurs in covid-19. baricitinib may also prevent endocytosis and viral infection by inhibiting aak1 activity. baricitinib has not been studied in humans for covid-19.baricitinib is typically dosed as 2 mg/day by mouth for rheumatoid arthritis. 98 no data exist for treatment of covid-19; however, it is proposed that a 7-to 14-day course would be needed. 102 dose adjustments are recommended for patients with lymphopenia, neutropenia, and anemia. 98 it is recommended to hold baricitinib in patients with an absolute lymphocyte count less than 500 cells/mm 2 , an absolute neutrophil count less than 1000 cells/mm 2 , and hemoglobin less than 8 g/dl. in patients with hepatic impairment, baricitinib is not recommended. dose adjustments are recommended with renal impairment. for patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (egfr) less than 30 ml/minute/ 1.73 m 2 , it is recommended to hold baricitinib. for patients with an egfr 30-60 ml/minute/ 1.73 m 2 , it is recommended to decrease dose to 1 mg once/day. there are no dosing recommendations for patients requiring crrt.baricitinib reaches peak concentrations within 1 hour of oral administration with steady state achieved at 2-3 days. 98 baricitinib has an oral bioavailability of 80% and is not significantly impacted by taking with or without food. the baricitinib volume of distribution is 76 l; it is 50% bound to plasma proteins and 45% bound to serum proteins. it is a substrate of p-gp, breast cancer resistance protein oat, and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein transporters.pharmacotherapy volume 40, number 5, 2020 metabolism of baricitinib occurs mainly by cyp3a4, and elimination is~75% renal. relevant drug-drug interactions with baricitinib include strong oat 3 inhibitors that may increase baricitinib exposure. 98 for patients concomitantly taking strong oat 3 inhibitors, the recommended dose of baricitinib is 1 mg once/day.several boxed warnings exist for baricitinib including risk of infection, particularly upper respiratory tract infection, malignancy, and thrombosis. 98 of note, these side effects were higher in patients receiving the 4-mg dose of baricitinib that is not a recommended dose due to these safety concerns. patients in clinical trials also experienced increased incidence of neutropenia, platelet elevations, aminotransferase elevations, lipid elevations, creatinine elevations, creatine phosphokinase elevations, and nausea. monitoring for long-term treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is recommended with baseline complete blood counts including neutrophils, liver function tests, and lipids. 98 monitoring for signs and symptoms of infection while treating with baricitinib is recommended in addition to skin examinations in patients at an increased risk for skin cancer.baricitinib is available as a film-coated immediate-release tablet for enteral administration. 98 it can be given with or without consideration of food. no data are available regarding crushing baricitinib and administration via gastric feeding tubes. although baricitinib is not on the niosh list of medications, it is carcinogenic by virtue of the adverse effect profile, and it may be treated as a hazardous drug.tocilizumab is a monoclonal antibody with fda approval for chimeric antigen receptor (car)-t cell-induced cytokine release syndrome (crs), giant cell arteritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and polyarticular or systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis. 103 evolving data suggest patients with severe covid-19 experience significant lung injury secondary to a surge of inflammatory cytokines, resulting in a cytokine storm. viral replication activates the innate immune system to secrete various signaling proteins such as ils that results in hyperinflammation and further lung damage. interleukin-6 is a key inflammatory protein involved in this pathway. 100 tocilizumab binds to il-6 receptors, thereby blunting cell signaling and effectively downregulating the excess inflammatory response. 103 the rationale for use of tocilizumab in covid-19 stems from data discovered with sars and mers. the sars patients were noted to have crs as a result of proinflammatory marker release including il-6 and tnf-a. 104 patients with mers were discovered to have elevations of il-6, il-8, and il-1b. 105 the data from wuhan in critically ill patients with covid-19 have also found increased levels of cytokines including il-6 and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor. 8, 106 lung tissue obtained postmortem from a patient with covid-19 showed elevated inflammatory factors suggestive of a cytokine storm. 107 interleukin-6 may be a key driver of the robust inflammatory response within the lungs of icu patients with covid-19. recently published data from wuhan indicate that tocilizumab added to lopinavir, methylprednisolone, and oxygen therapy in 20 patients with severe covid-19 resulted in rapid reductions in fever in all patients, improvement in oxygenation for 75%, and facilitated discharged from the hospital in 95% of patients. 108 additional studies are underway with tocilizumab combined with other antivirals or compared against renal replacement therapy for management of crs associated with covid-19. 109, 110 sarilumab, another anti-il-6 antibody, is currently under evaluation for the treatment of covid-19. it will be studied against supportive care measures and provide enhanced insight into the utility of targeting this pathway. 111tocilizumab for most indications is weight based with a maximum dose of 800 mg. the dosing of tocilizumab for covid-19 is not well established. when used in a case series of patients with covid-19, a onetime dose of intravenous tocilizumab 400 mg was administered. 108, 112 for crs secondary to chimeric covid-19 emerging pharmacotherapy barlow et al antigen receptor car t-cell therapy, three additional doses of tocilizumab can be given with at least 8 hours between each dose. in the covid-19 reports, three patients received an additional dose of tocilizumab 12 hours later as a result of continued fevers. 108 tocilizumab auc varies based on body weight, and the vd of intravenous tocilizumab at steady state is 6.4 l. 103 there are no published data regarding the use of tocilizumab 400 mg in obese patients with covid-19 and whether the 400-mg dose is adequate. the half-life of tocilizumab is concentration dependent, at 11 days when dosed 4 mg/kg and 13 days when dosed 8 mg/kg. tocilizumab should be held when the absolute neutrophil count is 1000 cells/mm 2 or below, platelet count is 100,000 cells/mm 2 or below, or liver enzymes are more than 3-5 times the upper limit of normal. this is particularly relevant for the treatment of covid-19 that was demonstrated to elevate liver enzymes in severe cases. 113 tocilizumab elimination is not influenced by renal dysfunction. no dose adjustments are required. in patients receiving tocilizumab for covid-19, only one patient had a history of chronic kidney disease, and no patients had reported hepatic impairment. 108limited efficacy data with tocilizumab should be weighed against its significant cost and potential for toxicities. secondary to interference with the host immune response, infections ranging from bacterial, viral, and fungal sources may develop. 103 patients should be screened for active or latent tuberculosis infection before administering tocilizumab. gastrointestinal perforation after the use of tocilizumab was reported in patients with a history of diverticulitis or receiving high-dose corticosteroids. 103 infusion reactions causing hypertension, headache, and skin reactions within 24 hours of administration were reported after administration of tocilizumab. 103 tocilizumab is recommended to be administered intravenously over 1 hour. 112, 103 tocilizumab should not be administered in the same line with other medications because it has not been studied for compatibility. 103 pertinent drug-drug interactions with tocilizumab may occur as a result of increased cyp450 enzyme activity. in vitro studies reported that tocilizumab may increase cyp1a2, cyp2b6, cyp2c9, cyp2c19, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4 activity. in vivo studies reported that tocilizumab may interact with simvastatin via increased activity of cyp3a4, resulting in decreased simvastatin exposure. findings were also similar when omeprazole and tocilizumab were combined, resulting in decreased omeprazole auc through increased cyp19 activity.passive immunity delivered as anti-coronavirus antibodies from convalescent human plasma may offer a novel therapeutic approach for covid-19. the proposed mechanism of benefit from convalescent human plasma derived from survivors of the coronavirus is the transfer of passive immunity in an effort to restore the immune system during critical illness and neutralize the virus to suppress viremia. 114 the main driver for the investigation of convalescent human blood products in the treatment of covid-19 originated from its use in the h1n1 pandemic, during which patients derived a clinically significant mortality benefit and improved viral clearance from convalescent blood products. 115 in a retrospective review of 40 patients with sars who failed treatment with methylprednisolone and ribavirin at 3 days, 74% (19) of patients who received convalescent plasma were discharged by day 22 compared with only 19% (21) of patients who received high-dose corticosteroids (p<0.001). five deaths were reported in the steroid group compared with no deaths with convalescent plasma. to obtain the greatest benefit from convalescent plasma, treatment should be used early in the course of disease (before day 16) because viremia from sars was shown to peak in the first week of treatment followed by a primary immune response by days 10 to 14. 116 preliminary data from ongoing convalescent plasma therapy data in the covid-19 outbreak suggest improvement in clinical symptoms with no signal of adverse effects. 117 targeted anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies that allow for a more selective therapy against coronavirus are in development, and some companies have begun active recruitment for investigation into its clinical efficacy and safety treatment of covid-19. 118 takeda pharmaceutical has announced investigation into a new plasmaderived therapy coined tak-888. this plasma-pharmacotherapy volume 40, number 5, 2020 derived therapy involves removing plasma from covid-19 survivors, extracting coronavirusspecific antibodies to administer to infected patients to stimulate a potent immune response against sars-cov-2. convalescent therapy remains in the experimental phase, but appears it may favorably influence the treatment course, and enrollment of patients into a clinical trial will aid in defining its role in therapy.given lack of efficacy and risk of delayed viral clearance, the world health organization consensus document on the management of covid-19 strongly recommends against the use of corticosteroids unless alternative indications are present. acute lung injury and respiratory distress syndrome secondary to systemic inflammation are well-characterized sequelae of sars and mers outbreaks with pulmonary histology demonstrating evidence of inflammation and diffuse alveolar damage. 119 corticosteroids were proposed to be of benefit in suppression of lung inflammation in mers and sars due to their immunomodulatory properties. however, clinical data are now clear that patients derive no benefit from corticosteroids in the management of sars, mers, or covid-19 but have instead demonstrated evidence of increased risk of harm including prolonged mechanical ventilation, avascular necrosis, delayed viral clearance, and secondary infections. 120, 121 a retrospective observational study of critically ill patients with mers who received hydrocortisone 300 mg per day did not find a 90-day mortality benefit (adjusted odds ratio 0.8, 95% confidence interval [ci] 0.5-1.1, p<0.12) but did find delayed viral clearance (adjusted hr 0.4, 95% ci 0.2-0.7, p<0.0005). 122 the lack of survival benefit was further supported by a systematic review of corticosteroids in patients with sars but showed an increased risk of psychosis, avascular necrosis, prolonged viremia, and hyperglycemia with corticosteroid treatment. 120 although severe, potentially life-threatening ards can occur, generalizing the evidence for corticosteroids to the covid-19-associated ards is problematic and fails to account for the differing pathogenesis of viral-induced lung injury. 121 corticosteroids should only be considered if required for an alternative indication (i.e., septic shock, bronchoconstriction). despite the lack of benefit defined in previous trials, a clinical trial is actively recruiting to assess the efficacy and safety of methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day for a duration of 7 days in noncritically ill patients to further identify the risks and benefits of therapy. 123 other emerging therapies for treatment of covid-19in addition to the drug therapies previously discussed, several additional drugs are being evaluated as potential therapies for covid-19 in clinical trials. arbidol, a drug used in russia and china for prophylaxis and treatment of influenza and respiratory viral infections, works by blocking viral fusion to the target cell membrane and has demonstrated activity against several viruses including sars. 124 arbidol is currently being evaluated for the treatment of covid-19 in several studies in china and is currently a recommended treatment option for covid-19 there. arbidol is not available in the united states. favipiravir, a drug licensed in japan for the treatment of influenza, is another potential agent due to its activity against a wide spectrum of rna viruses including coronaviruses. 125 several studies are underway evaluating favipiravir for the treatment of covid-19. other antiviral agents being evaluated in china for the treatment of covid-19 include antiretroviral agents darunavir/cobicistat and emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide, as well as the influenza drug baloxavir. finally, oseltamivir, a neuraminidase inhibitor used for treatment of influenza, is also being studied for treatment of covid-19. however, oseltamivir is unlikely to be active against sars-cov-2 based on previous studies with sars-cov. 61 drugs to decrease the inflammation associated with covid-19 are also being evaluated. one of these drugs is thalidomide that may decrease inflammation through its antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory effects. 126 the covid-19 pandemic has presented an enormous global health crisis. the pharmaceutical industry is working to develop novel treatments targeted at sars-cov-2. in the meantime, the medical community is trialing a variety of therapies that target different antiviral and immunomodulating mechanisms to combat this virus. some of the drugs are investigational, and some are old drugs being repurposed for a new pathogen. as we gain more information both about the effectiveness of the drugs against covid-19 emerging pharmacotherapy barlow et al sars-cov-2 and their pharmacokinetics, especially in the complex setting of critical illness, we will be better equipped to optimize therapeutic strategies.difference compared to the control group (p=0.001). lopinavir-ritonavir has shown no improvement in time to clinical improvement which is seen in our meta-analyses (p=0.1). remdesivir has shown no significant improvement in time to clinical improvement but this trial had insufficient power. discussion: due to the paucity in evidence, it is difficult to establish the efficacy of these drugs in the treatment of covid-19 as currently there is no significant clinical effectiveness of the repurposed drugs. further large clinical trials are required to achieve more reliable findings. a risk-benefit analysis is required on an individual basis to weigh out the potential improvement in clinical outcome and viral load reduction compared to the risks of the adverse events. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) introduction starting in december 2019, there was a pneumonia outbreak of unknown cause in wuhan, hubei province of china (17). the origin of the virus is unknown but there is an epidemiological link the huanan seafood wholesale market where there was a sale of wild animals, such as bats (17) . after notification of the world health organisation (who) on 31 december 2019, scientists were able to isolate a 2019-ncov from a patient and subsequently perform genome sequencing by the 7 th of january. since then many cases have emerged internationally leading to the who declaring the novel 2019-ncov (covid-19) outbreak a global pandemic (18) .similar clinical features to previous betacoronavirus infections have been noted, including presentations with fever, dry cough and dyspnoea but very few presentations with prominent upper respiratory tract signs and symptoms such as rhinorrhoea, sneezing or sore throat (19) . on imaging, bilateral ground-glass opacities on chest computed tomography (ct) scans have been noted. the patients with severe illness developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and required intensive care unit (icu) admission and oxygen therapy. these features bear resemblances with the severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infections. however, covid-19 patients rarely develop intestinal symptoms such as diarrhoea which was present in about 20-25% of those with sars-cov and mers-cov. the mortality rate has been similarly described by cohorts (19) (20) (21) (22) as 4-15%.with many describing the memories of the novel coronavirus outbreak in china, sars-cov in 2003 (17), drugs used during sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) are being considered (19) .with no current universally agreed treatment for covid-19, the current care advised is for supportive management depending on patient's needs, including antipyretics for fever and oxygen therapy.the repurposing of drugs can provide an avenue to find treatment options for covid-19 which has currently infected over 3.2 million people as of 2 may 2020 reported by the who (23).hydroxychloroquine (hcq) and chloroquine (cq), both anti-malarial drugs, have been authorised by both us and french authorities as there is no adequate approved and available alternative to treat covid-19 (24) . these drugs have been shown to have potent anti-viral activity against covid-19 in in-vitro studies (25, 26) . both can have adverse effects with hcq, a derivative of cq, being less toxic when used long term. therefore, recently, high-dosage of cq (12g) with either azithromycin and oseltamir has not been recommended in patients with severe covid-19 due to safety issues (27) .the use of anti-virals has also been trialled as previously, screening of approved drugs identified anti-virals to have an inhibitory activity on sars-cov. lopinavir, an anti-viral, also has activity against mers-cov both in vitro and in animal models 14 . therefore, due to the homogeneity of sars-cov-2 compared to the mentioned zoonotic viruses, anti-virals which have previously been used are being repurposed. remdesivir has also demonstrated effective control of covid-19 in-vitro (26) and has since been authorised for emergency use by the food and drug administration (fda) (28).the aim of this systematic review is to evaluate the data currently available regarding the repurposing of different drugs for covid-19 treatment.this systematic review adheres to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines (29). we searched ovid-medline, embase, cochrane library for articles published any time up to april 22, 2020. we also searched clinical trial registration sites in the uk (nihr), europe (clinicaltrialsregister.eu), us (clinicaltrials.gov) and internationally (isrctn.com). we examined the reference lists of articles to identify additional studies.the following search term was used: (favipiravir or remdesivir or galidesivir or ivermectin or oseltamivir or ganciclovir or lopinavir or ritonavir or darunavir or cq or hcq or arbidol or azithromycin or amoxicillin or moxifloxacin or ceftriaxone or antifungals or androgen receptor blockers or tea or traditional chinese medicine) and ("2019 ncov" or 2019ncov or "2019 novel coronavirus" or "covid 19" or covid19 or "new coronavirus" or "novel coronavirus" or "sars cov-2" or (wuhan coronavirus) or "covid 19" or "sars-cov" or "2019-ncov" or "sars-cov-2")only studies in english that evaluated the efficacy of the listed drugs were included. this included randomized controlled trials (rcts) as well as observational studies (including cohort and control studies). case reports were also collated.patients with suspected and consequently diagnosed with novel coronavirus (covid-19) will be included, with the following interventions: favipiravir, remdesivir, galidesivir, ivermectin, oseltamivir, ganciclovir, lopinavir/ ritonavir, darunavir, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, arbidol, azithromycin, amoxicillin, moxifloxacin, ceftriaxone, antifungals, androgen receptor blockers, tea and traditional chinese medicine will be considered. comparators will include standard of care treatment or placebo. the main outcomes will be time to clinical recovery, benefits in reducing mortality and reduction in viral load.we excluded studies in other languages when no translation was available, review articles, commentaries and letters to editors.one reviewer (pk) extracted data using a spreadsheet and a second (al) validated data extraction. descriptive and quantitative data were entered into a spreadsheet.the protocol is available at prospero (crd42020180915).one author (pk) extracted the data which was confirmed by another author (al). duplicate studies and clinical trials were removed as shown in prisma diagram ( figure 1 ). quality of studies (risk of bias) was assessed using the cochrane rob 2.0 for rcts ( figure 2 ) and robins-i (30) for non-rcts ( figure 3 ).where trials examined similar outcomes and were considered suitably homogenous, metaanalysis was performed. for adverse events and rates of negative seroconversion, odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals were calculated. the chi squared test was used to assess for heterogeneity. if p<0.10 for heterogeneity, then a random effects model was used, otherwise a fixed effects model was used. all meta-analyses were performed using the cochrane review manager (v.5.3, 2014; cochrane initiative).our literature search identified 937 studies or clinical trials, with 708 included after removal of duplicates. after abstract screening, 251 were included for full-text screening and of these 16 were included in qualitative synthesis ( figure 1 ), with 6 of these being randomized controlled trials.characteristics of studies (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) included are summarized in table 1 primary outcome of the studies included are also variables including time to clinical recovery and viral clearance. clinical improvement data for individual studies is summarized in table 2 . data on virology and radiology is shown in table 3 .all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.07.20124677 doi: medrxiv preprint2 studies examined the effects of cq, 1 compared it to anti-viral treatment and 1 was a case series used in a news briefing. 1 study analysed both clinical recovery and viral clearance. cq was initially mentioned in a news briefing (3), with results from more than 100 patients which had showed it was superior to the control treatment in shortening the disease course as well as inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings and promoting a virus negative conversion.subsequently, huang et al. (5) compared it to another proposed therapy (lpv-r) in a cohort study with 10 patients in the cq arm and 12 patients in the lopinavir/ritonavir arm. with cq, 70% of the patients had a negative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) at day 7, 90% at day 10 and 100% at day 14. compared to the lpv-r group where 58% of the patients had a negative rt-pcr at day 7, 75% at day 10 and 92% at day 14. there was a delay in lung clearance based on ct imaging, suggesting viral clearance does not translate immediately into pathological improvement in lungs. with cq, 20% had a ct scan improvement at day 10 and 100% at day 14 compared to anti-virals with 8% showing an improvement at day 10 and 75% at day 14. with cq, discharge rates from hospital were 100% at day 14 but with anti-virals, only 50% of the patients were discharged at day 14.6 studies examined the effects of hcq, of which 2 also added azithromycin. 4 compared it to a standardized care and 2 were case series with hcq and azithromycin. 4 studies analysed clinical recovery, whilst 6 studied viral clearance there have been 3 rcts in china. in the study by chen et al. (1) , where the eligibility criteria are not known, 30 patients were recruited, with 15 patients in each arm. it showed no significant difference (p>0.05) in negative seroconversion rate at day 7 with 87% negative in the hcq group and 93% in the control group and in time to negative seroconversion (p>0.05). time to normalization of body temperature was also comparable between the 2 arms and radiological progression using ct imaging showed 33% of the cases progressed of the hcq group compared to 47% in the control group.chen et al. (2) has included only mild cases with oxygen saturation (sao2) >93% and confirmed chest ct with pneumonia, comparing hcq (n=31) to standard treatment (n=31) which was undefined. the primary outcome was time to clinical recovery, defined as cough relief and return of body temperature (<36.6ºc on surface, <37.2ºc under armpit and mouth or <37.8ºc in rectum and tympanic membrane) maintained for more than 72 hours. it was shown that normalization of body temperature was significantly (p=0.0008) shorter by 1 day in the hcq group (2.2 days) compared to the control group (3.2 days). there was also significantly (p=0.0016) reduced cough remission time in the hcq group (2 days) compared to the control group (3.1 days). it was also noted that overall 6% of the patients progressed to a severe illness and these occurred in the control group not receiving hcq.2 testing, haemodynamic monitoring and intensive care. this study included anyone over the age of 18 with a confirmed sars-cov-2 infection. the primary outcome was the negative conversion of sars-cov-2 within 28 days. secondary outcomes included alleviation of clinical symptoms defined as resolving fever to axillary temperature of <36.6ºc, normalization of sao2>94% on room air, disappearance of respiratory symptoms; laboratory parameters and chest radiology within 28 days. viral clearance was similar in both arms with a negative seroconversion rate at 28 days of 85.4% and 81.3% in the hcq arm and soc arm respectively. the time to negative seroconversion was also similar with 8 days and 7 days in hcq and soc arms respectively. the overall rate of symptom alleviation within 28 days was also similar with hcq (59.9%) and with soc alone (66.6%). the median time to alleviation of clinical symptoms was also similar with 19 days in the hcq arm and 21 days in the soc arm. however, in a subgroup analysis when confounding effects of other anti-viral agents was removed, the efficacy of hcq on the alleviation of symptoms is more evident (hazard ratio, 8.83, 95%ci, 1.09-71.3). changes in c-reactive protein (crp) and lymphocyte count were also analysed with the hcq arm showing a significantly greater decline (p=0.045) in crp from baseline (6.986) compared to the soc arm (2.723) and a greater elevation in lymphocyte count from baseline in the hcq (0.062) compared to soc (0.008) which was not significant (p=0.547) a french cohort study (7) enrolled 20 patients with hcq and 16 patients was a control, regardless of their clinical status. it has shown that hcq can provide clearing of nasopharyngeal carriage in 50% of the patients by day 3 compared to 6.3% without it. the same research group have reported a case series (4) with 80 patients on a combination of azithromycin and hcq. this showed negative virus cultures in 97.5% of those included at day 5 with only 15% requiring oxygen and 4% requiring icu. however, these results were rapidly questioned by another study (6) who followed the same regime of azithromycin and hcq but showed that at day 5, 8 out of 10 (80%) of the patients were still positive for covid-19 rna.a total of 8 studies regarding anti-virals was included, 6 studies examined the effects of lpvr. of these, 2 compared it to a standardized care, 1 compared it to favipavir, 1 compared it to the combination of lpv-r and arbidol, 1 compared it to arbidol and 1 compared it to both arbidol and a control group. 1 other study compared favipavir to arbidol and a case series regarding remdesivir is also included. 4 studies analysed clinical recovery, whilst 5 studied viral clearance.there are 2 rcts comparing lpv-r to control and one further compares it to arbidol. cao et al. (14) is the largest rct in this systematic review enrolling 199 patients with pneumonia confirmed by chest imaging, sao2<94% while on breathing ambient air, 99 in the lpv-r group and 100 to the standard-care group. the primary outcome was the time to clinical improvement, defined as time from randomization to improvement of two points on a seven category ordinal scale or live discharge which was 16 days in both lpv-r and standardcare alone. in subgroups of treatment within 12 days or later treatment, there was no association with a shorter time to clinical improvement. secondary outcomes measured included a 28 day mortality which was lower in the lpv-r (19.2%) than in the standard-care all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. .(25% group), stay in intensive care which was shorter in the lpv-r (6 days) group than in the standard-care (11 days) group, percentage of patients with clinical improvement at day 14 which was higher in the lpv-r group (45.5%) than in the standard-care group (30%) and time to discharge which was shorter in the lpv-r group (12 days) than in the standard-care group (14 days). other secondary outcomes included duration of oxygen therapy, duration of hospitalization and time from randomization to death which had no significant difference between the two groups. in terms of virology, the percentage of patients with detectable viral rna was similar in both groups on any sampling day (5, 10, 14, 21 and 28), for example at day 5, 34% in lpvr group compared to 32.9% in standard-care group. however, the mortality in this trial was 22.1% which is significantly higher than the mortality reported in descriptive studies, potentially indicating that a severely ill population was recruited. therefore, the question of whether this anti-viral treatment may be effective in early treatment remains unaddressed.another rct (11) recruiting patients with mild (mild symptoms but no signs of pneumonia on imaging) or moderate (fever, respiratory symptoms and pneumonia on imaging) covid-19 compared lpv-r, arbidol and a control group with no anti-viral medication. the primary outcome was time of positive-to-negative conversion of sars-cov-2 from initiation of treatment to day 21 which was not significantly different (p=0.981). time to viral clearance was 9 days, 9.1 days and 9.3 days in lpv-r, arbidol and control group respectively. there was also no significant difference of negative conversion rates at day 7 (p=0.966) and day 14 (p=0.352) of treatment. there was also no significant difference in secondary outcomes which included rate of antipyresis, rate of cough resolution and rate of improvement of chest ct imaging at day 7 and 14 (p>0.05). to take into account the influence of time from onset to treatment, this was evaluated in those who deteriorate to a severe clinical status (5 days) compared to those who did not deteriorate (4 days) and showed no significant difference (p=0.619).however, one cohort study (9) comparing 42 patients treated with lpv-r to 5 patients in the control group has shown a significant reduction in time for body temperature normalization, 4.8 days in the lpv-r group compared to 7.3 days in the control group (p=0.0364).in one study (12) , lpv-r has also been used with arbidol which has higher negative seroconversion rate both at day 7 with 75% negative in the combination group compared to 35% in the lpv-r group (p<0.05) and at day 14, 94% negative in the combination group compared to 53% negative in the lpv-r group (p<0.05). there was also a significant difference (p<0.05) in the chest ct scans showing improvement in the combination group (69%) when compared to the lpv-r group (29%).another cohort study (15) has suggested favipavir is superior with a higher clinical recovery rate at day 7, defined as >72h recovery of body (axillary) temperature <36.6ºc, respiratory rate, sao2 >98% and cough relief (mild or none). this was significantly different (p<0.0001) with 61% of the patients clinically recovered in the favipavir group, compared to the 52% in the lpv-r group.a case series (16) involving remdesivir for compassionate use in 53 patients showed a 68% of the patients improved in the category of oxygen support by day 18 with 15% of the all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . patients worsening. the cumulative incidence of clinical improvement, defined by either a decrease of 2 or more points on the six point ordinal scale or live discharge, was 84% improvement. in this case series, 7 (13%) of the patients died, 6 of which were receiving non-invasive ventilation. overall mortality from date of admission was 0.56 per 100 hospitalisation days and when comparing patients receiving invasive ventilation (0.57) to those receiving non invasive ventilation (0.51), there was no substantial difference. however, the risk of death was greater among patients over the age of 70 (hazard ratio 11.34) and those with a higher serum creatinine (hazard ration 1.91).post-searching, a rct done at 10 hospitals in wuhan was published (31) . this enrolled 237 patients who were covid-19 positive, had pneumonia confirmed by chest imaging, had sao2<94% on room air and were within 12 days of symptoms onset, 158 to the remdesivir arm and 79 to the placebo arm. however, only 155 and 78 in the remdesivir and placebo arm respectively were included in the per-protocol population due to withdrawal of consent, receiving the medication for less days than the protocol and not starting the study. the primary clinical endpoint was time to clinical improvement defined as a two-point reduction in patients' admission status on a six-point scale. this was not significantly different in the remdesivir group (21 days) compared to the placebo group (23 days). in those receiving treatment within 10 days, there was a numerically faster time to clinical improvement in those in the remdesivir arm (18 days) compared to the placebo arm (23 days). clinical improvement rates at day 7, 14 and day 28 were not significantly different between the remdesivir group and placebo group. however, numerically, at day 14 there was a higher clinical improvement rate at day 14 (27% with remdesivir compared to 23% in placebo) and at day 28 (65% with remdesivir compared to 58% in placebo). the 28 day mortality was similar between the remdesivir group (14%) and the placebo group (13%).other clinical outcomes such as duration of oxygen support, duration of invasive mechanical ventilation duration of hospital stay, time to discharge and time to death were not significantly different. however, numerically, the days of invasive mechanical ventilation were lower in the remdesivir group (7 days) compared to the placebo group (15.5 days). in terms of viral load, no differences were observed between both groups with a similar decrease in viral load. in the same study, adverse events were reported in 66% of the patients (18% serious) in the remdesivir group, the most common ones being constipation, hypoalbuminaemia, hypokalaemia, anaemia, thrombocytopaemia and increased total bilirubin. adverse events were also reported in 64% (26% serious) of the patients in the control group, including hypoalbuminaemia, constipation, anaemia, hypokalaemia, increased aspartate aminotransferase, increased bloods lipids and increased total bilirubin. overall, more patients discontinued the drug due to adverse events in the remdesivir group (12%) than in the placebo group (5%). antiviral side effects ranged from 0-60% across the studies with reported side effects such as liver injury (high transaminases, high bilirubin), leucopenia, gastro-intestinal and cutaneous side effects (diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, rash). one randomized controlled trial reported lpv-r adverse effects as 48% (19.2% serious ones) compared to 49% (32% serious ones) in the control group. the same study reported that 14% of the patients could not complete the 14 day course of lpv-r due to adverse events. there was only one case series regarding remdesivir which reported a 60% adverse event rate, including increased hepatic enzymes, renal impairment, diarrhea, rash and hypotension. this included 23% of severe adverse events including multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, septic shock, acute kidney injury and hypotension.16 case reports (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) (43) (44) (45) (46) are summarised in table 4 . in each of the cases, a number of medications have been trialed, antibiotics in 10 of the cases, hcq in 8, lpv-r in 7 and remdesivir in 2 of the cases. interestingly, only 2 of them reported adverse effects, both with the use of hcq and azithromycin: high transaminases, atrial fibrillation and long qt syndrome. figure 2 and 3 show the risk of bias assessment of each study, using rob-2 for rcts and robins-i for non-rcts. of the 6 rcts, 1 (1) was of high risk whilst 5 (11, 12, 14, 16) were of moderate risk. of the non rcts, 1 was not appropriate for analysis (15), 1 (13) was of moderate risk and 8 (4-7, 9, 10, 12, 16) were of serious risk.3 studies were included in the meta-analysis of adverse events using hcq ( figure 4 ) and 2 studies were included in the meta-analysis of negative seroconversion rate using hcq ( figure 5 ). in the meta-analysis of seroconversion rate, cheng et al. measured this rate at day 7 while tang et al. measured it at day 28. these show that there is a significant difference (p=0.001) regarding adverse events in hcq compared to control group (odd ratio 3.61, 95% ci, 1.66-7.84). however, no difference was found (p=0.68) in negative seroconversion rate between hcq and the control group (odds ratio 1.18, 95% ci, 0.53-2.66) 3 studies were included in the meta-analyses of adverse events with lpv-r ( figure 6 ). this shows that there is no significant difference (p=0.1) between lpv-r and control group regarding adverse events (odds ratio 1.54, 95% ci, 0.92-2.55).all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.07.20124677 doi: medrxiv preprinthaving been declared a global pandemic, with the numbers of cases rising everyday, covid-19 has been an unprecedented challenge in a number of areas with a subsequent reorganization of the clinical activities (47) . clinicians across the world have trialed repurposing a number of medications. regarding cq, it has been suggested as a more effective and inexpensive option when compared to anti-virals (5) . a recent trial (27) has compared the use of high-dosage (12g) and low-dosage cq and has suggested that a highdosage regimen with azithromycin and oseltamivir was not safe to continue due to concerns regarding cardiotoxic events, myocarditis and qtc interval prolongation which can be associated with an increase in fatal arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia. however, age can be a confounder as it can be associated with unfavourable outcomes. therefore, it was advised that high dosage cq should not be recommended in the treatment of severe covid-19 but these findings cannot be extrapolated to patients with non-severe covid-19.the results from randomized controlled trials using hcq have shown a similar negative seroconversion rate and time to clinical recovery, when compared to standard care. however, it has been recorded that hcq may fasten normalization of body temperature and cough remission. with some smaller cohorts showing benefit of hcq, it is important to be cautious with results. therefore, overall, the role of of hcq in the management for covid-19 may still remain promising but larger scale studies are required.showing no difference when compared to standard-care alone. however, one rct has shown that lpv-r may have a lower 28-day mortality, a shorter stay in intensive care, a shorter time to discharge and an effect on clinical improvement. the only study (16) regarding remdesivir identified in our search was an observational study about a compassionate use in patients with severe covid-19, which showed an 84% clinical improvement and that improved in the category of oxygen support in 68% of the cases. after our search was carried out, a rct (31) was published comparing remdesivir and placebo, showing no significant advantage in time to clinical improvement, mortality or time to viral clearance with remdesivir, even if well tolerated. however, the power of this study was insufficient as it did not reach its target enrolment, due to the marked reductions in new patient presentations in mid-march in wuhan. the initiation of treatment might have been quite late in the disease course as there were restrictions on hospital bed availability to have a significant improvement in outcomes.when summarizing the case reports, it is challenging to draw conclusions; however, the clinical improvement of the patients reported with a use of a cocktail of medications is an important aspect to consider.the present systematic review has several limitations. the paucity of rcts, the 'gold standard' for comparing interventions, is probably due to difficulties with randomization and blinding in the unprecedented and stressful environment faced by healthcare services. therefore, a large number of studies are observational or cohort studies which are quicker to organize and implement, therefore obtaining results rapidly which is essential as the number of worldwide cases is rising at an alarming rate. another limitation is that studies vary in the outcomes measured, therefore side-by-side comparisons become more difficult.due to this heterogeneity of the studies, we were only able to perform a meta-analysis on a maximum of 3 studies. in one of the analyses regarding negative seroconversion rate, they were measured at different time points, therefore not giving an accurate view. a large proportion of the studies included also do not measure survival and morbidity outcomes which are important. many of the studies included have also not been formally peer reviewed yet but, due to the urgency of the pandemic, draft manuscripts have been uploaded.we included every study found in our systematic review which may have introduced bias, therefore it is important to analyse all studies cautiously as the selection of patients is important as different studies have recruited patients with a different severity of covid-19. it is also important to consider the timeline of the administration of the medication as early administration of medication could be more beneficial than later in the course of the disease. when using risk of bias assessment tools, most of the non-rcts were at serious risk of bias due to confounders including baseline confounding factors such as the presence of comorbidities which could affect the outcome of the patient. no blinding of patients or assessors can also pose a risk of bias due to the potential unreliable measurement of outcomes.to our knowledge, this is the first systematic review regarding the repurposing of drugs in covid-19, summarizing 16 studies as well as 16 case reports. in conclusion, it is difficult to establish the efficacy of these drugs in the management of covid-19 due to the lack of evidence. however, likewise, there is also no sufficient evidence to show these drugs are not successful in improving clinical outcomes and reducing viral load. therefore, it is important to balance the benefits of trialing this medication with the adverse events described where the spectrum of these has not been clearly understood.accordingly, there is a need for further high quality data, especially from rcts, to evaluate the benefits of these repurposed drugs in the treatment of patients with covid-19. we recognise there is a large global effort for this, with the biggest covid-19 trial, the recovery trial (48), having recruited over 8500 participants across 173 sites to date (1 may 2020). this randomized trial is inviting clinically suspected or laboratory confirmed covid-19 adult (>18 years) patients hospitalised in the united kingdom to participate with randomisation to one of 4 arms: usual care, usual care plus lpv-r, usual care plus low-dose dexamethasone, usual care plus hcq or usual care plus azithromycin. those who deteriorate are further randomized between tocilizumab and a control group.this study indicates no clinical effectiveness regarding the role of chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine and anti-viral for the treatment of covid-19 patients. however, there is potential for these medications but further large clinical trials are required to achieve more reliable findings. therefore, a risk-benefit analysis is required on an individual basis to weigh out the potential improvement in clinical outcome and viral load reduction compared to the risks of the adverse events. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.07.20124677 doi: medrxiv preprint tables  table 1: characteristics of study (* -no (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.07.20124677 doi: medrxiv preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.07.20124677 doi: medrxiv preprinthuman coronaviruses (covs) such as hcov-229e, nl63, oc43 and hku1 primarily infect the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tract, causing mostly mild diseases. however, some covs such as sars-cov and mers-cov cause severe respiratory diseases (sars and mers) that result in~10% to~35% mortality [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . sars-cov caused a pandemic in 2003 with 774 deaths worldwide [6] [7] [8] . mers-cov was first reported in june 2012, and according to a world health organization (who) report, the potential of remdesivir, the united states food and drug administration (fda) has granted an orphan drug status on 23 march 2020 so that it can be used in clinics, and a clinical trial has started at the university of nebraska medical center, omaha, ne (nct04280705). in order to explore the feasibility of broad-spectrum nucleoside inhibitors of rna polymerases as potential inhibitors of sars-cov-2, we used comparative molecular modeling, docking and bioinformatics to assess these compounds as potential inhibitors of nsp12. more specifically, we present the feasibility of remdesivir, 5-fu, ribavirin, and favipiravir (t-705) as anti-sars-cov-2 compounds.nucleoside analog inhibitors are administered as compounds containing a nucleic acid base with modified sugar moiety. these compounds are metabolized into their triphosphate (tp) form by cellular kinases, becoming the bona fide substrates of nucleic acid polymerases. the nucleic acid polymerases contain conserved motifs that participate in nucleoside-tp (ntp) binding [53] . first, we assessed sequence conservation in the ntp-binding motifs using available nsp12 sequences of sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2.we then conducted a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of nsp12 proteins using available sequences from sars-cov (n = 40), mers-cov (n = 14) and sars-cov-2 (n = 26) along with bat cov (n = 31) (figure 1a ). our analyses showed that sars-cov-2 is closely related to the bat cov-ratg13 strain, which is consistent with earlier reports [8] . the majority of sequence variation was present in the n-terminal region of nsp12, belonging to niran and interface domains (the description of the interface domain in presented in the following section). the polymerase domain (amino acid residues 399-932) is highly conserved among all sars-cov-2 nsp12 proteins with only nine substitutions (t614n, n650s, h742t, e743d, d746n, y769f, n772t, a775s, a787s) with respect to sars-cov ( figure 1a ). the rdrp motifs (a to g) are highly conserved in the sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 strains (figure 1b) . sars-cov-2 rdrp motifs are fully conserved within currently available strain sequences (n = 179) (figure 1c ). this is further supported with the large number of sequences (n = 4551 as of 20 april 2020) available in the genomic epidemiology of hcov-19 (https://www.gisaid.org/epiflu-applications/next-hcov-19-app/).based on the cryoem structure, nsp12 has been divided into three structural regions: (i) the niran domain (residues 117-250), (ii) interface domain (residues 251-398), and (iii) polymerase domain (residues 399-919) [43] . the recently reported structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12 showed the presence of a newly identified n-terminal β-hairpin, which interacts with the palm subdomain of nsp12. we modeled sars-cov-2 nsp12 structure using the available cryoem structure of sars-cov nsp12 (pdb file 6nur [43] ). the protein sequence of sars-cov nsp12 has 99.9% identity with gz02 isolate (genbank accession number aas00002). the sars-cov-2 nsp12 sequence that we used in homology modeling was taken from isolate wiv05 (genbank accession number qhr63269). the two sequences (nsp12 from sars-cov and sars-cov-2) have~94% identity with the most sequence variation existing in the n-terminal β-hairpin, niran, and interface domains (figure 1a ).(t614n, n650s, h742t, e743d, d746n, y769f, n772t, a775s, a787s) with respect to sars-cov ( figure 1a ). the rdrp motifs (a to g) are highly conserved in the sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 strains (figure 1b) . sars-cov-2 rdrp motifs are fully conserved within currently available strain sequences (n = 179) (figure 1c ). this is further supported with the large number of sequences (n = 4551 as of 20 april 2020) available in the genomic epidemiology of hcov-19 (https://www.gisaid.org/epiflu-applications/next-hcov-19-app/). (green) and sars-cov-2 (blue). the bat cov-ratg13 that was proposed to be the origin of the sars-cov-2 is marked in red. the circos plot was created using circos software package (v0. . the amino acid changes between consensus sars-cov-2 compared to consensus sars-cov were identified by multiple sequence alignment and denoted as vertical bars on the circos plot. (b) the seven conserved rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) motifs (a-g) are as denoted by the sequence logo (weblogo v3). (c) sequence conservation of sars-cov-2 nsp12 motifs are shown as sequence logos (red).the modeled structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12 (figure 2) superposed extremely well on to the cryoem structure of sars-cov nsp12 (rmsd of <0.5 å for 802 cα atoms). nine non-conserved residues in the polymerase domain are located at the surface of nsp12 distal to the polymerase active site (d621, d760 and d761). all conserved rdrp motifs (a-g) [13] were easily identifiable in the modeled structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12 (figure 2b ). one of the unusual features of modeled sars-cov-2 nsp12 is the partial β-strand structure of motif a that contains one carboxylate (d621) of the catalytic triad. in fact, a similar conformation is present in the cryoem structure of sars-cov nsp12 [43] . motifs a and c are known to form a three-stranded β-sheet composed of one strand from motif a and two strands from motif c in both rdrps and dna-dependent dna polymerases. however, the crystal structures of poliovirus rdrp (3dpol) and enterovirus 71 rdrp (3dpol) elongation complexes showed subtle conformational changes in the palm subdomain (called the 'active site closure') and that the presence of incoming substrate induces inter-β-strand hydrogen bonds required for classification as β-strand (reviewed by peersen [54] ). therefore, the partial β-strand structure of motif a is expected to adopt a complete β-strand conformation in the complex consisting of primer-template (pt) and the nucleoside triphosphate (ntp). the crystal structures of poliovirus rdrp (3dpol) and enterovirus 71 rdrp (3dpol) elongation complexes showed subtle conformational changes in the palm subdomain (called the 'active site closure') and that the presence of incoming substrate induces inter-β-strand hydrogen bonds required for classification as β-strand (reviewed by peersen [54] ). therefore, the partial β-strand structure of motif a is expected to adopt a complete β-strand conformation in the complex consisting of primer-template (pt) and the nucleoside triphosphate (ntp). remdesivir (gs-441524) is a 1′-cyano 4-aza-7,9-dideazaadenosine c-adenosine nucleoside analog. it is a broad-spectrum rna polymerase inhibitor that has been shown to inhibit human and mouse covs [52] . more importantly, remdesivir has been shown to inhibit sars-cov-2 in vitro [48, 55] . a recent report showed that compassionate-use of remdesivir showed improvement in 68% of covid-19 patients [56] . the antiviral activity of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 is not surprising as it is a nucleoside analog and expected to bind at the ntp-binding site, which is highly conserved among sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 nsp12 polymerases ( figure 1b ). except motifs d and g, all other motifs either directly participate in ntp binding/hydrolysis or are spatially located in close vicinity of the remdesivir-tp binding site. a molecular model consisting of enzyme, remdesivir-tp and rna (pt) is shown in figure 3a .motifs a and c harbor catalytic site carboxylates and motif b binds the base/sugar moiety of the ntp. both are close to remdesivir-tp ( figure 3a ). motif e, which is in the vicinity of the ntp binding pocket, is present only in rna polymerases, and has been termed as 'primer grip' [6, 7] . this motif is also in close proximity to remdesivir-tp. motif f contains a highly conserved basic residue, which interacts with the tp moiety of ntp. we also identified r558 in the sars-cov-2 nsp12/pt/remdesivir-tp model as the conserved motif f basic residue, which interacts with the β-phosphate (figure 3a ). remdesivir (gs-441524) is a 1 -cyano 4-aza-7,9-dideazaadenosine c-adenosine nucleoside analog. it is a broad-spectrum rna polymerase inhibitor that has been shown to inhibit human and mouse covs [52] . more importantly, remdesivir has been shown to inhibit sars-cov-2 in vitro [48, 55] . a recent report showed that compassionate-use of remdesivir showed improvement in 68% of covid-19 patients [56] . the antiviral activity of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 is not surprising as it is a nucleoside analog and expected to bind at the ntp-binding site, which is highly conserved among sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 nsp12 polymerases ( figure 1b ). except motifs d and g, all other motifs either directly participate in ntp binding/hydrolysis or are spatially located in close vicinity of the remdesivir-tp binding site. a molecular model consisting of enzyme, remdesivir-tp and rna (pt) is shown in figure 3a .motifs a and c harbor catalytic site carboxylates and motif b binds the base/sugar moiety of the ntp. both are close to remdesivir-tp ( figure 3a ). motif e, which is in the vicinity of the ntp binding pocket, is present only in rna polymerases, and has been termed as 'primer grip' [6, 7] . this motif is also in close proximity to remdesivir-tp. motif f contains a highly conserved basic residue, which interacts with the tp moiety of ntp. we also identified r558 in the sars-cov-2 nsp12/pt/remdesivir-tp model as the conserved motif f basic residue, which interacts with the β-phosphate (figure 3a ).resistance to remdesivir has been demonstrated in in vitro passage assays [57] . two mutations (f476l and v553l) in mhv nsp12 appeared after 23 passages. amino acid residues f476 and v553 counterparts are numbered f483 and v560, respectively in the cryoem structure of sars-cov. hence, hereafter we will refer to these residues according to their numbering in the cryoem structure of sars-cov nsp12 (i.e., f483 and v560). both f483 and v560 are absolutely conserved in α-, β-, and γ-covs, and belong to the fingers subdomain of nsp12. their locations relative to remdesivir-tp are shown in figure 3b ,c, respectively. v560 is proximal to motif f. in our model of nsp12/pt/remdesivir-tp complex, v560 is close to the template nucleotide that is base-paired with remdesivir-tp (or incoming ntp). topologically equivalent valine (v181) interacts with the templating base in the crystal structures pathogens 2020, 9, 320 6 of 16 of foot-and-mouth disease virus (fmdv) 3dpol consisting of e/pt/atp [58] and coxsackievirus 3b 3dpol [54] . therefore, mutation v560l in nsp12 may alter the position of the template nucleotide and reduce the binding of remdesivir-tp, thereby imparting resistance to remdesivir.hence, hereafter we will refer to these residues according to their numbering in the cryoem structure of sars-cov nsp12 (i.e., f483 and v560). both f483 and v560 are absolutely conserved in α-, β-, and γ-covs, and belong to the fingers subdomain of nsp12. their locations relative to remdesivir-tp are shown in figure 3b ,c, respectively. v560 is proximal to motif f. in our model of nsp12/pt/remdesivir-tp complex, v560 is close to the template nucleotide that is base-paired with remdesivir-tp (or incoming ntp). topologically equivalent valine (v181) interacts with the templating base in the crystal structures of foot-and-mouth disease virus (fmdv) 3dpol consisting of e/pt/atp [58] and coxsackievirus 3b 3dpol [54] . therefore, mutation v560l in nsp12 may alter the position of the template nucleotide and reduce the binding of remdesivir-tp, thereby imparting resistance to remdesivir. f483 is located adjacent to motif b and forms hydrophobic interactions with v640 and v696 of motif b. mutation to l483 results in a shorter side chain yet maintains hydrophobic interactions with neighboring v640 and v696. it is possible that subtle changes in the hydrophobic interactions may assist in the known mechanism of active site closure in rdrps [29, 30] to enhance fidelity of nsp12, i.e., preferential selection of ntp over remdesivir-tp.the polymerase domain of sars-cov nsp12 has a high structural homology with picornavirus 3dpol [43] . hence, we reasoned that the nucleoside analogs, known to inhibit the well-studied fmdv 3dpol, might inhibit nsp12. the mechanism of inhibition of two major nucleoside analogs, 5-fu and ribavirin, has been structurally well studied [58] [59] [60] . below, we discuss the feasibility of 5-fu and ribavirin for the inhibition sars-cov-2 nsp12. 5-fu is a pyrimidine analog that has been used in clinics as an anti-cancer drug for many years [61, 62] . additionally, it is a mutagen for several viruses [46, 63] . incorporation of 5-fu-monophosphate (5-fump) into the viral genome by rdrps leads to error catastrophe [64, 65] . efficient extinction of fmdv has been achieved by 5-fu in combination with guanidine hydrochloride and heparin [66] . additionally, 5-fu after its conversion to 5-fu-triphosphate (5-futp) blocks initiation of fmdv rna synthesis and therefore functions as an initiation inhibitor [67] . mutations in rdrp enzymes under 5-fu pressure impart fitness loss in the absence of 5-fu, but confer a fitness gain in presence of 5-fu. most rna viruses do not possess a proofreading activity. therefore, these viruses overcome the effect of mutagens by selecting resistance mutations that enhance the fidelity rna synthesis [68] .covs also encode nsp14, which acts as a proofreading enzyme. deletion of nsp14 renders sars-cov sensitive to 5-fu [69] . furthermore, mapping the mutations affecting fidelity in coxsackievirus b3 onto the mhv nsp12 molecular model, and introducing these mutations into mhv with [nsp14-exon(+)] or without [nsp14-exon(−)] exonuclease activity, two mutations (v560i and m618f) were identified that conferred resistance to 5-fu [46] . mutation at nsp12 codon 560 (v560l) has also been reported for remdesivir (discussed above). therefore, resistance to 5-fu by mutation at v560 may occur through the repositioning of templating nucleotide, which, in turn may alter the selectivity of the enzyme for utp over 5-futp.we have previously reported that mutation v173i in fmdv 3dpol enhances selectivity of utp over 5-futp [70] . using pre-steady state kinetics, we showed that v173i mutation in fmdv 3dpol enhances the selectivity of utp over 5-futp by~3.2-fold compared to the wild-type enzyme. the selectivity of utp over 5-futp by v173i 3dpol was primarily due to the increase in the dissociation of 5-futp from the elongation complex, which resulted in restricted 5-fump incorporation [70] . fmdv containing v173i survived the mutagenic activity of 5-fu by compensating for the increase in a→g and u→c transitions that the wild-type virus endures in the presence of 5-fu [70] . compensation in the mutant virus entails an increase of g→a and c→u transitions in the presence of 5-fu, which approximates the mutational pattern to that of the wild-type virus replicating in the absence of 5-fu [70] . due to the fact that covs contain an exonuclease enzyme, the change in ntp selectivity may be a primary mechanism of 5-fu resistance, since the misincorporation of 5-fump would most likely be corrected by the nsp14 exonuclease.5-fu resistance mutation position m618 belongs to the conserved motif a. as described above, the active site closure mechanism of rdrps serves as a fidelity control [71] . a comparison of rdrp palm domains suggests that all (+) strand rna viruses use this active site closure mechanism to optimize the fidelity of rna synthesis [14] . as shown in figure 4 , m618 is clustered among hydrophobic residues emanating from motifs a (dark-red), c (red), and d (green). mutation m618f will result in the introduction of a bulky side chain (phenylalanine), which is also more hydrophobic than methionine. this may lead to a subtle change in the palm-based closure mechanism of rdrps (in the case of nsp12) and therefore enhance the fidelity of rna synthesis. m618 is topologically equivalent to position i230 in coxsackievirus and f230 of poliovirus. mutation at this position has been shown to affect the fidelity of the rdrp [14] . hence, it is possible that selection of m618f in the presence of 5-fu is related to the fidelity of nsp12. ribavirin (1-β-d-ribofuranosyl-1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide) is an fda approved antiviral drug. it is one of the most widely used broad-spectrum inhibitors of rna viruses. similar to 5-fu, it is mutagenic for many rna viruses [64, [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] . ribavirin has been in clinics for many years to treat hcv (in combination with pegylated interferon) [78] , fmdv [79] and poliovirus [80] . additionally, ribavirin in combination with interferon-α2a or α2b has been shown to inhibit mers-cov infection [81] [82] [83] . ribavirin triphosphate (rtp) binds at the ntp binding site of fmdv 3dpol [58] . due to the fact that ntp binding motifs are highly conserved among rdrps (figures 1 and 2) , rtp is predicted to bind and exert its inhibitory effect on all covs, including sars-cov-2.resistance to ribavirin in different rna viruses is achieved by mutations in the rdrp coding gene. in poliovirus, fmdv and enterovirus 71, mutations in the 3dpol (rdrp) confer resistance to ribavirin [84] [85] [86] [87] . hcv develops resistance to ribavirin (when used in combination with pegylated interferon) by blocking downstream signaling actions of stat1, stat2, irf9 and jak-stat pathways [88, 89] , and by mutation in the rdrp gene [90, 91] . mutations g64s and l420a in poliovirus 3dpol, m296i in fmdv 3dpol, and f415y in hcv ns5b have been reported to impart resistance to ribavirin. mutations at g64 and l123 in enterovirus 71 3dpol have also been reported to confer ribavirin resistance [87] .structurally, ribavirin resistance mutation sites in rna polymerases do not appear to be in absolutely equivalent positions. a structural alignment showed that g64 in poliovirus 3dpol is ~17 å away from the active site, whereas m296 in fmdv 3dpol is part of the ntp binding site (i.e., within 12 å). while y415 in hcv ns5b and l420 in poliovirus 3dpol are at topologically equivalent positions, they are ~22 å away in the thumb subdomain. in poliovirus 3dpol, resistance to ribavirin is achieved by mutations at g64 and at l420 ( figure 5 ). these two mutation sites are almost posterior to the active site. residue d868 of nsp12 is topologically equivalent to l420 of poliovirus 3dpol, whereas n462 (nsp12) can be tentatively assigned as the equivalent to g64 (3dpol). both y415 (of ns5b) and l420 (of poliovirus 3dpol) interact with the rna primer strand near the active site [92, 93] . mutation g64s in poliovirus 3dpol and m296i in fmdv 3dpol change the fidelity of the two enzymes [94, 95] , whereas mutation l420a facilitates rna recombination [86] . these examples suggest that resistance to ribavirin can be achieved by more than one mechanism. it is possible that resistance to ribavirin (1-β-d-ribofuranosyl-1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide) is an fda approved antiviral drug. it is one of the most widely used broad-spectrum inhibitors of rna viruses. similar to 5-fu, it is mutagenic for many rna viruses [64, [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] . ribavirin has been in clinics for many years to treat hcv (in combination with pegylated interferon) [78] , fmdv [79] and poliovirus [80] . additionally, ribavirin in combination with interferon-α2a or α2b has been shown to inhibit mers-cov infection [81] [82] [83] . ribavirin triphosphate (rtp) binds at the ntp binding site of fmdv 3dpol [58] . due to the fact that ntp binding motifs are highly conserved among rdrps (figures 1 and 2) , rtp is predicted to bind and exert its inhibitory effect on all covs, including sars-cov-2.resistance to ribavirin in different rna viruses is achieved by mutations in the rdrp coding gene. in poliovirus, fmdv and enterovirus 71, mutations in the 3dpol (rdrp) confer resistance to ribavirin [84] [85] [86] [87] . hcv develops resistance to ribavirin (when used in combination with pegylated interferon) by blocking downstream signaling actions of stat1, stat2, irf9 and jak-stat pathways [88, 89] , and by mutation in the rdrp gene [90, 91] . mutations g64s and l420a in poliovirus 3dpol, m296i in fmdv 3dpol, and f415y in hcv ns5b have been reported to impart resistance to ribavirin. mutations at g64 and l123 in enterovirus 71 3dpol have also been reported to confer ribavirin resistance [87] .structurally, ribavirin resistance mutation sites in rna polymerases do not appear to be in absolutely equivalent positions. a structural alignment showed that g64 in poliovirus 3dpol is 17 å away from the active site, whereas m296 in fmdv 3dpol is part of the ntp binding site (i.e., within 12 å). while y415 in hcv ns5b and l420 in poliovirus 3dpol are at topologically equivalent positions, they are~22 å away in the thumb subdomain. in poliovirus 3dpol, resistance to ribavirin is achieved by mutations at g64 and at l420 ( figure 5 ). these two mutation sites are almost posterior to the active site. residue d868 of nsp12 is topologically equivalent to l420 of poliovirus 3dpol, whereas n462 (nsp12) can be tentatively assigned as the equivalent to g64 (3dpol). both y415 (of ns5b) and l420 (of poliovirus 3dpol) interact with the rna primer strand near the active site [92, 93] . mutation g64s in poliovirus 3dpol and m296i in fmdv 3dpol change the fidelity of the two enzymes [94, 95] , whereas mutation l420a facilitates rna recombination [86] . these examples pathogens 2020, 9, 320 9 of 16 suggest that resistance to ribavirin can be achieved by more than one mechanism. it is possible that resistance to ribavirin in sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 can develop through mutation at d868 or through yet another unknown mutation and/or mechanism.pathogens 2020, 9, x for peer review 9 of 16 ribavirin in sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 can develop through mutation at d868 or through yet another unknown mutation and/or mechanism. favipiravir (t-705; 6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) is a broad-spectrum inhibitor of rna viruses [96, 97] , including ebola virus [98] , crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever [99] , lassa virus [100] and chikungunya virus [101] . it was also approved as an anti-influenza drug in 2014 in japan and, more recently, the italy aifa and china fda have approved its use for treatment of covid-19.favipiravir was discovered by chemical modification of a pyrazine analog (t-1106) [96] . after entering the cell, favipiravir is metabolized into the triphosphate form (t-705-rtp) that is recognized by rdrps. t-705-rtp competes with atp and gtp [101] , suggesting that it is recognized as a purine analogue. in contrast to many nucleoside inhibitors, favipiravir does not have a sugar moiety when administered. human hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase converts t-705 into its ribose-5'-monophosphate (rmp) prior to formation of t-705-rtp [102] . mechanisms of inhibition by t-705 have been demonstrated by the chain termination of nascent rna [103] and by induction of lethal mutagenesis [104, 105] . currently, favipiravir is being evaluated for covid-19 treatment and the results are awaited.resistance to t-705 by rdrps is achieved by mutation of a conserved lysine of motif f. thus, in chikungunya rdrp, k291r exerts low-level resistance to t-705 [101] , and mutation k159r in coxsackievirus b3 (cvb3) 3dpol resulted in a nonviable virus [106] . the replication competence of k159r virus was restored by the a239g mutation. biochemical results suggested that k159r reduced the processivity of cvb3 3dpol, and the double mutant (k159r/a239g) had low fidelity [106] . the cvb3 k159 equivalent in nsp12 is k548. currently, it is not known if the mutation of k548 will have effect on favipiravir. however, considering its conserved position, the resistance to favipiravir by sars-cov-2 is quite possible.the nsp12 protein sequences of bat cov, sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 were retrieved using blastp (protein-protein blast) algorithm with blosum62 matrix. multiple sequence analysis was performed in aliview software. the ml tree was inferred using raxml v8.1.20 [107] . the branch supports were computed out of 100 bootstrapped trees. the tree was visualized in figtree v1.4.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/). the circos plot was created using circos favipiravir (t-705; 6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) is a broad-spectrum inhibitor of rna viruses [96, 97] , including ebola virus [98] , crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever [99] , lassa virus [100] and chikungunya virus [101] . it was also approved as an anti-influenza drug in 2014 in japan and, more recently, the italy aifa and china fda have approved its use for treatment of covid-19.favipiravir was discovered by chemical modification of a pyrazine analog (t-1106) [96] . after entering the cell, favipiravir is metabolized into the triphosphate form (t-705-rtp) that is recognized by rdrps. t-705-rtp competes with atp and gtp [101] , suggesting that it is recognized as a purine analogue. in contrast to many nucleoside inhibitors, favipiravir does not have a sugar moiety when administered. human hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase converts t-705 into its ribose-5'-monophosphate (rmp) prior to formation of t-705-rtp [102] . mechanisms of inhibition by t-705 have been demonstrated by the chain termination of nascent rna [103] and by induction of lethal mutagenesis [104, 105] . currently, favipiravir is being evaluated for covid-19 treatment and the results are awaited.resistance to t-705 by rdrps is achieved by mutation of a conserved lysine of motif f. thus, in chikungunya rdrp, k291r exerts low-level resistance to t-705 [101] , and mutation k159r in coxsackievirus b3 (cvb3) 3dpol resulted in a nonviable virus [106] . the replication competence of k159r virus was restored by the a239g mutation. biochemical results suggested that k159r reduced the processivity of cvb3 3dpol, and the double mutant (k159r/a239g) had low fidelity [106] . the cvb3 k159 equivalent in nsp12 is k548. currently, it is not known if the mutation of k548 will have effect on favipiravir. however, considering its conserved position, the resistance to favipiravir by sars-cov-2 is quite possible.the nsp12 protein sequences of bat cov, sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 were retrieved using blastp (protein-protein blast) algorithm with blosum62 matrix. multiple sequence analysis was performed in aliview software. the ml tree was inferred using raxml v8.1.20 [107] . the branch supports were computed out of 100 bootstrapped trees. the tree was visualized in figtree v1.4.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/). the circos plot was created using circos software package (v 0. . amino acid changes in sars-cov-2 against sars-cov were obtained by pairwise sequence alignment using aliview v1.26 [108] .homology-derived molecular model of sars-cov-2 nsp12 was generated using 'prime' of schrödinger suite (schrödinger llc, new york, ny, usa) and the cryoem structure of sars-cov [43] (pdb file 6nur). to generate ternary complex containing enzyme/pt/ntp or enzyme/pt/nucleoside-tp, the pt and rtp from the crystal structure of fmdv 3dpol [58] (pdb file 2e9r) were extracted and docked into the modeled structure of nsp12. the templating nucleotide was modified as required for the complementarity of the incoming substrate. all the complexes were energy minimized using the jaguar program of schrodinger suite.in conclusion, here we show that the nucleoside inhibitor binding pocket is largely conserved among diverse rna-dependent rna polymerases, and that the broad-spectrum nucleoside inhibitors discussed may have potential in covid-19 treatment. while it is possible that sars-cov-2 may evolve with drug resistance mutations against these nucleoside inhibitors, knowledge of potential escape mutants may aid in the development of more specific sars-cov-2 inhibitors with a higher resistance barrier. the emerging genomic sequences and structures of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 nsp12 also offer increasing insight into the design and identification of novel nucleoside inhibitors or small molecules that are specific to sars-cov-2 nsp12, and could be used against the current covid-19 pandemic or in future cov outbreaks. the in vitro analysis that is presently on-going in the laboratory will provide a better picture of their comparative in vitro potency and resistance profile.additionally, the use of these antivirals has an added benefit, as a significant wealth of knowledge already exists regarding their administration, efficacy, toxicity and side effects in humans, which can speed up clinical trials in covid-19 patients. inhibitors targeting nsp12 will block the replication of both (+) and (-) strand of the viral genome, which is essential for the formation of a mature and infectious virus. influenza a virus and sars-cov-2 are respiratory viruses capable of causing pandemics, and the latter is responsible for the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic. both viruses encode rna polymerases which transcribe their rna genomes and are important targets for antiviral drugs including remdesivir. here, we show that the antiviral drug enisamium inhibits the rna polymerases of both influenza a virus and sars-cov-2. furthermore, we show that a putative metabolite of enisamium is a more potent inhibitor, inhibiting the sars-cov-2 rna polymerase with similar efficiency to remdesivir. our data offer insight into the mechanism of action for enisamium, and implicate it as a broad-spectrum antiviral which could be used in the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection.rna viruses, such as pandemic influenza a viruses (iav) and severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), are among the most important human pathogens. while iav and sars-cov-2 are different viruses and follow different replication cycles, both can cause severe respiratory disease in humans that leads to high morbidity and mortality. vaccines exist against influenza viruses; however, long vaccine development times mean that antigenic mismatches can occur between circulating influenza virus strains and the vaccine strain. moreover, due to antigenic shift, existing vaccines are not effective against emerging pandemic influenza a viruses(1). no vaccine currently exists against coronaviruses, including the sars-cov-2 pandemic and sars-cov epidemic strains, which cause coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and sars, respectively. therefore, research is needed into conserved viral enzymatic activities, such as rna polymerase activity, which could be targeted by broad spectrum antivirals(2, 3).iavs are negative sense rna viruses whose 14 kb genome consists of eight segments of single-stranded viral rna (vrna). the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase (flupol) copies the vrna into a replicative intermediate called the complementary rna (crna) during viral replication, or into capped and polyadenylated viral messenger rna (mrna) during viral transcription(4, 5). the crna serves as a template for the production of new vrna molecules. vrna and crna molecules are both replicated in the context of ribonucleoproteins (rnps), which consist of flupol bound to the 5′ and 3′ ends of a genome segment and the rest of the vrna or crna is bound by a helical coil of nucleoprotein (np). flupol is composed of three subunits: polymerase basic 1 (pb1), pb2, and polymerase acidic (pa). structural analyses have shown that the pb1 subunit adopts the canonical polymerase right hand-like fold, which contains the fingers, palm and thumb subdomains that are conserved among all viral rna polymerases. the pa subunit has a large c-terminal domain that is integrated into the pb1 thumb subdomain, and is connected to an n-terminal endonuclease domain by a linker. the pb2 subunit is composed of several globular domains, including cap binding and 627 domains, which are flexible with respect to the core pb1 subunit(4).sars-cov-2 is a betacoronavirus in the order nidovirales, and has a positive-sense, non-segmented rna genome of around 30 kilobases(2, 6). the viral genome has a 5′ m7gpppam cap and 3′ poly(a) tail, modifications which allow the viral genome to be translated by cellular machinery. two-thirds of the viral genome encodes two overlapping open reading frames (orfs), 1a and 1b, which are translated into two large polyproteins immediately upon infection. the two polyproteins are cleaved by intrinsic proteolytic activity to produce non-structural proteins (nsps) 1-16, which collectively form the membrane-associated replication-transcription complex (rtc). the rtc has several major functions: firstly, it synthesises full-length negative-sense rna antigenomes, which are the templates for new positive-sense rna genomes. secondly, it synthesises subgenomic negative-sense rnas which contain the ribosome-accessible orfs of structural and accessory proteins. finally, the rtc transcribes subgenomic or full-length negative-sense rnas into 5′ m7gpppam capped, 3′ polyadenylated viral mrnas. the multiple functions of the replicase complex requires nsp1-16 to have many catalytic activities, such as cap synthesis, which are not entirely understood(7). nsp12 is the rna-dependent rna polymerase component of the replicase complex, and it requires nsp7 and nsp8 for processivity(8, 9). the structures of nsp7/8/12 complexes from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 have been solved by cryo-em(10–13). nsp12 is the core of the complex that adopts the canonical right-handed rna polymerase fold that is linked to an n-terminal domain implicated in nucleotidyltransferase activity(14). one nsp7 and two nsp8 molecules form a complex with each nsp12.iav flupol and sars-cov rtc are important drug targets. favipiravir (t-705) triphosphate (fig. 1) inhibits flupol rna synthesis activity, and other catalytic activities such as the pa endonuclease have also been targeted(15, 16). remdesivir is a nucleoside analogue drug that has shown promise in both cell culture and clinical trials as a treatment for sars-cov-2 infection(17). remdesivir triphosphate (fig. 1) is the active metabolite of remdesivir, which inhibits the sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12 complex and is not excised by the nsp14 exonuclease (12). further nucleoside analogue drugs have also been suggested as therapeutic candidates(18).however, there are currently no drugs licensed to treat sars-cov-2 infection. enisamium (4-(benzylcarbamoyl)-1-methylpyridinium) iodide (fav00a; fig. 1), marketed as amizon®, was highlighted by the world health organisation as a candidate therapeutic against sars-cov-2 (19). fav00a is licensed for use in 11 countries, including ukraine and russia, and has been shown to have clinical efficacy against influenza a and b virus infections(20). it is thought to inhibit influenza virus rna synthesis, however, the mechanism of action is currently unknown(21).in this study, we show that fav00a and a putative hydroxylated metabolite (fig. 1), vr17-04, inhibit flupol and sars-cov-2 polymerase activity in vitro. the inhibition of rna synthesis by both polymerases implies that fav00a is a broad-spectrum small molecule inhibitor of rna virus rna synthesis, and is a possible therapeutic option for treating sars-cov-2 infection.previous experiments showed that enisamium can inhibit influenza virus replication in tissue culture(21). we confirmed these observations by infecting a549 cells with influenza a/wsn/33 (h1n1) virus (wsn) at moi 0.01 and adding enisamium chloride (fav00b) to the cell culture medium. forty-eight hours after infection, virus titres were analysed by plaque assay on mdck cells. fav00b significantly affected iav tires in line with previous observations (fig. 2a). to test if fav00b can inhibit iav rna synthesis in a minigenome context, hek 293t cells were transfected with plasmids expressing the pb1, pb2 and pa flupol subunits, np and a segment 5 (np) vrna template. to estimate the effect of fav00b on host cell rna and protein synthesis, we transfected a plasmid expressing gfp from a constitutively active cmv promoter. as a further control, we analysed the effect of enisamium on the 5s ribosomal rna (rrna) and tubulin protein steady state level. after transfection, fav00b was added to the cell culture medium at the concentrations indicated in fig. 2b. total cellular rna was extracted 24 hours post-transfection, and iav replication (vrna synthesis) activity was analysed by radioactive primer extension. fav00b significantly affected iav replication with an ic50 of 354 μm, while there was no significant effect on 5s rrna, gfp, pa subunit or tubulin expression levels (fig. 2b). overall, these observations suggest that enisamium has no effect on host cell viability, but inhibits iav replication through the inhibition of vrna synthesis by flupol.to examine the effect of enisamium on iav rna synthesis in vitro, we expressed protein a-tagged wsn iav flupol in hek 293t cells and purified the heterotrimeric complex using igg sepharose chromatography. we then performed in vitro rna synthesis assays using a model 14 nucleotide (nt) viral rna (vrna) template in the presence of different concentrations of fav00a, or t-705 triphosphate as a positive control. in these assays, fav00a weakly inhibited flupol activity with an ic50 of 46.3 mm, while t-705 triphosphate inhibited flupol activity with an ic50 of 0.011 mm (fig. 2c). this suggests that the inhibitory effect of enisamium on flupol activity in vitro is limited.the weak inhibition of flupol by enisamium is unlikely to be responsible for antiviral efficacy observed in cell culture. to test if a metabolite of enisamium could be a more potent inhibitor of flupol activity, we treated a549 cells with fav00a for 24 hours and then performed flupol activity assays in the presence of cellular extract. we observed a strong, concentration-dependent inhibition of flupol activity, which is consistent with a metabolite of enisamium inhibiting influenza virus rna synthesis (fig. 2d). to test if enisamium metabolites have a direct effect on flupol activity in vitro, 9 metabolites were synthesised (table 1) and assayed in in vitro reactions containing purified flupol. only a hydroxylated metabolite, vr17-04, showed substantially increased potency compared to fav00a (fig. 1); with an ic50 of 0.84 mm it inhibited flupol activity 55-fold more potently than fav00a (fig. 2c).to study whether vr17-04 has a direct effect of flupol initiation or nucleotide incorporation, we measured the effect of vr17-04 on the ability of flupol to extend a capped rna primer. in this assay, a capped rna primer ending in ag can be aligned to the terminal u or uc of the template (fig. 3a). these two different initiation modes lead to the formation of two extension products, called the c- and g-product (fig. 3a). a realignment step that can occur as the polymerase slips at 4u of the template can add an additional 3 nt to each extension product, increasing the number of possible extension products(22). addition of vr17-04 to the capped primer extension assay resulted in absence of extension at high concentrations, and predominantly partial extension of the primer by only 1-2 nucleotides at intermediate vr17-04 concentrations (fig. 3b). in addition, we observed that formation of the c-product was reduced, suggesting that vr17-04 also affected primer-template binding. collectively, these data show that hydroxylation of enisamium increases the potency as inhibitor in vitro and that hydroxylated enisamium directly affects nucleotide incorporation by flupol.to determine if enisamium and its putative metabolite vr17-04 can inhibit the sars-cov-2 rtc, we developed a sars-cov-2 rna polymerase in vitro assay that involved nsp12 as the rna-dependent rna polymerase, and nsp7 and nsp8 as processivity factors(8). we expressed and purified sars-cov-2 nsp7, nsp8 and nsp12, and mixed them at a ratio of 2:2:1 to form a nsp7/8/12 complex (fig 4a). to test in vitro rna synthesis activity, we incubated the nsp7/8/12 complex with a 40 nt rna template and a radiolabelled 20 nt rna primer (fig 4b,c). the nsp7/8/12 complex was able to extend the 20 nt primer in the presence of ntps into a doublet of major products of approximately 40 nt in length. this pattern was previously observed for the sars-cov nsp7/8/12 complex(8). the proportion of 20 nt primer extended by nsp7/8/12 increased over time, plateauing at around 30 minutes (fig 4c).remdesivir triphosphate is a nucleotide analogue shown to inhibit sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12 activity(12). to estimate the potency of this inhibition, we performed in vitro rna synthesis assays in the presence of remdesivir triphosphate or t-705 triphosphate (fig 5a). remdesivir triphosphate inhibited rna synthesis activity with an ic50 of 2.01mm, while t-705 triphosphate was non-inhibitory at all concentrations tested. next, we performed in vitro rna synthesis assays in the presence of fav00a and the putative metabolite vr17-04 (fig 5b). fav00a inhibited nsp7/8/12 activity at relatively high concentrations, with an ic50 of 40.7 mm. vr17-04 exhibited over 10-fold more potent inhibition, with an estimated ic50 of 2-3 mm, similar to that obtained for remdesivir triphosphate. these ic50 values are within an order of magnitude of those calculated for the inhibition of flupol by fav00a and vr17-04 (fig 5c). collectively, these data show that rna synthesis by the sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12 complex is inhibited by enisamium and its putative metabolite vr17-04.in this study we showed that enisamium and a putative metabolite, vr17-04, inhibit flupol rna synthesis activity in vitro. we also established an in vitro rna synthesis assay for the nsp7/8/12 complex of sars-cov-2, and used this assay to show that enisamium and vr17-04 also inhibit rna synthesis by sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12. specifically, we find that vr17-04 inhibits sars-cov-2 rna synthesis with a similar ic50 to remdesivir triphosphate.our in vitro assays indicate that fav00a inhibits flupol activity with a relatively high ic50 value of 46.3 mm (fig 2c). this inhibition was improved 55-fold by addition of a hydroxyl group in the compound vr17-04 (fig. 1), which we propose is an active metabolite of enisamium. similar ic50 values of 40.7mm and 2-3mm were observed for fav00a and vr17-04, respectively, against the sars-cov-2 rna polymerase (fig 5c). the exact mechanism of rna synthesis inhibition by enisamium is unknown, but our in vitro assays suggest that enisamium can directly inhibit flupol elongation (fig. 3). further studies, such as drug binding assays, could be used to provide further insight into the mechanism of action of vr17-04.while vr17-04 inhibits flupol activity with an ic50 of 0.84 mm, enisamium inhibits influenza virus growth in cell culture more potently with ec90 values ranging from 157-439 μm (fig. 2a)(21). this apparent discrepancy may be due to enisamium exerting additional antiviral effects through other mechanisms or more potent unknown metabolites. however, it could also be due to the in vitro assays not fully reflecting the requirements for rna polymerase activity in an in vivo situation. while our flupol in vitro assays examine the synthesis of a short 14 nt product, in vivo, flupol must processively synthesise rna products ranging in length between 890 nt and 2341 nt depending on the viral genome segment(23). in the sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12 in vitro activity assay we examine the extension of an rna primer by 20 nt, however, during infection, nsp7/8/12 must synthesise rna products up to 30 kilobases(7). moreover, protein concentrations in the in vitro reactions may be higher than in cell culture systems. therefore, it is not surprising that rna synthesis inhibitors can show better efficacy in vivo than in vitro. indeed, this phenomenon is exemplified by the nucleoside analogue drug remdesivir. remdesivir has a reported ic50 of 0.77 μm against sars-cov-2 in cell culture, while we find that remdesivir triphosphate has a much higher ic50 of 2.01 mm in vitro, which is similar to values observed previously (fig 5a)(12, 17).we find that sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12 complex activity is inhibited by fav00a and vr17-04 with similar ic50 values to flupol, 40.7mm and 2-3mm respectively (fig 5c). this suggests that the concentration of enisamium required for in vivo efficacy against sars-cov-2 may be similar to that required for influenza virus, which is not toxic in cell culture and humans (21)(fig. 2b). furthermore, the ic50 value of vr17-04 against nsp7/8/12 is similar to that of remdesivir triphosphate (fig 5c). the similar in vitro efficacy of remdesivir triphosphate and the putative enisamium metabolite vr17-04 suggests that enisamium could inhibit sars-cov-2 replication as well.the rapid global spread of sars-cov-2 necessitates development of effective therapeutic interventions, and the most promising short-term strategy is to repurpose existing drugs. our results demonstrate that enisamium, which is approved for use against influenza in 11 countries, inhibits rna synthesis by the sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12 complex. a putative enisamium metabolite has similar in vitro efficacy against sars-cov-2 rna polymerase activity as remdesivir triphosphate. this raises the possibility that enisamium could be a viable therapeutic option against sars-cov-2 infection. moreover, unlike remdesivir, enisamium does not require intravenous administration, which would be advantageous for its use outside of a hospital setting. a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group phase 3 trial will need to be used to assess the antiviral efficacy and safety of enisamium iodide (amizon®) in subjects with moderate covid-19. indeed, permission is currently being sought for a phase 3 clinical trial of amizon® max for the treatment of covid-19 in ukraine.a549 cells were preincubated with varying concentrations of fav00b in minimal essential medium (mem) containing 0.5% foetal calf serum (fcs) at 37 °c for 1 h. cells were next infected with influenza a/wsn/33 (h1n1) virus at a multiplicity of infection (moi) of 0.01 in mem containing 0.5% fcs for 1 h. following infection, the inoculum was removed and replaced with varying concentrations of fav00b in mem containing 0.5% fcs and incubated for 48 h. plaque assays were performed on mdck cells in mem containing 0.5% fcs with a 1% agarose overlay and grown for 2 days at 37 °c.hek 293t cells grown in dulbecco’s minimal essential medium (dmem) with 10% fcs were transfected with plasmids expressing influenza a/wsn/33 (h1n1) virus rna polymerase subunits (pcdna3-pb1, pcdna3-pb2, pcdna3-pa), np (pcdna3-np) and segment 5 (np) vrna (ppoli-np-rt)(24, 25). as negative control, a pb1 active site mutant (pb1a) was used in which the active site sdd motif was mutated to saa(26). gfp was expressed through transfection of pcdna3-egfp(27). fav00b was added to the cell culture medium 15 min after transfection. twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were washed in pbs and the total rna extracted using tri-reagent (sigma) and isopropanol precipitation. iav vrna and 5s rrna steady state levels were subsequently analysed by radioactive primer extension and 6% denaturing page as described previously(28). phosphorimaging was performed on a typhoon scanner. for gfp measurements, approximately 0.2×106 cells were suspended in 100 μl pbs and transferred to a black 96-well cellstar plate (greiner bio-one). fluorescence was measured on a spectramax i3 plate reader using standard settings. western analysis was performed on 8% sds-page and pa antibody gtx125932 (genetex)the subunits of the a/wsn/33 (h1n1) influenza virus flupol with a tandem affinity purification (tap)-tag at the c-terminus of pb2 (pcdna3-pb1, pcdna3-pb2-tap, pcdna3-pa) were expressed in hek 293t cells and purified as heterotrimeric complex using igg sepharose chromatography as described previously(29). next, 0.5 mm ctp, 0.5 mm utp, 0.05 mm atp, 0.01 mm gtp, 0.5 mm apg, 0.001 mm [α-32p]gtp, t-705 triphosphate, fav00a and vr17-04 at the concentrations indicated, and 0.5 μm 5′ (5′-aguaguaacaaggcc-3′)and 3′ (5′-ggccuguuuuuacu-3′) vrna promoter strands were added to purified flupol. after incubation at 30 °c for 15 min, samples were analysed by 20% denaturing page and autoradiography. transcription assays were performed as described previously, using radiolabelled capped 11-nucleotide rna (5′-pppgaauacucaag-3′; chemgenes)(22, 30).approximately 106 a549 cells treated with fav00a in dm em containing 10% fcs were lysed through sonication in 40 μl buffer a (10 mm hepes-naoh, ph 7.5, 0.1% np-40,150 mm nacl, 5% glycerol, and 1 mm dtt) for 10 seconds. after centrifugation, extract was added to purified flupol reactions at 1/10 of the total reaction volume.full-length nsp7, nsp8, and nsp12 genes from sars-cov-2, codon optimized for insect cells, were purchased from idt. the nsp12 gene was cloned into the multibac system, with a tobacco etch virus (tev) protease cleavable protein-a tag on the c-terminus(31). the nsp7 and nsp8 genes were cloned into pgex-6p-l vector (ge healthcare) with an n-terminal gst tag followed by a prescission protease site. nsp12 was expressed in sf9 insect cells and nsp7 and nsp8 were expressed in e. coli bl21 (de3) cells. initial purification of nsp12 was performed by affinity chromatography as previously described for flupol with minor modifications: all buffers were supplemented with 0.1 mm mgcl2 and the nacl concentration was changed to 300 mm(32). nsp7 and nsp8 were purified on glutathione sepharose (ge healthcare). after overnight cleavage with tev (nsp12) or prescission (nsp7 and nsp8) proteases, the released proteins were further purified on a superdex 200 (for nsp12) or a superdex 75 (for nsp7 and nsp8) increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare) using 25 mm hepes–naoh, ph 7.5, 300 mm nacl and 0.1 mm mgcl2. fractions of target proteins were pooled, concentrated, and stored at 4 °c.nsp7, nsp8 and nsp12 were mixed at a molar ratio of 2:2:1 and incubated overnight at 4 °c to form the nsp7/8/12 complex. activity assays were performed essentially as described previously for sars-cov-2 nsp7/8/12(8). briefly, 40mer (5′-cuauccccaugugauuuuaauagcuucuuaggagaaugac-3′) and radiolabelled 20mer (5′-gucauucuccuaagaagcua-3′) rnas corresponding to the 3′ end of the sars-cov genome (without the polya tail) were pre-annealed by heating to 70 °c for 5 mins followed by cooling to room temperature. 50 nm pre-annealed rna was incubated for 10-60 mins at 30 °c with 500 nm nsp7/8/12 complex, in reaction buffer containing 5 mm mgcl2, 0.5 mm of each atp, utp, gtp and ctp, 10 mm kcl, 1 u rnasin (promega) and 1 mm dtt. assays in the presence of remdesivir triphosphate, t-705 triphosphate, fav00a or vr17-04 were run for 30 mins. reactions were stopped by addition of 80 % formamide and 10 mm edta, followed by heating to 95 °c for 3 mins. reaction products were resolved by 20 % denaturing page with 7m urea, and visualised by phosphorimaging on a fuji fla-5000 scanner. data were analysed using imagej and prism 8 (graphpad).healthcare workers are advised to be vaccinated every year. but sometimes more dangerous and even deadly forms occur that are likely to lead to epidemics and pandemics (andrews, 2006) .in late december 2019 in wuhan, china, several patients were diagnosed with viral pneumonia, now known as the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). subsequently, a large number of cases of the disease were found to either reside in wuhan or travel to the city. the researchers were able to obtain the 2019-ncov genome sequence by performing bronchoalveolar lavage and culture of patients' lungs and by conducting phylogenetic analyzes of the genome and investigating the evolutionary relationship between 2019-ncov and other coronaviruses, they found the origin of 2019-ncov and its evolutionary history. the 2019-ncov genomic sequence obtained from the patients showed that 98.99% of their gene sequences matched. the genome also has an 88% similarity to the genome of the bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 bat coronavirus genomes that appeared in zhoushan, china, but with the severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) coronaviruses, 79% and 50% were similar, respectively. also by homology modeling, a model for the virus receptor was obtained, which, by comparing homology models, concluded that despite differences in some amino acids, the structure of the domains attached to the receptor at 2019-ncov and sars-cov was similar. sars-cov spike (s) protein is essential for entry into the host cell. the spike s1 subunit contains the receptor-binding domain (rbd). the sars-cov virus uses the angiotensin-converting-enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor to bind the host cell, that contains a diversity of respiratory epithelial cells, alveolar macrophages, and monocytes. considering the relatively high identity of the rbd in 2019-ncov and sars-cov, it is crucial to evaluate the cross-reactivity of anti-sars-cov antibodies with 2019-ncov spike protein, which could have significant implications for rapid development of vaccines and therapeutic antibodies against 2019-ncov. these structures displayed that sars-cov rbd contains a core structure and a receptor-binding motif (rbm), and that the rbm binds to the outer surface of ace2. the ace2 is the only known human homolog of the key regulator of blood pressure ace.sars-cov-2 rbd showed significantly higher binding affinity to ace2 receptor than sars-cov rbd and could block the connection and, therefore, binding of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov rbd to ace2expressing cells, so inhibiting their infection to host cells. therefore, ace2 also serves as the cellular entry site for the sars-cov, a main target for pharmacological intervention and improved new monoclonal antibodies that could attach specifically to 2019-ncov rbd.sars-cov rbd-specific antibodies possibly will cross-react with sars-cov-2 rbd protein, and sars-cov rbd-induced antisera could neutralize sars-cov-2, suggesting the potential to improve sars-cov rbd-based vaccines for inhibition of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov infection (tai et al., 2020; wan, shang, graham, baric, & li, 2020) .bats host a reservoir of various zoonotic viruses, including coronaviruses. regulatory studies and phylogenetic analyzes have shown that there is a high genetic diversity among sars-like viruses in bats, allowing for the recombination and evolution of new species.it has been shown that the bat virus with 96% nucleotide sequence similarity to human sars-cov can use human ace2 as a receptor. this represents the same state of entry into the cell as human sars-cov. for example, bat sl-cov-wiv1 can grow on human epithelial cells and vero e6 cells, which is neutralized by human sars-cov convalescent sera (ge et al., 2013; yang et al., 2016) . the recent crisis was the outbreak of novel coronavirus from emerged wuhan in central china, referred to as 2019-ncov, has recently caused a pandemic scale of pneumonia in humans and resulted in a huge threat to the global public and a high number of hospitalizations. the damage to the lungs, which leads to fluid leaking from small blood vessels in the lungs. the fluid collects in the lungs' air sacs or alveoli. this makes it difficult for the lungs to transfer oxygen from the air to the blood. while there's a shortage of information on the type of damage that occurs in the lungs during 2019-ncov wu, leung, & leung, 2020 a glycopeptide antibiotic commonly used to treat a bacterial infection is active against sars-cov and is on the list of drugs that are also used to treat covid-19 (j. . this antibiotic is chloroquine has recently been shown to be an inhibitor of sars-cov-2 in vitro and the hydroxylated form has been suggested as a potential treatment for patients with sars-cov-2 infection. importantly, the overdose of this drug is toxic and can cause death (devaux, rolain, colson, & raoult, 2020; weniger & world health organization, 1979) . m. wang et al. (2020) reported that the ec50 of chloroquine against covid-19 tested on vero e6 was 1.13 μm and the ec90 was 6.90 μm. chloroquine inhibits sars-cov entry, which exerts its inhibitory effect by altering glycosylation of the ace2 receptor and spike protein. in patients with covid-19, hydroxychloroquine has been shown to decrease inflammatory responses and decrease cytokine storm in vitro. chloroquine also interferes with proteolytic processing of m protein and modifies virion assembly and budding. also, chloroquine indirectly act against covid-19 by reducing the production of proinflammatory cytokines and by activating anti-sars-cov-2 cd8 + t-cells (devaux et al., 2020) . it has also been used in the treatment of intracellular bacterium coxiella burnetii both in vitro and in vivo and has resulted f i g u r e 1 molecular mechanisms and therapeutic targets of drugs that have been used to treat covid-19. ace2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor; covid-19, coronavirus disease-19; er, endoplasmic reticulum; impdh, inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase; rdrp, rna-dependent rna polymerase in its elimination (savarino, lopinavir is an antiretroviral protease inhibitor used in combination with ritonavir to treat patients with aids and hiv infection.lopinavir is a potent and highly specific inhibitor of hiv-1 protease.ritonavir inhibits the metabolism of lopinavir, therefore coadministration of lopinavir and ritonavir in healthy volunteers increases the area under the lopinavir plasma concentration-time curve> 100-fold (hurst & faulds, 2000) . in a study by cao et al. (2020) , can be obtained (lim et al., 2020) . but in a study by jun zhang at xixi hospital in hangzhou, china. a 2020 study showed that 400 mg daily lopinavir with ifn-α2b atomization inhalation, 5 million u twice daily, as well as the use of lopinavir alone could be useful for patients with covid-19 and increased eosinophils have been suggested as an indicator of improvement in patients, but after starting treatment with this drug, complications such as digestive adverse effect and hypokalemia should be considered by physicians .jinyu xia's study also showed that the combined effect of arbidol with lpv/r was greater than that of lpv/r (16 patients received oral arbidol with lpv/r and 17 patients received lpv/r alone).arbidol has been shown to have a direct antiviral effect on the initial in vitro replication of sars-cov (deng et al., 2020; khamitov et al., 2008) . arbidol (umifenovir) is a broad-spectrum antivirus that works on both enveloped and nonenveloped viruses. it is active on viruses such as influenza a and b and is also known to inhibit hepatitis c. this drug can prevent the fusion of the virus with the target membrane and block the entry of the virus into the target cell (boriskin, leneva, pecheur, & polyak, 2008 ).oseltamivir is a neuraminidase inhibitor (nais) used to treat influ- of recent concern about the use of oseltamivir was the emergence of resistance in 23% of patients with h1n1, which was asso- ribavirin is a guanosine nucleoside analog and antiviral compound (graci & cameron, 2006; martinez, 2020) . in animal studies of coronaviruses, ribavirin, although weakly inhibitory, can reduce the release of macrophage proinflammatory cytokines in mice and alter the th-2 response to th-1 response and act as an immunomodulator (ning et al., 1998) . in most cases, ribavirin is combined with ifn, and although the results of ribavirin and ifnα-2b yousefi et al.| 5 in a mers-cov rhesus macaque model were promising, with the results of the trial and the effect of ribavirin and ifn (either α2a or β1) on mers-cov infected patients it was different, however, ribavirin lowers hemoglobin concentrations in respiratory patients and therefore reduces its potential as an antiviral against sars-cov-2 (arabi et al., 2017; falzarano et al., 2013) . ifnα-2b and ribavirin, when used for mers-cov treatment, showed that they were 8-fold and 16-fold reduced in their single-dose regimen, respectively and they further stimulate cytokine release and immune responses, reducing viral replication, modulating host response, and improving clinical outcomes. studies using ribavirin plus lopinavir/ritonavir on patients with sars have reduced ards and mortality. there was also a significant decrease in ards and mortality in patients with sars-cov who received corticosteroids with ribavirin, lopinavir/ ritonavir (chu et al., 2004; zheng & wang, 2016 ).favipiravir (fpv) a guanosine analog and an oral anti-influenza drug that targets rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), which converts to active phosphoribosylated form in cells and acts as an rna polymerase inhibitor. also, favipiravir is a broad-spectrum drug that blocks the replication of flavivirus, poliovirus, rhinovirus, filovirus, and arenaviruses. the effective dose of favipiravir used is day 1:1,600 mg twice daily, days 2-5: 600 mg twice daily but its effective dose for treatment of covid-19, and 600 mg tid with 1,600 mg first loading dosage for no more than 14 days. however, favipiravir is contraindicated in pregnant women due to teratogenicity and embryotoxicity in animals and cannot be used in this group of patients (delang, abdelnabi, & neyts, 2018; shiraki & daikoku, 2020) .a study by fang et al. (2020) found that favipiravir could play an important role in protecting mice from the fatal infection of wild-type and oseltamivir-resistant-influenza b viruses. favipiravir has also been used in combination with zanamivir to successfully clear the type b influenza virus in immunocompromised children (lumby et al., 2020) . in a randomized clinical trial, chen et al. (2020) showed that in patients with moderate covid-19 who were untreated with antiviral drugs, favipiravir increased clinical recovery over 7 days and reduced fever, cough, and respiratory problems, it was therefore used as an effective drug in these patients. another study by jianjungao on 80 patients with covid-19 at the hospital of shenzhen, china, showed that favipiravir had a stronger antiviral effect than the lopinavir/ritonavir drug combination and reported no adverse effects (furuta, komeno, & nakamura, 2017) . a cellular inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase inhibitor and an immunomodulator that has antiviral effects on a range of viruses, including influenza a, reovirus, flavivirus, and coxsackie b3 virus, it is also used as an inhibitor of nucleotide synthesis in lymphocytes and an immunosuppressant in transplantation and treatment of autoimmune diseases (diamond, zachariah, & harris, 2002; padalko et al., 2003) . it has also been shown to inhibit hepatitis b and hepatitis c virus replication in combination with ifn-α and cyclosporine a. mycophenolic acid (mpa) in use with cyclosporine, it is also a potent inhibitor of mers-cov but has a less inhibitory effect on sars-cov. in studies of coronaviruses in the mouse model, it did not affect sars-cov, but at standard concentrations at oral doses, it was able to inhibit mers-cov (chan et al., 2013; henry et al., 2006; markland, mcquaid, jain, & kwong, 2000) .mpa acts as a synergism with ifn-β1b and thiopurine analogs but it has less protective effect than the combined effect of 6 | lopinavir/ritonavir with ifn-β1b. the use of this compound in bedside coronaviruses was that with the ifn-β1b used in saudi arabia to treat mers-cov all patients using this drug combination could survive but patients had lower acute physiology and chronic health (allison & eugui, 1993) . mpa also had a significant inhibitory effect on the proliferation of hcov-oc43 and hcov-nl63 at ec50concentrations of 1.95 μm and 0.19 μm, respectively (shen et al., 2019) . lin et al. (2018) also showed that mpa along with disulfiram and 6-thioguanine was synergistically inhibitors of the mers-cov papain-like protease (mers-cov pl pro ).angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 gene (ace2) is a metalloproteinase with 805 amino acids which is an important receptor for entry of sars-cov into the host cell. domain s1 in the sars-cov spike protein binds the virus to the ace2 cell receptor present in the host cells. therefore understanding the association between sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and ace2 can be an effective therapeutic approach (lin et al., 2018) . ace2 is a homolog of carboxy peptidase that is best known for cleaving different peptides in the renin-angiotensin system (ras) and other substrates, such as apelin (batlle, wysocki, & satchell, 2020) . this enzyme is mostly present in organs such as the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and relatively low level in the lungs and its expression has been reported in type 2 pneumocytes (hamming et al., 2004) . the extracellular domain of ace2 acts as the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike protein receptor. the new coronavirus also uses membrane-bound ace2 as the receptor. ace2neutralizes sars-cov-2 in vitro by combining with the fc protein of immunoglobulin (lei et al., 2020) . in addition, sars-cov-2 binds to ace2 with a higher affinity than sars-cov. in this context, the preparation of a soluble and recombinant form of ace2 protein in humans could be useful as a novel biological treatment to counter or limit the progression of infection caused by coronaviruses that use ace2 as a receptor (wrapp et al., 2020 to treat covid-19, it is clear that the use of these drugs alone will not produce the desired results, and some drugs will cause side effects in certain groups of people. for example, excessive use of chloroquine is toxic and can even be fatal, or the use of favipiravir in pregnant women is not recommended, as it is associated with teratogenicity and embryotoxicity in animals or corticosteroids that are immunosuppressive and are not recommended for mild or early ards, because early use of corticosteroids can delay the clearance of the virus and increase the risk of death, long-term administration of high doses of corticosteroids in the early stages of treatment has negative effects. generally, corticosteroids should be avoided unless the patient has symptoms such as moderate or severe ards, sepsis or septic shock. mpa also has no effective inhibitory effect on sars-cov, so they are not recommended for treatment. lopinavir is associated with side effects such as digestive adverse effects and hypokalemia that should be considered by physicians. the use of neuraminidase inhibitors is also invalid due to resistance to ncov-2019 and is not recommended for the treatment of patients.however, the use of hydroxychloroquine as prophylaxis is appropriate because it blocks the entry of the virus and prevents virus replication, and remdesivir has extensive antiviral activity against coronaviruses. therefore, the appropriate recommendation for the treatment of patients with covid-19 is a combination of existing drugs. ifnα-2b together with ribavirin, when used for the treatment of mers-cov, showed that their effective dose was decreased compared to the single-dose regimen and better-stimulated cytokine release and inflammatory responses, and decreased viral replication, modulated host response, and improved clinical outcomes.ribavirin plus lopinavir/ritonavir in patients with sars-cov reduces ards and mortality, and in patients with sars-cov who receive corticosteroids with ribavirin, lopinavir/ritonavir, their ards and mortality significantly decreased. lopinavir also has a stronger antiviral effect than the lpv/r, and the combination of arbidol and lpv/r is more effective than lpv/r. in addition to these drugs, if ace2 is presented in its soluble form as a suitable recombinant protein, it may be a new factor in counteracting the spread of coronavirus as well as its proliferation in infected individuals. another possible treatment option could be the use of serums that are obtained from the blood of patients infected with the new coronavirus during their recovery and also targeting the cellular components involved in the host's inflammatory response to the virus is also a good way of targeting viral damage by targeting a cellular protein.yousefi et al.on dec 31, 2019, a cluster of cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology was reported in wuhan, china. on jan 10, 2020, a novel coronavirus, lately named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and classified into the betacoronavirus genus, was 50 identified as the causative agent (1) . as of mar 20, 2020, 9 days after the world health organization (who) declared the covid-19 a pandemic (2) , the new coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) had caused approximately 8 800 deaths among more than 210 000 confirmed cases reported mainly in china but also spreading to at least 168 other countries or territories worldwide (3). compared to the two other coronaviruses responsible for epidemic outbreaks in the past, 55 sars-cov and mers-cov, the novel sars-cov-2 strain shares ⁓79% and ⁓50% genome sequence identity, respectively (4) . not surprisingly, important differences in terms of the epidemiology and physiopathology between these three viruses have also been observed (5) (6) (7) .as with most emerging viral diseases, no specific antiviral treatment nor vaccine against any of these three coronaviruses are currently available, with standard patient management relying 60 mainly on symptom treatment and respiratory support when needed. in that regard, and considering that key features of the biology of sars-cov-2 and its induced covid-19 still require further characterization, the scarce readiness of biologically relevant pre-clinical experimental models of sars-cov-2 infection as a complement of the african green monkey veroe6 cell line represents a major barrier for scientific and medical progress in this area. we and others have previously 65 reported the advantage of using more physiological models such as in-house or commercially available reconstituted human airway epithelia (hae) to isolate, culture and study a wide range of respiratory viruses (8, 9) . developed from biopsies of nasal or bronchial cells differentiated in the air/liquid interphase, these models reproduce with high fidelity most of the main structural, functional and innate immune features of the human respiratory epithelium that play a central role 70 in the early stages of infection and constitute robust surrogates to study airway disease mechanisms and for drug discovery (10) .in this study, we initially isolated and amplified in veroe6 cells a sars-cov-2 virus directly form a nasal swab from one of the first hospitalized patients with confirmed covid-19in france (11) . the complete genome sequence of the isolated sars-cov-2 virus was deposited 75 in the gisaid epicovtm database under the reference betacov/france/idf0571/2020 (accession id epi_isl_411218). phylogenetic analysis confirmed that the isolated virus is representative of currently circulating strains (12) . we first characterized the replicative capacities of this viral strain in veroe6 cells at different multiplicities of infection (mois) (fig. 1a) , using both classic infectious titer determination in cell culture (tcid50) and molecular semi-quantitative 80 methods, the latter based on orf1b-nsp14-specific primers and probes designed by the school of public health/university of hong kong (details in supplementary materials). this double approach was facilitated by the appearance of clearly observable characteristic cytopathic effect from 48 hpi (fig. 1b) , and enabled the validation of a large interval (range 1-8 log10(tcid50)) with high correlation (r-squared 0.94) between molecular and infectious viral titers (fig. 1c) . 85 in parallel, we successfully inoculated nasal mucilair™ hae on the apical surface directly with nasal swab samples, as confirmed by transmission electron microscopy observations (fig.   s1 ). characteristic features of coronavirus-induced cell ultrastructure remodeling were easily distinguishable in both the apical and basal sides of the hae at 48 hpi, notably the high accumulation of progeny virions in mucus-producer goblet cells. then, we advantageously 90 exploited the mucilair™ hae model and in-house adapted protocols previously optimized for different respiratory viruses (13) to perform experimental infections with sars-cov-2. viral replication was monitored through repeated sampling and tcid50 titration at the apical surface of hae (fig. 1d) . trans-epithelial electrical resistance (teer), considered as a surrogate of epithelium integrity, was also measured during the time-course of infection (fig. 1e) . in parallel, 95 comparative molecular viral genome quantification was performed at the three levels of the air/liquid hae interphase: in apical washes (fig. 1f, apical) , total cellular rna (fig. 1g , intracellular) and basal medium (fig. 1h, basal) . sars-cov-2 viral production at the epithelial apical surface increased sharply at 48 hpi, reaching 5.8 and 6.3 log10 tcid50/ml in nasal and bronchial hae, respectively. the peak of viral replication was reached earlier in bronchial (48-72 100 hpi) than in nasal hae, in which a progressive increase in infectious viral titers was observed until at least 96 hpi (fig. 1d) . this replication kinetics was validated by molecular viral genome quantification at the apical pole ( fig. 1f) . high viral replication correlated with a reduction in epithelium integrity at 48 hpi, reflected by more than 2.8-and 4-fold decreases in bronchial and nasal hae teer values, respectively, followed by a partial recovery in the case of bronchial hae 105 (fig. 1e) . moreover, viral production at the apical pole was well correlated with intracellular viral genome detection during infection, except for the nasal hae at 48 hpi, in which a strong relative increase of nsp14 rna was observed (fig. 1f) . interestingly, viral genome was detected in the basal medium from 48 hpi, with the peak observed at 72 hpi ( fig. 1h ) coinciding with the highest impact of sars-cov-2 infection on epithelium integrity. 110 to further characterize the biology of the sars-cov-2, we inoculated both nasal ( fig.   2a , b) and bronchial (fig. 2c, d) hae and analyzed the infection-induced remodeling of the cellular ultrastructure using transmission electron microscopy. at 48 hpi, both hae exhibited a well-established infection, with ciliated, goblet and to a lesser extent basal cells showing active production of viral progeny. this observation is accordance with viral replication results described in fig. 1 and with a recent study reporting high expression levels of the sars-cov-2 cell receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace2) in both ciliated and goblet respiratory cells (14) . as previously observed in structural studies of other coronaviruses, notably sars-cov and mers-cov (15-18), we distinguished characteristic clusters in the perinuclear region of infected hae cells. these clusters are mainly composed of numerous viral single-and double-membrane 120 vesicles (dmv) and mitochondria ( fig. 2a, a1 we therefore evaluated in both veroe6 and hae model the antiviral potential against sars-cov-2 of remdesivir monotherapy but also in combination with diltiazem. diltiazem is a voltage gated 170 ca2+ channel antagonist currently used as anti-hypertensive for the control of angina pectoris and cardiac arrhythmia (26) , which we have recently repurposed as an effective host-directed influenza inhibitor due to its so far undescribed capacity of inducing the interferon (ifn) antiviral response, particularly type iii ifns (fig. s2) (8) . additionally, the rationale of testing such virus-directed plus host-directed drug combination is consistent with a novel study describing hypertension as a 175 potential risk factor observed among a cohort of inpatients with covid-19 (19), and two reports not anticipating potential adverse effects of diltiazem (27) or negative pharmacological interactions of between remdesivir and diltiazem for the treatment of covid-19 (28) . cells has been proved functional, this cell line cannot produce type i ifns (29, 30) . this incomplete ifn response most likely accounts for the lack of significant antiviral effect observed with diltiazem monotherapy in our experimental conditions. nonetheless, addition of 11.5 µm diltiazem significantly potentiated the antiviral effect of remdesivir ( fig. 4a-c) , inducing 68% and 50% 185 reductions in remdesivir ic50 values at 48 and 72 hpi, respectively. comparably, daily treatment with 20 µm remdesivir resulted in 7.3 log10 and 7.9 log10 reductions of intracellular sars-cov-2 viral titers at 48 hpi in nasal and bronchial hae, respectively (fig. 4d, upper panel) . not surprisingly for a model with a completely functional ifn response, daily treatment with 90 µm diltiazem resulted in moderate yet substantial (0.4 log10 and 0.8 log10, respectively) reductions of 190 intracellular viral titers in nasal and bronchial hae at the same time-point (fig. 4d, upper panel) .on top of that, we observed an additional 1.3 log10 reduction in nasal hae viral titers for the remdesivir-diltiazem combination when compared with remdesivir monotherapy. in all cases, the antiviral effects induced by remdesivir, diltiazem or the remdesivir-diltiazem combination translated into a protection of the nasal but not the bronchial hae barrier integrity, preventing the 195 drop on teer values induced by the infection (fig. 4d, lower panel) . importantly, remdesivir also showed a strong antiviral effect at 72 hpi (fig. 4e, upper panel) . this time, the ⁓2 log10 reductions in nasal and bronchial hae viral titers observed for the remdesivir and remdesivirdiltiazem treatments correlated higher teer values in both hae compartments (fig. 4e coronaviruses are a form of positive-strand non-segmented rna viruses distributed among birds, mammals and humans that cause respiratory and neurological illnesses. 1 there are six different types that can cause disease among humans. four of these (hku1, 229e, nl63 and oc43) cause only the common cold in patients, 2 5 due to the broad genetic variation and diversity of coronaviruses and higher chances of animal to human spread they are likely to emerge periodically in future. 6 during december 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia-like symptoms occurred in patients that were linked to the seafood market in wuhan china. 7 investigation identified a new strain of coronavirus called sars-cov-2. 8 the detection of this novel coronavirus is key to confirm the cases and proceed to treatment. in an early method for detecting sars-cov-2, the samples from bronchoalveolar-lavage fluids were collected, centrifuged to remove debris and inoculated onto human epithelial cells of airway origin. 9 about 20 000 sequences from each sample were obtained and genome matches showed more than 85% identity with sars-like betacornavirus. results were also obtained from real-time pcr, and isolated viruses were named sars-cov-2. 8 to further characterize sars-cov-2, the de-novo sequence was obtained by using nanopore sequencing and illumina methods. the airway epithelial cell cultures were suitable for visualization and identification of the novel coronavirus. 9 check efficacy against this virus. the possible options include nucleoside analogs, interferon that can act as immune modulators and approved antimalarials having antiviral activities such as chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine.the nucleoside analogs such as ribavirin, favipiravir, galidesivir and remdesivir target rna polymerase and block the synthesis of viral rna. 10 favipiravir was effectively used against influenza and has the potential to inhibit viral rna synthesis and a new study also supports its activity against sars-cov-2. 11 different clinical trials are underway where patients are being recruited to evaluate the efficacy of a combination of favipiravir and interferon-α 12 and a combination of favipiravir and baloxavir marboxil is being evaluated. 13 ribavirin is a guanine derivative antiviral drug approved for the treatment of hcv and rsv, but it causes anemia at higher doses that limit its use and its efficacy against coronavirus is uncertain. 14 remdesivir is an adenine derivative antiviral drug. it has activity against a variety of viral strains such as sars and mers and a recent study also supports its activity against sars-cov-2. 11 a recent patient in us with sars-cov-2 has shown recovery with intravenous administration of remdesivir. 15 recently, phase-iii clinical trials have been started in usa to evaluate the efficacy of iv remdesivir as 200 mg od or 100 mg od for 9 days. 16 a recent rct apparently reported no significant efficacy, but we await the published findings. small molecular weight drugs such as chloroquine have shown inhibitory effects against sars-cov-2 (ec50 = 1.14 μm in vero e6 cells) and is under evaluation in open-label trials.. 15 chloroquine (cq) is a recognized anti-malarial drug but also has antiviral activity. the antiviral activity of chloroquine was first noticed in the late 1960s. 21 chloroquine and its analog hydroxychloroquine both have inhibitory effects against various viruses including sars, 22 enterovirus 23 and zika virus. 24 chloroquine inhibits the virus by increasing endosomal ph and so reducing viral cell fusion and also interferes with cellular receptor glycosylation. 25 the ec90 value of chloroquine against sars-cov-2 is 6.90 μm that can be achieved with administration of 500 mg dose. 26 remdesivir and chloroquine have shown activity in in vitro studies and can easily be tested in patients with sars-cov-2. 15 in another recent study, gao et al found that chloroquine phosphate reduced the symptoms of pneumonia in sars-cov-2 patients and shortening the duration of disease. 27 the guidelines for the treatment of sars-cov-2 were revised six times since its issuance on 15 january 2020. the recent guidelines also include ifn-α, remdesivir, ribavirin, ritonavir and chloroquine. the mode of administration of ifn-α is through inhalation at a dose of 5 million units diluted with water for injection. the dose of ritonavir is 100 mg bd for adults.ribavirin may be given in combination with ifn-α or ritonavir at a dose of 500 mg bd or tds. chloroquine phosphate should be administered at a dose of 500 mg bd. arbidol can be given three times a day at 200 mg. 28 hydroxychloroquine (hcq) is an approved disease-modifying antirheumatic drug that also has immunomodulatory effects and prevents organ damage. 29 hcq alters endosomal ph and interrupts the biding between rna/dna and toll-like receptors that leads to suppression of tlr signaling. [30] [31] [32] inside the cytoplasm, hcq also interferes with the interaction between nucleic acid sensor cyclic gmp and cytosolic dna. 33 these two mechanisms lead to increase production of il-1, tnf and type-1 interferon. such mechanism supports the idea that hcq suppress the cytokine release storm (crs) which is due to sars-cov-2 triggered overreaction of immune system. 34 in a recent study, hcq was found to be more effective than chloroquine; a loading dose of 400 mg twice daily and maintenance dose of 200 mg twice a day is recommended for sars-cov2 infection. 35 the mechanism involves in antiviral role of hcq and cq is inhibition of receptor binding and fusion of cell membrane. these two are crucial steps that are required for cell entry of sars-cov-2. chloroquine interferes with the glycosylation of ace-2 (angiotensinconverting enzyme receptors) receptors that are considered as cellular receptors for sars-cov-2 and block the fusion of sars-cov-2 with host cell. thus, the binding of virus is blocked and infection is prevented. the hcq and cq after entry into the cell tend to concentrate in lysosomes and endosomes. the sars-cov-2 use endosome as a tool for cellular entry. hcq and cq increase the ph of endosomes and create a negative influence on the binding of sars-c0v-2 with endosomes. 25 lysosomal protease helps in viral fusion with cell membrane. increase lysosomal ph prevents the action of protease and fusion and replication of virus is blocked 36 . the mechanism of action of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine is represented as (figure 1 ).cinanserin is an antagonist of serotonin receptors. it can inhibit chymotrypsin-like (3c-like) protease and has shown promising results against sars coronavirus. 37 the 3c-protease was also investigated to be encoded in sars-cov-2. 38 flavonoids such as chalcones, flavones and isoflavones produce antioxidant effects but they also have antiviral effects. 39 a study has found that flavonoids can inhibit the entry of hepatitis-c virus. 40 some flavonoids have activity against mers coronavirus, presumably due to inhibition of 3c-like protease. 41 nitric oxide (no) is a biological gas produced from arginine. no after reaction with superoxide forms peroxynitrite which has cytotoxic bactericidal action. 43 nitric oxide is also known to regulate airway function and reduce inflammation of airways. 44 the beneficial effect of no in sars patients was observed in some studies. 45 no can also inhibit the synthesis of rna and viral protein. 46 a study has found that organic nitric oxide could inhibit the replication cycle of sars-cov-2. 47 αlpha-lipoic acid (ala) is used in hepatic disorders and polyneuropathies. 48 ala is an antioxidant that protects cells against oxidative stress by increasing the glutathione level. 49 some studies support the role of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors. this is based on the hypothesis that ace-2 serves as receptor for sars-cov-2. 54,55 so, ace inhibitor could potentially compete for site binding and reduce the mortality and morbidity associated with sars-cov-2. 56 the various ongoing clinical trials are summarized in table 1 .vaccine provides immunity against a particular pathogen before exposure of that infectious agent. several types of vaccines exist that can be nucleic acid based, live attenuated vaccine, subunit proteins or nanoparticle vaccines. 67 different technologies are being utilized to f i g u r e 1 mechanism of action of hcq and cq by blocking binding of virus with ace-2 receptors and increasing endosomal ph and preventing fusion with the cell develop potential vaccine for sars-cov-2 including dna and mrnabased nanoparticles. phase-i trials of potential vaccines focus on safety and immunogenicity, for example, against mers. 68 two of the clinical trials on mers vaccine are expected to be complete by the end of 2020 69, 70 in russia and one in germany by december 2021. 71 the inovo pharmaceutical company has tested its vaccine against mers coronavirus funded by coalition for epidemic preparedness innovation (cepi) using dnabased technology and named as ino-4700. 72 the university of oxford recombinant chimpanzee adenovirus has also begun phase 1 randomized multicenter trials for intramuscular injection of vaccine chadox1 against sars-cov-2. the 1100 participants have been divided into four groups and they will be observed for any serious adverse event for 6 months.the ongoing clinical trials for development of vaccines have been summarized in table 2 and completed vaccine trials for sars and   mers viruses have been summarized in table 3 .the fusion of coronavirus with a cell occurs after biding of s protein to a target receptor delivers viral nucleocapsid and initiates replication. the s protein causes syncytial formation at the receptor site. 85 a neutralizing antibody that can target the s protein on the surface ofclinical trials for various treatment options for sars-cov-2clinical trial registration number trial information date type referencesthe efficacy of newgen beta-gluten probiotic powder in patient with 2019-ncov. 16 march 2020 interventional 57the efficacy of combination of favipiravir + tocilizumab in patient with pneumonia (covid-19 the immune response was dose-independent and further trials needed to establish efficacy 84 covid-19, previously known as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) respiratory disease caused by a newly discovered coronavirus, sars-cov-2 virus and identified in the city of wuhan, hubei province, china in december 2019. world health organization (who) declared the official name as covid-19 in february 2020. 1,2 virus isolated from the covid-19 patients belongs to the genus betacoronavirus, this group of viruses can cause simple/common cold to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) caused by sars-cov was identified in 2002, and another syndrome middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), caused by mers-cov identified in 2012. 3e6 according to the report of the who and china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , it is a zoonotic virus, based on the data available, bats seems to be the reservoir of covid-19 virus. 7on 11 march 2020, who declared this disease as a pandemic, based on its spread to 118,000 cases in 114 countries, and 4291 deaths on that date and warned other countries about its seriousness. 8 according to the who covid-19 dashboard globally, as of 9:20am cest, 26 9 in india as on, 26 may 2020, 08:00 ist (gmtþ5: 30) , 141,213 were infected, among them 60,490 were cured/discharged and 4167 were died. in india, the mostly affected states includes maharashtra with 52,667 cases (1695 deaths) followed by tamil nadu 17,082 (118); gujarat 14, 460 (888) ; and delhi 14,053 (276). 10 like other coronaviruses, these are spherical shaped containing genetic material inside and with spike proteins protruding from their surface, which helps to latch onto the human cell followed by fusion and transfer of genes to the host cell. the latest data shows that, like the virus that caused the 2002 sars outbreak, sars-cov-2 spikes bind to receptors on the human cell surface called angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). 11 this latest virus can develop respiratory tract infections in the patients range from mild to fatal illnesses like pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). the majority of the patients will experience mild to moderate respiratory illness and recover with supportive treatment and do not need any special care/treatment. geriatric patients and patients with comorbidities like diabetes, cardiovascular, chronic respiratory disorders, cancer, immunodeficiency patients and other chronic disorders are more prone to develop serious pathological issues related to covid-19. 3 symptoms may appear after 2e14 days (based on mers-cov virus data) of infection, which includes fever, cough, shortness of breath, trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion or inability to arouse and bluish lips or face, covid-19 is also associated with mental and neurological manifestations, including delirium or encephalopathy, agitation, stroke, meningoencephalitis, impaired sense of smell or taste, anxiety, depression and sleep problems, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and adults is also observed in some cases. 12, 13 unfortunately, three types of extra pulmonary complications were reported by the covid19 patients, includes liver injury as that of other corona infections (sars and mers) and fulminant myocarditis and acute kidney injury. 14e16as of now, the exact effective drug, vaccine, or any therapeutic procedure is not available and experiments are underway. however, empiric therapy is being practiced to manage and saves the life of the patient with the known antivirals, antibiotics, corticosteroids biological and traditional preparations, either alone or in combination based on the patient's condition (signs, symptoms, and severity), need and availability along with other supportive therapies. for managing any disease, early identification of the disease and assessment of associated risk factors (modifiable/ nonmodifiable) is paramount, secondly, supportive care which includes curative therapy (if available), symptomatic therapy. as sars-cov-2 virus belongs to the sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov), prescribers are administering the drugs which have shown some promising results in managing similar viral infections. 17 healthcare systems of different countries have suggested few drugs based on the preliminary data obtained through uncontrolled studies:national health commission of the people's republic of china has recommended favipiravir, chloroquine phosphate, plasma transfusion therapy, remdesivir, and traditional chinese medicine. 18 the indian council of medical research (icmr), new delhi, has recommended hydroxychloroquine for empirical use for prophylactic purposes in asymptomatic healthcare workers and household contacts of laboratory confirmed patients. 19 according to the guidelines given by the government of india, ministry of health & family welfare, directorate general of health services (emergency medical relief (emr) division), lopinavir/ritonavir can be given only after proper informed expressed consent from the patient and ensuring all necessary monitoring measures to avoid possible serious adverse reactions. 20 spanish society of hospital pharmacy for the management of antiviral treatment in the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 disease covid-19 guidelines has recommended lopinavir/ritonavir, lopinavir/ritonavir (oral) þ interferon alfa-2b and beta-1b, remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, darunavir/cobicistat, tocilizumab. 21, 22 there are no us food and drug administration (fda)-approved drugs specifically for the treatment of patients with covid-19. centers for disease control and prevention have provided information about the currently recommended drugs in the united states i.e. chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, remdesivir, and lopinavir/ritonavir. 23 as per the data available on 22.05.2020, in nih us national library of medicine clinicaltrial.gov, 977 interventional clinical trials for covid-19 are currently at various stages of development throughout the world, of them 11 drug intervention trials on das181; hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir/ritonavir, interferon beta-1a and 1 b; baricitinib 4 mg; methylprednisolone; ganovo (danoprevir)þritonavir ± interferon nebulization; ribavirin, were completed, but no results were posted on the website. 24 to date, the emergency use authorization (eua) authority of the us fda has issued 2 therapeutic euas for combating this pandemic: on 28.03.2020, fda has issued first emergency use authorization (eua) for the use of hydroxychloroquine sulfate and chloroquine sulfate in certain adolescent and adult patients hospitalized patients weigh 50 kg or more with covid-19 when a clinical trial is not available or feasible. they also instructed that the prescribers should use the stock supplied from the strategic national stockpile. and on 01.05.2020, fda issued the second eua for remdesivir to treat severe covid-19 in both adult and children. 25 with this review, shreds of evidence for considering these drugs for managing covid-19 were assessed through the evaluation of possible mechanism, safety profile, and availability with a note on the cost.favipiravir (t-705 or avigan), an oral antiviral drug approved in japan for influenza infection in 2014. 26 it has also been used for treatment of ebola virus infection. it acts by direct inhibition of viral replication and transcription through misincorporation in nascent vrna (viral ribonucleic acid), or by binding to conserved polymerase domains, preventing incorporation of nucleotides for vrna replication and transcription. 27 according to the madelain v et al 28 18 the clinical evidence on the efficacy of this drug was observed in the clinical trial conducted by the third people's hospital of shenzhen in guangdong province, where favipiravir group patients' (n ¼ 35) laboratory tests shown negative for covid 19 after 4 days of treatment, whereas other group patients took 11 days for the same. 31 in an open-label non-randomized control study conducted by q cai et al, favipiravir (fpv) 1600 mg twice daily as a loading dose and 600 mg twice daily plus interferon (ifn)-a 5 million u twice daily by aerosol inhalation were administered to 35 patients with a median age of 43 (35.5e59) years. in another group lopinavir 400 mg/ritonavir 100 mg (rtv) twice daily plus ifn-a 5 million u twice daily by aerosol inhalation were given in 45 patients (median age was 49 (36e61) years). they observed a shorter viral clearance time and significant improvement in chest imaging in fpv group with few adrs. preliminary results of another comparative study conducted in wuhan, china, with 120 covid-19 patients have also supported the efficacy of favipiravir and they also stated that administration of favipiravir tablet is easier. 32,33according to the data obtained from the uppsala monitoring centre (umc)-global adverse reactions reporting system as on 22.05.2020 only 24 adrs were reported. 34 the cost of the drug is not found with our extensive search and the global commercial availability of this drug is very less.currently, there are 17 clinical trials specific to covid-19 are at various phases of development and researchers are expecting promising results in clearing the virus. 35 recently, a reputed pharmaceutical company has initiated phase-3 clinical trials for covid-19 in india with tablet favipiravir, and it is expecting the complete study results by august. 36 chloroquine is approved for the prophylaxis and treatment of malaria, to treat extraintestinal amebiasis and chloroquine is also used off label for the treatment of various rheumatic diseases, as well as treatment and prophylaxis of zika virus. 37, 38 as per the emergency use authorization (eua) of us fda for the unapproved use of this drug in covid-19 patients and the dosing schedule for this drug is 1 g on day one, followed by 500 mg once a day for 4e7 days based on clinical evaluation. 25 preclinical data from various studies has confirmed the role of chloroquine in controlling the human coronavirus infection through different mechanisms, which includes; through protease inhibition in sarscov; inhibition of sialic acid biosynthesis; inhibition of hcov-oc43 replication in hrt-18 cells by chloroquine in newborn mice; the activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (erk) in human coronavirus 229e infection in human epithelial lung cells; inhibition of viral spread in cell culture through endosomal ph rise and interfering with terminal glycosylation of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor; inhibition of the replication of sars-cov in vero e6 cells. 6,39e43 in 2020, docking study results of wu c et al 44 predicted the possibility of combining with nsp3b and e-channel and further and also supported the potentiality of the chloroquine to become a therapeutic option for covid-19 infection; zhang s et al 45 and colson p et al 46 also stated that the alkalization of phagolysosome and slowdowns the ph-dependent viral replication, including fusion and uncoating. and they also commented as chloroquine is both a safe and economic drug than others at this current junction for both prophylactic and curative treatment of novel coronavirus infection.chloroquine phosphate tablet 500 mg 12 hourly for 10 days might have benefits in controlling the novel coronavirus pneumonia irrespective of their severity. 47 in other studies conducted on covid-19 patients, researchers have found the superiority of chloroquine over other therapy in terms of both efficacy and safety in reducing the exacerbation of pneumonia. 46, 48 with the support of this data, chinese government recommended chloroquine along with other therapies for the prevention and treatment of covid-19 pneumonia. 18 the american academy of ophthalmology stated that risk of toxicity with the usage of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine is dose and duration dependent with the normal daily dose for less than 5 years therapy has <1% chance of retinopathy, however regular monitoring is required to prevent retinopathy. 39, 49 a total of 6189 adrs were reported to umc, sweden. of which 1873 were skin and subcutaneous disorders, 1676 were gastrointestinal disorders, 1447 were nervous system disorders, and 738 were eye disorders. 34 this drug is widely available globally in all the areas at affordable prices, the cost range of 250 mg tablets is 0.35 usd tablet is 5.42e7.85 usd, in india, it is available in a variety of formulations for all age groups i.e. drops, injection, tablet, syrup, etc., at very low cost and the cost of 10 ml drops ( currently, a total of 67 clinical trials are underway with chloroquine for the management of covid-19. 51 hydroxychloroquine (hcq) is an aminoquinoline. it is indicated for both the prophylaxis and treatment of uncomplicated malaria. it is also prescribed for the management of rheumatoid arthritis, chronic discoid lupus erythematosus, and systemic lupus erythematosus. in pediatric age group it is used for the management of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (in combination with other therapies), discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus. 52, 53 the recommended dosing schedule for both prophylactic and therapeutic use in covid-19:-as per icmr, the prophylactic dosing schedule of hcq in covid-19 is as follows 19 :for asymptomatic healthcare workers involved in the care of suspected or confirmed cases of covid-19: 400 mg twice a day on day 1, followed by 400 mg once weekly for the next 7 weeks; to be taken with meals.for asymptomatic household contacts of laboratory-confirmed cases: 400 mg twice a day on day 1, followed by 400 mg once weekly for the next 3 weeks; to be taken with meals). -the dosing schedule of hcq as per the us fda's eua for hospitalized covid-19 adults and adolescent patients who weigh 50 kg is 800 mg on the first day and then 400 mg daily for four to seven days, duration of total treatment is based on clinical evaluation. 25 -some u.s. clinicians have reported different dosing schedules: 400 mg 12 hourly on day one, then daily for 5 days; 400 mg bid on day one, then 200 mg 12 th hourly for 4 days; 600 mg 12 th hourly on day one, then 400 mg daily for 2e5 days. 23 literature confirms that both the cq and hcq have similar properties and acts in the same way with minor changes in their dosing schedule, researchers also said that the hcq is their first choice in treating the sars-cov-2 infection, as hcq is showing less toxicity (~40%) in animals than chloroquine. 46, 54 an in-vitro study conducted by yao x et al, 55 using sars-cov-2infected vero cells, concluded that the hcq (ec 50 ¼ 0.72 mm) at an oral loading dose of 400 mg 12 th hourly, followed by 200 mg twice daily for 4 days is better than chloroquine (ec 50 ¼ 5.47 mm) 500 mg 12 th hourly for 5 days for treating sars-cov-2 infection, they also quoted that, the immunomodulatory effects of these two drugs can suppress the raised immune factors (cytokines il-6 and il-10) as an immune response to sars-cov-2 virus and prevents the complications. christophe b et al 56 studied the antiviral activity of ferroquine (fq) derivatives, hydroxychloroquine, and chloroquine in viruses infecting vero cell cultures where they found the better inhibitory activity of hydroxychloroquine than chloroquine (cq).the revised advisory report of the joint monitoring group under the chairmanship of dghs on the safety and efficacy of prophylactic use of hydroxychloroquine (hcq) in india has drawn the following conclusions from the clinical studies:-a significant dose-response relationship was observed between the number of prophylactic doses taken and frequency of occurrence of sarscov-2 infection in symptomatic healthcare workers -the probability of sarscov-2 infection in healthcare workers who have taken the prophylactic hcq was less when compared to those who have not taken -another study conducted at aiims, new delhi on prophylaxis hcq (median 6 weeks of follow up) had reported the lower incidence of this infection in healthcare workers.they have also assessed the safety of hcq prophylaxis among 1323 healthcare workers and found mild adverse effects such as nausea (8.9%), abdominal pain (7.3%), vomiting (1.5%), hypoglycemia (1.7%) and cardio-vascular effects (1.9%). 57 recently, magagnoli j et al 58 have conducted retrospective analysis of 368 sarscov-2 infection in-patients in united states, and they concluded that the use of hydroxychloroquine alone or in combination with azithromycin, has not proven the efficacy in controlling the infection, however, the mortality rate was more in patients administered with hydroxychloroquine alone. the authors have also stated the need of sufficient data to widespread use of these drugs.mehra mr et al 59 have analyzed the multinational registry of 96,032 of covid-19 in-patients who were admitted during december 20, 2019 to april 14, 2020. a total of 14,888 patients were received hydroxychloroquine or/and chloroquine with or without a macrolide along with other treatments. authors have not found the any evidence of benefit with these drugs, in-spite they noted the risk of ventricular arrhythmias and a greater hazard for in-hospital death with covid-19. results of this analysis suggested to not to use these drug regimens without clinical evidence.the risk of toxicity with the usage of hcq is dose and duration dependent. with a normal daily dose for less than 5 years therapy has a <1% chance of retinopathy. they recommend a maximum daily dose, which can lead to this toxicity is 5.0 mg/kg for hcq, but with cq damage may occur at 2.3 mg/kg weight. but, the duration of the therapy may not be longer in controlling covid-19, so there is a less possibility of developing retinopathy. 49 no significant elevation of liver enzymes and liver injury with the hcq is rare in normal individuals but, it may alter the metabolism of coadministered drugs. 60 a total 23,994 adrs were reported to umc sweden on hcq, of which general disorders and administration site conditions (10,232), skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (5802), gastrointestinal disorders (4207), musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders (3385), nervous system disorders (2658) and eye disorders (2118) are commonly affected systems. 34 it is available in different strengths i.e. 100 mg, 200 mg 300 mg, and 400 mg tablets, the cost of hcq ranges from for 400 mg 10 inr to 16 to date, 201 hcq clinical trials are being conducted with or without other treatments in different parts of the world and are at different stages of development for prophylaxis and treatment of mild, moderate, and severe sars-cov-2 infections. of 201 trials, 5 were completed and expecting defined guidelines for the use of hcq in covid-19 patients with more scientific evidence 62 due to its safety profile, availability and low cost and efficacy, most of the prescribers are advising this drug in their covid-19 patients and as prophylaxis for non-infected healthcare workers, covid19 patients exposed people. in recent days, after the announcement of potential beneficial effects with rational use by some organizations and famous persons, the irrational purchase of the cq and hcq has increased enormously, this led to the shortage of these drugs for chronic inflammatory diseases. in some cases, irrational use leads to poisoning. 63,64philippe gautret et al 65 have studied the efficacy of hcq in combination with azithromycin, 22 confirmed covid-19 patients received 600 mg of hydroxychloroquine daily and depending on their clinical presentation, azithromycin was added to the treatment. a significant reduction of the viral load was observed on day 6 when compared to controls. they concluded that hydroxychloroquine treatment had significantly reduced the viral load in covid19 patients and its effect was synergized with azithromycin.researchers are investigating the efficacy of this combination in various countries with or without other drugs. 62 remdesivir, or gs-5734, is an investigational adenosine triphosphate analog and used in the treatment for ebola and coronavirus infections. remdesivir shuts down viral replication by inhibiting a key viral enzyme, the rna-dependent rna polymerase. 66 based on the preclinical data and preliminary evidence on speedy recovery in clinical trials, on 1 st may 2020, food and drug administration (fda) issued the eua for its emergency use for the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients. 25 preclinical studies conducted by researchers have demonstrated the antiviral activity through various mechanisms against coronaviruses like mers and sars, which are structurally similar to sars-cov-2.dong l et al 29 reported that the remdesivir is a nucleoside analogue with potential and broad-spectrum antiviral activity. according to the report by abby olena, 74 remdesivir mimics adenosine, one of the building blocks of any rna virus's genome can interfere with the rna-dependent rna polymerase.holshue m l et al 75 have reported the first case of a 35-year-old man who was confirmed with novel covid-19. intravenous remdesivir was initiated from the evening of day 7, as the patient's condition was worsen and continued till the discharge day. 0n 11 th day the viral loads were decreased in respiratory fluid specimens are on the 12 th day, specimen tested negative for 2019-ncov and the patient's clinical condition was improved. and no adverse events were observed in association with the remdesivir infusion. they also mentioned the need for extensive clinical investigation on the usage of remdesivir.a news report by suryatapa bhattacharya 76 in the wall street journal revealed that the 14 american cruise passengers in japan who contracted the novel coronavirus were treated effectively with the antiviral drug remdesivir. international pharmaceutical federation and american society of health-system pharmacists (ashp) have stated the importance of remdesivir in treating covid-19 in their treatment guidelines for covid-19 and they also mentioned that this drug is under evaluation in different clinical trials. 77, 78 a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial at ten hospitals in hubei, china on 237 covid 19 patients, remdesivir in a dose of 200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg on days 2e10 in single daily infusions was given in158 patients and remaining were received placebo. they also received lopinavireritonavir, interferon, and corticosteroids as and when. the non statistical significant clinical improvement at a faster time was observed with remdesivir. the incidence of adverse effects was similar in two groups i.e. 66 % and 64% respectively. remdesivir was withdrawn from 18 (12%) patients. study findings revealed that dose regimen was well tolerated but no significant efficacy was observed in seriously ill patients. however, reduction in some clinical parameters was observed. authors concluded the need of vigorous research with this drug is needed to confirm its benefits in larger population. 79 a total of 74 adrs were reported to umc, sweden of which, majority were related to the investigations (28), followed by renal and urinary disorders (14) , skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (14) , infections and infestations (11) , and respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders (9) . 34 the cost of the remdesivir 1 mg is usd 220 and 5 mg usd 550. 80 as of now, this drug is not widely available globally.currently, 24 clinical trials are being conducted to know the efficacy of remdesivir in covid-19 patients, of them 1 trial was completed. some uncontrolled studies are showing some clinical evidence and may expect the same with these clinical trials and this may become a potential treatment option for covid-19 patients. 81 though it is effective in combating covid-19, its limited availability and high cost becomes challenge, so, governments and researchers have to take necessary actions to overcome these issues.lopinavir and low dose of ritonavir are antiretroviral protease inhibitors; together they work effectively in the treatment of hiv infection, in the year 2000 this combination was released by abbott under the brand name kaletra. the metabolism of lopinavir is inhibited by ritonavir and enhances the half-life and antiviral activity. american association for the study of liver diseases (aasld) and infectious diseases society of america (idsa) guidelines recommend ritonavir-boosted combination therapies as first-line therapy for hcv genotype 1a/b and 4 treatment-naïve patients with or without cirrhosis. 82 the government of india ministry of health & family welfare directorate general of health services (emr division) has recommended this drug combination for the clinical management of covid e 19 in the following dosing schedule 20 : -lopinavir 200 mg/ritonavir/50 mg 2 tablets twice daily, -lopinavir400 mg/ritonavir 100mg/5 ml, 5 ml suspension twice daily, (if the patient is unable to take orally) -the duration: for 14 days or for 7 days after becoming asymptomaticthe spanish society of hospital pharmacy has also suggested this drug in alone and in combination for the management of antiviral treatment in the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 disease covid-19 21 : -lopinavir/ritonavir: 400/100 mg at every12 h through oral route for 14 days. and -lopinavir/ritonavir (oral) þ interferon alfa-2b: for mild cases: 100,000e200,000 iu/kg through nebulization. for severe cases:200,000e400,000 iu/kg two times a day for 5e7 days and beta-1b 250 mcg/48 h through subcutaneous for 14 days.chymotrypsin-like protease (3clpro) and a papain-like protease (plpro) are important for the replication of sars-cov. these proteases are important targets for the development of antiviral drugs. in-vitro/animal studies conducted in 2020 have revealed the inability of this drug to bind to major targets like 3clpro, plpro, rdrp, and a comparative study between the remdesivir and lopinavir/ritonavir (lpv/rtv), and interferon-beta (ifn-b) against mers-cov in mice found slight reduction in viral loads and improved the pulmonary function but not reduced the viral replication or severe lung pathology. 68,69according to the case report published by han w et al 83 this combination has shown efficacy in a 47 years old male sarscov-2 patient in 800/200 mg dose along with, methylprednisolone 40 mg (for 2 days only), recombinant human interferon alfa-2b 10 million iu per day, patient was recovered on the 10 th day and tested negative for the virus and discharged.in chen q et al 84 case series, lopinavir and ritonavir tablets (800/ 200 mg daily) were given to 9 patients along with other treatments based on the severity, all the patients become negative for sars-cov-2 (range 4e11 treatment days). the average days of hospital stay were 14.2 (range from 9 to 20) for the recovery from the lung lesions, as well as from the clinical symptoms. fortunately, no deaths were reported during the treatment period and authors concluded that effective treatment should include the combination of traditional chinese and western medicine. b cao et al 85 have conducted a randomized, controlled, openlabel trial on 199 sars-cov-2 infected adult patients with the median age of 58 (49e68) years. patients were randomized into two groups i.e. 99 were assigned to the lopinavir-ritonavir group (the dose of 400 mg and 100 mg, 12 th hourly for 14 days.) and 100 to the standard care group. they have observed a similar reduction in the viral loads from day 1 to day 28 in both groups. adverse events were monitored up to 28 days and found 46 adrs in the lopinavir-ritonavir group and 49 in the standard group, gastrointestinal adverse events were more common in the lopinavirritonavir group, but serious adverse events were more common in the standard care group. drug discontinuation was observed in 13 patients of the lopinavireritonavir group due to these safety issues. the authors conclude that there was no difference observed in the outcomes of both groups. this suggests further evaluation to confirm the benefits of lopinavir-ritonavir.a total 10,786 adrs reported to umc sweden of which, the majority were related to injury, gastrointestinal disorders (3117), followed by general disorders and administration site conditions (1913), injury, poisoning and procedural complications (1544), investigations (1483) metabolism and nutrition disorders (1267), skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (1189), nervous system disorders (1083). 34 the cost of this drug combination is around 100e150 inr for one tablet of 400mg/ 200 mg composition and the availability is not much. 86 presently, 64 clinical trials are underway on this combination along with other drug interventions and the majority at an initial stage of the development. 87 based on the effectiveness in the clinical conditions rather than preclinical studies and when compared to other anti-viral drugs' cost and availability, this drug has the possibility of becoming an effective treatment option for covid-19.ribavirin, a guanosine analogue discovered by witkowski and coworkers in 1972, originally approved only for the treatment of severe respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) infection in children. it has a broad spectrum activity against rna and dna viruses and also used in the treatment of lassa fever virus infection, influenza a and b, and other viruses. later it was tested for hepatitis c virus infections and found effective in combination with interferon-alfa in treating chronic hepatitis c infections. it acts by incorporating into viral rna and inhibition of its, inducing viral genome mutations, and inhibiting normal viral replication. it also inhibits the rna dependent rna polymerase activity. 88e90based on the docking study results of 2020 wu c et al 43 this drug might be a potent sars-plpro inhibitor as it bound to the active site of the enzyme with low energy. an extensive review done by vincent c c c et al 91 had reported that, ribavirin suppresses the proinflammatory response while augmenting viral replication in this mouse model. and it has shown activity in human caco-2 and pig kidney cell lines but failed to show effects in vero cells.ning q et al 92 study reported the immunomodulatory effects of ribavirin i.e. inhibiting the production of il-4 by th2 cells, and positive effect on interferons in th1 cells in both in-vitro and invivo. it also inhibits macrophage proinflammatory cytokines and th2 cytokines while preserving th1 cytokines.sun d et al 93 have reported the efficacy of ribavirin along with other medications in pediatric patients with lower case fatality rate than adults. in kenneth w et al 94 study, a total of 10 severe acute respiratory syndromes (sars) patients with an average age 52.5 ± 11.0 years were treated empirically with ribavirin (8 mg per kilogram of body weight every eight hours) or oral ribavirin (1.2 g every eight hours, in patient 4 only) and intravenous corticosteroids (hydrocortisone at a dose of 4 mg per kilogram every eight hours tapered to 200 mg every eight hours or methylprednisolone at a dose of 240e320 mg daily). out of 10 patients, only one patient got discharged with complete recovery by the 20 th day of admission. 7 patients were unwell even after 18e33 days of admission and the remaining 2 were died.a retrospective study was conducted by booth cm et al 95 on 144 sars patients with the median age of 45 (34e57) years, where, ribavirin (loading dose of 2 g iv, followed by 1 g iv every 6 h for 4 days, followed by 500 mg every 8 h for 3 days) was given to 126 patients with a median of 6 (5e7 days) treatment days. by 14 th day majority (74%) of the patients got recovered and discharged. but, the safety issues warns the prescribers to monitor the patients closely, around 50% were developed hemolysis and low hemoglobin. and in 18% patients, the drug was discontinued due to the toxicity. they have also reported 8 deaths.leong h n et al 96 have reported that out of 229 sars cases 97 (42.4%) were received ribavirin for mean days of 5.6 at a dose of 1.2 g three times a day, in either oral or intravenous routes, 10 patients have died and anemia was observed in 24 patients. they conclude ribavirin should be given along with other therapies like immune therapy.in a study conducted by peiris jsm et al, 97 75 sars confirmed patients were treated with 8 mg/kg intravenous ribavirin every 8 h for 14 days, along with other treatment based on the patient's condition. improvement was seen in 46 patients, 11 were stable at, the condition of 18 patients' was worsened and 5 were died.arabi ym et al 98 retrospective cohort study on 349 mers critically ill patients reported that, 144 (41.3%) patients have received ribavirin/rifn. the median age of these 144 patients was 57.5 years, 205 patients have received other therapy. the dose of the ribavirin was as per the creatinine clearance, (if it is >50 ml/min, 2000 mg orally loading dose then 1200 mg every 8 hrs for 4 days, then 600 mg po every 8 hrs for 4e6 days; 20e50 ml/min-2000 mg orally loading dose then 600 mg every 8 hrs for 4 days, 200 mg orally every 6 hrs for 4e6 days. and in <20 ml/min and hemodialysis patients-2000 mg orally loading dose then 200 mg every 6 hrs for 4 days, then 200 mg every 12 hrs was given). the average duration of therapy was 8 days. rbv/rifn has cleared the viral load in 28 days and another group, it was found to be in 22 days. 90-day mortality was more with rbv/rifn (73.6% vs 61.5%). in safety profile, no difference was found between the two groups, but, rbv/rifn group patients had received more blood transfusions, which indicate that more number of patients from this group had developed hemolysis. they concluded that rbv/rifn therapy may not be effective than other therapy.at the time writing this article a total 90,864 adrs were reported to umc sweden, of which general disorders and administration site conditions are 36,378, followed by gastrointestinal disorders (22,119) , infections and infestations, skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (20,160), investigations (19,020), nervous system disorders (19, 055) , blood and lymphatic system disorders (17,769), psychiatric disorders (14, 552) , respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders (10, 301) . 34 ribavirin is available as capsules, tablets, and syrup in different strengths. the cost of a single dose of 100 mg is ranging from inr 29.00e33.00, for 200 mg cost range is inr 56.00e78.00 and the cost of 30 ml syrup is inr 80.00e100.00. 99as on date, only 8 clinical trials are being conducted by researchers on this drug, of them 2 were at completed stage and report of one trial concluded that the ribavirin triple antiviral therapy was safe and superior to lopinavir-ritonavir alone. 100e101apart from these drugs, ivermectin and nitazoxanide have also showing the some evidences of becoming promising drugs for treating the covid-19 patients.ivermectin is a broad spectrum anti parasitic. in 2012, it was approved for lice infestations. preclinical studies recommend the ivermectin's anti sars-cov-2 activity in vero-hslam cells where drug has reduced the viral rna at 48 h and impede the viral replication in bovine herpesvirus1 (bohv-1) through the inhibition of dna polymerase nuclear import. ivermectin also inhibits the entrance of dna polymerase ul42 into the nucleus of pseudorabies virus and its proliferation. 102e105 according to the momekov g et al, 106 the available pharmacokinetic data of the routine doses of ivermectin may not attain the sars-cov-2 inhibitory concentrations and they are not justifying the empirical use of this drug in covid-19 patients in spite of its broad spectrum anti viral activity, but they are not discouraging its use in covid-19.as on 26.05.2020, around 14 clinical trials are at the initial stage of development either in alone or combination with other drugs for covid 19, among them majority are being conducted in combination with nitazoxanide. 107 nitazoxanide is a first line broad spectrum antiviral drug and also used in influenza patients. preclinical studies have reported the anti mers-cov and other coronaviruses. it acts by different mechanisms i.e. by inhibiting n protein expression of the virus; suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and interleukin-6 production; inhibition of the broad spectrum rna and dna viruses' replication. according to the review of pepperrell t et al, a superior safety profile was observed with approved doses of nitazoxanide. they have also suggested further investigation to confirm the hepatorenal, cardiovascular, and teratogenicity effects. and opinioned the possibility of becoming a promising drug for covid-19. 108e110 as covid-19 is a pandemic disease with the high transmission rate, the best strategy is to the testing of marketed antivirals empirically and developing the specific molecules based on the outcomes. so, this review tried to find the properties of recommended molecules for the treatment of this pandemic, especially their mechanisms, efficacy and safety through preclinical and clinical literature in combating coronaviruses and similar viruses, cost, and availability.favipiravir has been recommended by the national health commission of the people's republic of china against the sars-cov-2 virus. it may acts at two stages after the virus has entered into the host cell, i.e. inhibition of rna-dependent rna polymerase and inhibiting the incorporation of nucleotides for vrna replication and transcription. some more clinical evidence on this drug is required for considering this drug the treatment of covid-19 either in alone or in combination with other drugs, and it is not a widely available drug globally.both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine may act at different stages of the virus life cycle and interferes with the viral entry through endosomal ph rise and interfering with terminal glycosylation of ace2 receptors, translation, proteolysis, and replication. among these two, hcq is may be more effective than cq. though, the early positive clinical outcomes, less possibility of severe adverse effects, might drawn the attention of the prescribers to use these drugs empirically, but latest evidences are not supporting the use of these two drugs either in alone or combination and also with or without macrolide, especially in curing the infection. but, prophylaxis use of hydroxychloroquine in indian healthcare workers has been producing the beneficial effects with mild adverse effects.on 22.05.2020, ministry of health and family welfare has reported the efficacy of prophylaxis hydroxychloroquine in healthcare workers, 57 in controversial to this on 25.05.2020, in the media briefing in view of the safety concerns raised by mehra mr et al 59 who has announced the temporary pause of the hydroxychloroquine arm within their solidarity trial. 111 this data indicates the variations in the responses of one drug in different population.another promising drug is remdesivir, which acts at more than one site of viral life cycle i.e. through incorporation into nascent viral rna chains and results in premature termination at a post virus entry stage. interfere with rna dependent polymerase and inhibits the replication and targeting the proofreading exoribonuclease and acts through the incorporation of the active triphosphate into viral rna. and clinical evidence in around 15 patients has shown positive results with minimal or no adverse reactions and deaths. this drug has got us fda emergency use authorization in covid-19 patients and also recommended by more national healthcare organizations as a potential option against covid-19.although the in-vitro data of lopinavir-ritonavir may not support its mechanism of action i.e. proteolysis, the clinical evidence suggests that it is an effective drug in combination with interferon as this combination has managed the more than 100 sars patients with a moderate rate of adr occurrence.ribavirin acts rather than on the replication it may show immunomodulatory actions on the virus and inhibit the macrophage proinflammatory cytokines and th2 cytokines while preserving th1 cytokines. among 460 coronavirus positive patients 21% of patients had developed adrs and 5% were died during treatment. the preclinical and clinical data is not encouraging its use especially as mono therapy and further studies are mandatory to support its utilization in covid-19.and it has not recommended by major national healthcare organizations and the reason may be its safety concerns.as of now, it is early to suggest ivermectin and nitazoxanide as the available data is limited to confirm the role of these drugs in covid-19 patients and clinical trials are at initial stage.apart from these drugs, some other biological, chemical and traditional drugs are also showing promising results in uncontrolled studies.this review concludes that the drugs mentioned above are having different properties and act differently in combating the covid-19 viruses. no drug may be superior or inferior, however, the use of single drug may not be effective enough to control this deadly virus, so use of combination of antivirals with different mechanism of action may be more effective and at the same time their adverse events should not be underestimated.all authors are equally contributed in data collection, review, and preparation of this manuscript and approved the final version for the publication.we have not received any funding from government or private or any other organizations.no conflicts of interest.the lopinavir-ritonavir trial enrolled 39 additional patients due to insignificant results after the sample size reached the planned number, which led to inflation of the type i error rate. the remdesivir trial of wang et al. failed to reach the planned sample size due to a lack of eligible patients, while the bootstrap method was used to predict the quantity of clinical interest conditionally and unconditionally if the trial had continued to reach the originally planned sample size. moreover, we used a terminal (or cure) rate model and a model-free metric known as the restricted mean survival time or the restricted mean time to improvement (rmti) in this context to analyze the reconstructed data due to the existence of death as competing risk and a terminal event. the remdesivir trial of beigel et al. reported the median recovery time of the remdesivir and placebo groups and the rate ratio for recovery, while both quantities depend on a particular time point representing local information. we reanalyzed the data to report other percentiles of the time to recovery and adopted the bootstrap method and permutation test to construct the confidence intervals as well as the p values. the restricted mean time to recovery (rmtr) was also computed as a global and robust measure for efficacy.results: for the lopinavir-ritonavir trial, with the increase of sample size from 160 to 199, the type i error rate was inflated from 0.05 to 0.071. the difference of terminal rates was -8.74% (95% ci [-21.04, 3 .55]; p=. 16) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06. 17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprintthe novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) has spread all over the world at an unprecedented rate since its outbreak in december 2019. more than 200 countries or territories have confirmed cases, and a total of over 8 million individuals have been infected, leading to more than 44,0000 deaths by june 17, 2020. the covid-19 was declared as a public health emergency of international concern by the world health organization (who) on january 30, and as a pandemic on march 11, 2020. as recommended by the who r&d blueprint expert group, clinical improvements for covid-19 patients can be classified as seven-category ordinal scales [1] :(1) not hospitalized with resumption of normal activities;(2) not hospitalized, but unable to resume normal activities;(3) hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen;(4) hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen;. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. the trial lotus china (lopinavir trial for suppression of sars-cov-2 in china) [7] was conducted at a record speed from january 18 to february 3, 2020 (the date of enrollment of the last patient), although patient recruitment up to a planned sample size is often the bottle neck of trial conduct. this was not the case with severe covid-19 due to abundance of hospitalized patients during that period of time. in this trial, eligible patients were randomized at a 1:1 ratio to either the lopinavir-ritonavir treatment group (400 mg and 100 mg orally, twice daily) plus the standard care, or the standard care alone, for 14 days. no placebo was used for blinding because no placebo was prepared due to the urgency of the trial, so that both patients and investigators were aware of the identity . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprint of treatment each patient received. following the who seven ordinal scales [1] , the primary end point adopted by the trial [7] was the time to clinical improvement, which was defined as the time from randomization to an improvement of two points from the status at randomization (e.g., from point 6 to point 4 or from point 5 to point 3) or live discharge from the hospital, whichever came first. the sample size was increased from 160 to 199 since the result with the enrolled 160 patients did not reach statistical significance. as a final conclusion, cao et al. [7] reported no benefit with the lopinavirritonavir treatment beyond the standard care with a hazard ratio (hr) of 1.24 and the associated 95% confidence interval (ci) [0.90,1.72].wang et al. [8] conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial with remdesivir at ten hospitals in hubei, china. overall, 236 patients were enrolled from february 6 to march 12, 2020, who were randomly assigned to the remdesivir group (200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg on days 2-10) and the placebo group at a 2:1 ratio.in the original design, it planned to recruit 453 patients with 302 to remdesivir and 151 to placebo, while no patients were enrolled after march 12 due to no more eligible patients available in the hubei province. as a consequence, the statistical power of the study was reduced from 80% to 58%. the primary clinical end point was the time to improvement within 28 days. clinical improvement was defined as two-point improvement from an adjusted six scales from the who seven-category ordinal scales. in conclusion, remdesivir did not show statistically significant clinical benefit compared with the placebo in terms of the hr of 1.23 (95% ci [0.87, 1.75]).beigel et al. [9] reported a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of intravenous remdesivir in adults hospitalized with covid-19 and evidence of lower respiratory tract infection. this trial had a total sample size of 1059 patients (538 assigned to remdesivir and 521 to placebo). the median recovery time of the remdesivir . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprint group was 11 days (95% ci [9, 12] ) while that of the placebo group was 15 days (95% ci [13, 19] ). the rate ratio for recovery was 1.32 (95% ci [0.47, 1.04]; p<.001), which was statistically significant in favor of remdesivir. the kaplan-meier estimates of mortality at 14 days were 7.1% with remdesivir and 11.9% with placebo, and the hr for death was 0.70 (95% ci [0.47, 1.04]). remdesivir was shown to be superior to placebo in shortening the time to recovery in adults hospitalized with covid-19, while in terms of the hr for death, there was no significant difference between the two groups.given that only one treatment, remdesivir, so far has been shown to be effective by a randomized clinical trial and the pandemic of covid-19 cannot be controlled within a short period of time, the aforementioned three clinical trials [7] [8] [9] provide extremely valuable information on the treatments of covid-19 and the corresponding trial design and analysis. however, several important issues have been identified in the statistical analysis and implementation of the three trials. we point out the statistical issues in the three trials [7] [8] [9] and reanalyze the data from the cumulative incidence curves for the time to improvement/recovery using more appropriate approaches. our more in-depth and comprehensive analyses yield new insights on the design and analysis for ongoing and future covid-19 clinical trials.the log-rank test [10] is the most commonly used method in survival analysis and clinical trial design to compare the survival benefit of two arms. consider a randomized clinical trial with a planned sample size ܰ ଵ using a two-sided log-rank test. if the hypothesis test indicates no significant survival difference between the two groups under the significance level ߙ but the trial decides to continue to enroll more patients up to a larger sample size ܰ ଶ , this would inflate the overall type i error of the trial. any adjustment to the sample size during the trial should be planned and evaluated in advance to maintain the overall type i error rate.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. )th quantile of the standard normal distribution.for clinical studies with survival end point, we are interested in the distribution of event time ܶ . in general, patients will eventually experience the event with a long enough follow-up, although the exact event time might not be observed due to censoring.however, for some diseases with long-term survivors, it may happen that the event will never occur in a fraction of subjects, i.e., the event time for cured subjects is infinity [13] [14] [15] [16] . under this situation, patients can be divided into two groups: the terminal (or cure) group (the specified event would never occur) and the non-terminal group (the specified event would occur but possibly censored due to the end time of the study). thus, the distribution of the event time ܶ has a point probability masswhere ߟ is the group label taking a value of 1 if the individual is in the terminal group and 0 otherwise, for the covid-19 trials [7, 8] , the cumulative incidence curve of ܶ can be expressed by . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. note that although the hr is the most popular statistic to quantify the survival difference in randomized clinical trials, it is no longer an interpretable quantity if the proportional hazards (ph) assumption is violated [20] . by contrast, the rmst has the advantages of being nonparametric and model-free yet carrying clinically meaningful interpretations.given the pre-specified time point ߬ , the estimate of the rmst difference between two groups can be interpreted as the extra survival gain on average during the time-߬ followup period.clinical trials during the epidemic of an infectious disease might fail to reach the planned sample size due to a lack of eligible patients if the outbreak can be quickly controlled [22] . however, early termination of a clinical trial would inevitably lead to loss of power in the original analysis of cao et al. [7] , the time to clinical improvement was assessed after all patients had reached day 28, while failure to reach clinical improvement or death before day 28 were considered as right-censored at day 28. in contrast to the usual survival analysis where death (or a bad event such as disease progression) is used as the event of interest, a good event (clinical improvement) was adopted as the end point in this trial. as a result, the shorter time to reach clinical improvement, the better. cao et al. [7] concluded no benefit of using the lopinavir-ritonavir treatment beyond the standard care with an hr of 1.24 (95% ci [0.90,1.72]).we carried out an in-depth and comprehensive investigation of the trial design in cao et al. [7] and identified several key issues with the trial that might have hindered its success. . that is, the false positive rate for this trial increased as high as 7.1% in contrast to the nominal level of 5%. any sample size alteration or re-estimation should be planned in advance in order to control the type i error rate and maintain the integrity of a trial. when the sample size reached 199, the trial was halted for enrollment because of the availability of another treatment, remdesivir.such termination of a trial was again unplanned and immature; if there were no another agent available, would the trial continue recruitment? interestingly, the remdesivir trial . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. instead, we recommend death as a single and clean end point for such trials, given the mortality rate was not low with severe hospitalized covid-19 patients (19.2% in the lopinavir-ritonavir group and 25.0% in the standard care group).the original analysis [7] treated death before day 28 as right-censored at day 28, no matter when death had occurred. this may cause ambiguity because it cannot distinguish the situations where all deaths in one group occurred earlier while those in the other group occurred later. as death is a terminal event, a terminal (or cure) rate model would be more appropriate for analysis of such data. a terminal rate model can be viewed as the counterpart of the traditional mixture cure rate model [13] [14] [15] [16] , which can be developed by slight modifications. as death is a terminal event, patients who died during the 28-day follow-up period would never reach the clinical improvement, i.e., the time to clinical improvement was infinity, denoted as ∞ . death can also be viewed as competing risk for clinical improvement.the upper panel of table 1 shows that neither was there any significant difference in the terminal rates between the lopinavir-ritonavir and standard care groups, nor in the hr (after excluding the terminal subjects who would eventually be absorbed in the death . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. the mixture terminal rate model was performed using the "smcure" package.c the rmti was estimated by calculating the area above the cumulative incidence curve using the "survrm2" package . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. moreover, the crossings of the cumulative event curves for the lopinavir-ritonavir and standard care groups at days 10 and 16 in fig. 2 [7] imply possible violation of the ph assumption. when the ph assumption is not satisfied, the hr from a cox model [24] is not clinically meaningful. as an alternative, the area above the curve in fig. 2 [7] or the area under the inverted curve as shown in our fig. 1 , referred to as the restricted mean time to improvement (rmti), can be used to quantify treatment effect which requires no assumption such as ph [11, [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . as a model-free quantity, the rmti up to 28 days can be interpreted as the average time to reach improvement in 28 days, for which the shorter the better. the 28-day rmti difference between the two groups was -1.67 days (95% ci [-3.62, 0.28]; p=.09) in favor of lopinavir-ritonavir but not statistically significant. the 7-day and 14-day rmtis are also presented in the lower panel of table 1, where the 14-day rmti showed some promising results for lopinavir-ritonavir yet further confirmation is needed.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. tables 2 and 3 show the numbers on mortality and clinical improvement by day 28 across the two treatment groups respectively. we carry out chi-squared tests (or fisher's exact tests if some of the cell counts are smaller than 5) to examine any association between the outcomes and treatments. for table 2 wang et al. [8] reported a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for remdesivir with severe covid-19 patients. based on an adjusted six-point ordinal scale . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprint of clinical status, the primary end point was the time to clinical improvement, defined as 2-level decline from randomization (similar to that in cao et al. [7] , in fact the two trials were conducted by the same group of investigators), for which the shorter the better.patients were permitted concomitant use of lopinavir-ritonavir, interferons, and corticosteroids. the hr between the remdesivir and placebo groups was 1.23 [95% ci 0.87-1.75], indicating no significant difference. overall, 237 eligible patients were enrolled, with 158 patients assigned to the remdesivir group and 78 patients to the placebo group under the intent-to-treat (itt) scheme. the trial was stopped early and thus failed to reach the designated sample size 453 due to a lack of eligible patients. similar to the trial by cao et al. [7] , deaths before day 28 were treated as right-censored observations at day 28 regardless the actual occurrence time of deaths in wang et al. [8] .moreover, a clinical improvement might not be observed due to death, i.e., death is a terminal event, and thus the terminal (or cure) rate model introduced earlier should be recommended for the survival analysis rather than the standard cox model. the upper panel of table 4 indicates no significant difference in the terminal rates between the remdesivir and placebo groups. in particular, the terminal rates were 31.49%for the remdesivir group and 40.71% for the placebo group with p=. 19 . with the terminal . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprint subjects excluded, the hr from the mixture terminal rate model was 0.92 (95% ci, [0.63, 1.35]; p=.67), which also showed no significant difference between the two groups. due to the competing risk from death, the end point might not be observed, and thus the standard hazard concept is ambiguous and the hr does not have a meaningful interpretation anymore [25] . in fig. 2 [8] , the curve for the cumulative improvement event of remdesivir is uniformly higher than that of the control, indicating patients with remdesivir reached improvement faster than those in the control group. the area above the cumulative incidence curve or equivalently the area under the survival curve up to 28 days in our fig. 2 would be a reasonable quantity for evaluating the treatment efficacy.using the reconstructed data from fig. 2 [8] , the restricted mean time to improvement (rmti) evaluated at day 28 was 20.42 days (95% ci [19.26, 21 .57]) for the remdesivir group and 21.31 days (95% ci [19.73, 22 .88]) for the placebo group. as shown in the . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. rmtis are also presented in the lower panel of table 4 , while neither showed statistically significant results. table 5 shows both the unconditional and conditional predictions of the hr, similar to sample size re-estimation using conditional power [26] in a two-stage design. if the trial could have reached the designated sample size, the hr from the conditional prediction shows significant treatment effect of remdesivir with p=.02, and if the trial could enroll twice of the target sample size, both conditional and unconditional approaches result in significant differences under the 5% significance level.thus, a larger sample size may be needed to show the significant difference between remdesivir and placebo.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprint beigel et al. [9] presented a preliminary report of nct04280705 trial which is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of intravenous remdesivir in adults hospitalized with covid-19 with evidence of lower respiratory tract involvement. this trial enrolled 1059 patients (538 assigned to remdesivir and 521 to placebo). the primary end point of the original analysis was the recovery time, defined by either discharge from the hospital or hospitalization for infection-control purposes only. the median recovery time of the remdesivir group was 11 days (95% ci [9, 12] ) and that of the placebo group was 15 days (95% ci [13, 19] the remdesivir trial of beigel et al. [9] is essential to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir, as it has a large sample size of 1059 patients under a well-designed randomized controlled trial scheme. in terms of the data analysis, beigel et al. [9] only reported the median recovery time without p value. from fig. 2a [9] , the kaplan-meier curves of cumulative recoveries are initially intertwined and then diverge, so other percentiles of the time to recovery would provide more information on the efficacy of remdesivir.meanwhile, a global and robust measurement, the restricted mean time to recovery (rmtr), can help to quantify the treatment efficacy in a more comprehensive way [11, [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . table 6 . the restricted mean time to recovery (rmtr) and percentiles of the time to recovery based on the reconstructed data from fig. 2a the upper panel of table 6 presents the rmtrs up to day 30 for both remdesivir and placebo groups. the rmtrs were 14.5 days and 17.2 days for remdesivir and placebo respectively, indicating that patients with remdesivir on average enjoyed 2.7-days gain of recovery with 30-days follow-up. the difference in rmtrs was statistically significant with p<.001, demonstrating the superiority of remdesivir. this is consistent with the original analysis in terms of the rate ratio of recovery [9] . meanwhile in the bottom penal of table 6 , more percentiles of the time to recovery were reported with p values. the early difference for remdesivir vs. placebo in the recovery time at the 25th percentile was -1 (95% ci [-3, 0]; p=.65), which was not statistically significant. however, the differences manifested to be statistically significant later; for example, the 30th to 60th percentiles of the recovery time in the remdesivir group were all significantly shorter than those in the placebo group. it is reasonable for the treatment to take effect after a certain length of follow-up.when designing and conducting a clinical trial for new treatment, particularly for the covid-19 pandemic without knowing much about the clinical outcomes, many things can go wrong if the design is not well thought through, the trial is not carefully conducted following the protocol, or the analysis is not properly carried out. critical issues with such trials include, but not limited to, the end point selection, the type i error rate control, double blinding or open label, early termination of a trial, the validity of the ph assumption in a cox model, assumptions for statistical tests and models, etc. in contrast to searching for a needle in a haystack, the trial design should be more targeted, focused, and tailored for specific needs of covid-19 patients and particular disease characteristics and severities [27] .given the emergency and fast spread of the coronavirus around the world, it is crucial to design the right clinical trial and accelerate the development of new treatment. with the high speed of enrollment and urgency of the trial outcome, it appears to be difficult to . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprint carry out any adaptation during the trial conduct. the trial outcomes unfold so fast that any adaptation may not be able to catch up with the speed of recruitment.as a summary, our recommendations for covid-19 trials are listed as follows:(1) adopt death as a single end point for severe hospitalized covid-19 patients; or live discharge from the hospital for moderately severe covid-19 patients.(2) conduct the gold standard trial scheme: a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial with equal randomization, 1:2 or 1:3 allocation ratio for control vs. treatment.(3) with multiple agents tested in one trial, allow the trial to drop certain treatment due to futility or toxicity.(4) adopt the restricted mean survival time as the metric to quantify the treatment effect when the proportional hazards assumption is not satisfied; otherwise standard approaches using the hazard ratios and log-rank tests should be used.(5) control the type i error rate; any sample size alternation during the trial must be planned and evaluated in advance with a strict control of the false positive rate.(6) intent-to-treat analysis (or its modified version) is recommended for the final analysis.although adaptive design has gained much popularity and is playing an increasingly important role in oncology trials, the advantages of adaptive design may be mitigated to large extent under such a fast patient enrollment, because the impact of any adaptation may be too slow to manifest before the trial is completed. as a result, our recommendations follow the gold standard scheme of conventional trial design without much adaptation ingredient, which may help investigators to discriminate different treatments and identify the effective ones in an efficient way.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133702 doi: medrxiv preprinthuman enteroviruses, family picornaviridae, genus enterovirus, are non-enveloped, single-stranded rna viruses. enteroviruses include a large number of viruses and are characterized into four species (a∼d) responsible for diverse diseases, including poliovirus (pv), which causes poliomyelitis; some coxsackieviruses (cvs), and echovirus, which cause myocarditis; and enterovirus 70 (ev70), which causes enteroviral conjunctivitis. the most prevalent enteroviruses, causing hand, foot and mouth disease (hfmd), are endemic worldwide, and the top two pathogens are coxsackie a16 virus (cav16), and enterovirus 71 (ev71). ev71 was first identified in 1969 in california, united states (schmidt et al., 1974) and is now a reemerging pathogen worldwide responsible for hfmd and other fatal neurological diseases, including meningitis, neurogenic pulmonary edema, acute paralysis, and reduced cognitive function. since a massive outbreak in 2008, hfmd has become widespread in china, with over 2,000,000 cases annually. the pediatric population is most affected, mainly preschool children, and is at the highest risk of developing severe ev71-associated complications.the approval of an inactivated ev71 vaccine in china has provided a specific prevention method for hfmd. however, the vaccination coverage rate is relatively low. moreover, a lack of effective therapy or treatment still poses a severe threat to children's health and social stability in china. hence, finding safe and effective therapeutics against ev71 and other enteroviruses is an urgent need.nucleoside analogs, which target viral rna-dependent rna polymerases (rdrps) to inhibit viral transcription and replication, have recently achieved great success. targeting non-structural protein 5 (ns5) of hepatitis c virus (hcv) makes this "ghost" disease curable. one type of nucleoside analog, a 1'-cyano-substituted adenine c-nucleoside ribose analog (nuc), has been found to inhibit the replication of multiple viruses, including hcv, dengue virus (denv), coronavirus (cov), nipah virus (niv), and ebola virus (ebov) (cho et al., 2012) . remdesivir (gs-5734) is a phosphoramidate prodrug of nuc that inhibits ebov and multiple covs with submicromolar half maximal effective concentration (ec 50 ) values. also, remdesivir inhibits numerous members within paramyxoviridae, such as respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), measles virus (mv), mumps virus (muv), human parainfluenza virus type 3 (hpiv3), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), hendra virus (hev), and niv, with potent efficacy (lo et al., 2017; brown et al., 2019) . currently, the sars-cov-2, formally known as the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) is expanding throughout the globe, and remdesivir has been found to be effective in inhibiting sars-cov-2 replication in vitro (wang et al., 2020) and relieved the symptoms of the first american case of sars-cov-2 infection (holshue et al., 2020) . now, phase 3 clinical trials for remdesivir have been initiated to combat the sars-cov-2 pandemic. the antiviral mechanism of remdesivir is mediated through delayed chain termination of nascent viral rna by targeting the viral rdrp. considering the conservation of the key motif within rdrps, it is reasonable to speculate that remdesivir exhibits similar efficacy for enterovirus infection treatment. here, we found that remdesivir could inhibit ev71 replication after virus entry and inhibit viral complementary rna (crna) synthesis. additionally, remdesivir inhibited coxsackievirus b3 (cvb3) and ev70 at promising rates. overall, our results expand the antiviral spectrum of remdesivir and provide new evidence for the development of this antiviral as an effective anti-enterovirus therapeutic.hela [american type culture collection (atcc), manassas, va, united states; ccl-2], was cultured in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem; sigma-aldrich, st. louis, mo, united states) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs; sigma-aldrich) with 5% co 2 at 37 • c. ev71 (strain 87-2008 xi'an shaanxi, genbank accession no. hm003207.1) was obtained from the xi'an centre for disease control and prevention (xi'an, shaanxi, china) as previously indicated (deng et al., 2012) . as the virus propagated in the laboratory for ten years, the genome was sequenced and submitted to ncbi under accession number mk904809.rabbit enterovirus 71 vp2 antibody was purchased from genetex (gtx132340, hsinchu, china). mouse monoclonal double-stranded rna (dsrna) antibody j2 was obtained from scicons (10010500, szirák, hungary). anti-gapdh mouse monoclonal antibody (mab) was purchased from sangon (d190090, shanghai, china).remdesivir (gs-5734, hy-104077, and purity 99.74%) was purchased from medchemexpress (nj, united states).cytotoxicity assays were conducted following an established protocol . briefly, hela cells were seeded in 96well plates at 1.0 × 10 4 cells per well and incubated at 37 • c with 5% co 2 overnight. the original culture medium was discarded, and the cells were washed twice with dulbecco's phosphatebuffered saline (dpbs). then, medium with vehicle control or antivirals at different concentrations was added to the wells, and samples were cultured for an additional 24 h. after the medium was removed, 100 µl of dmem and 10 µl of cell counting kit-8 (cck8) solution (yeasen, shanghai, china) were added to the wells, and the cells were cultured for 4 h in the dark. the plate was shaken for 1 min, and the absorbance (a) was measured at 450 nm using a biotek synergy ht microplate reader. cell viability was calculated using the following formula: cell viability = [(as-ab)/(ac-ab)] × 100%, where as denotes the absorbance of the experimental wells containing cells, medium, cck8 solution, and drug; ac denotes the absorbance of the control wells containing the same components as the as wells but without the drug; and ab indicates the absorbance of the blank wells, containing only medium and cck8 solution.hela cells were infected with ev71 (moi = 1) for 1 h, and the inoculum was removed after virus adsorption. then, the culture medium with remdesivir at different concentrations was added. after 24 h of treatment, cellular rna was isolated and subjected to reverse transcription and subsequent qrt-pcr. total cellular rna was extracted using trnzol universal (#dp424, tiangen), and rna concentration was determined with an epoch microplate spectrophotometer (biotek, winooski, vt, united states). reverse transcription (rt) was then performed with a hifair r iii 1st strand cdna synthesis kit (yeasen, shanghai, china) according to instructions provided by the manufacturer. briefly, equal amounts of total rna (e.g., 5 µg) from cells treated with different concentrations of remdesivir were added to 3 µl 5 × gdna digester mix and supplemented with rnase-free ddh 2 o to a final volume of 15 µl. the reaction mixtures were incubated at 42 • c for 2 min. after incubation, 2 µl 10 × hifair r iii super buffer, 1 µl hifair r iii rt enzyme mix, and 1 µl oligo (dt)18 (50 µm) were added to a final volume of 20 µl with rnase-free ddh 2 o. then, the mixture was reacted at 25 • c for 5 min, followed by 55 • c for 15 min, and 85 • c for 5 min. the final reaction mixture was subjected to qrt-pcr performed using hieff r qpcr sybr r green master mix (yeasen) on a cfx96 real-time system (bio-rad, hercules, ca, united states). briefly, 10 µl of hieff r qpcr sybr green master mix, 0.4 µl forward primer (10 µm), and 0.4 µl reverse primer (10 µm) targeting corresponding genes were mixed with rnase-free ddh 2 o to a final volume of 20 µl. the qrt-pcr reaction was performed as a two-step method: after denaturation for 5 min, 40 cycles of 95 • c for 10 s for denaturation and 60 • c for 30 s for annealing/extension reaction were performed. a melting curve was constructed following the default setting of the cfx96 real-time system. the mrna expression level of each target gene was normalized to the corresponding β-actin expression level. the primers used for gene amplification are listed in table 1 .immunofluorescence assays (ifa) were conducted as previously described (ye et al., 2015) . cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a confluence of 60-70%. after adherence, the cells were infected with ev71 at an moi of 1 for 1 h, with rocking every 15 min. after absorption, the inoculum was removed, and medium with remdesivir at varying concentrations was added.at 24 h post infection (hpi), the cells were subjected to an ifa following an established protocol. briefly, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, followed by permeabilization with 0.5% triton x-100. cells were incubated with primary antibody (j2) at 4 • c overnight and with fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibody at 37 • c for 2 h. hoechst 33258 was used to stain cell nuclei, and the samples were imaged with an bx60 fluorescence microscope (olympus, tokyo, japan).cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a confluence of 60-70%. then, the cells were infected with ev71, and the drug was added as described for the ifa. at 24 hpi, the cells were washed twice with dpbs and lysed with ripa buffer (beyotime, p0013c, or p0013d). samples were quantified (bca kit, thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, united states), and 40 µg aliquots of each cell lysate were boiled for 10 min. the lysates were subjected to 10% sds-page and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (pvdf) membranes (millipore, billerica, ma, united states). the membranes were incubated with primary antibody against ev71 vp2 (genetex), followed by incubation with secondary antibody conjugated to an infrared dye (li-cor biosciences, lincoln, ne, united states). the membranes were visualized using an odyssey infrared imaging system (li-cor biosciences) as previously described .in total, 29 selected human enterovirus whole protein amino acid sequences were retrieved from uniport. the evolutionary history was inferred using the neighbor-joining method (saitou and nei, 1987) . the bootstrap was set at 1000. the evolutionary distances were computed using the poisson correction method and are presented in units of the number of amino acid substitutions per site. evolutionary analyses were conducted with mega x software (kumar et al., 2018) .statistical analysis was performed using a two-tailed unpaired t-test in graphpad prism software (la jolla, ca, united states). the data are presented as the means ± standard deviations (sds; n = 3 or as otherwise indicated). all experiments were repeated at least twice.previous studies have reported that remdesivir (gs-5734) inhibits different viruses with different efficacies. to determine whether remdesivir inhibits ev71 replication, we first sought to investigate the antiviral activity of remdesivir against ev71 in a broad dilution range. based on data from other viruses, we chose five concentrations, ranging from 0.01 µm to 100 µm. we first infected hela cells with ev71 (moi = 1) for 1 h. then, the inoculum was removed, and medium with remdesivir at varying concentrations was added. after 24 h of treatment, cellular rna was isolated and subjected to qrt-pcr analysis. remdesivir showed a dose-dependent inhibition of ev71 replication (figure 1a , ec 50 = 0.991 µm) and had little effect on cell viability (figure 1b) , although ev71 replication seemed slightly enhanced at low remdesivir concentrations (0.01 ∼ 0.1 µm). moreover, viral protein synthesis was inhibited by remdesivir treatment (figure 1c) . during positive-sense rna virus replication, dsrna is present in the cellular replication site of the virus and can be detected by dsrna-specific antibodies. a noticeable reduction in dsrna staining was discovered in the remdesivir-treated groups ( figure 1d ). in addition, the number of secreted virions in the culture supernatant at 24 hpi, cells were collected and subjected to viral rna copy number quantification by qrt-pcr (mean ± sd, n = 3). ns, p > 0.05, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001.was reduced upon remdesivir treatment ( figure 1e) , with an ec 50 = 0.203 µm. taken together, these results suggest that remdesivir potently inhibits ev71 replication without affecting cell viability.since remdesivir inhibits the replication of other viruses through targeting of viral rdrp, we sought to rule out the effects of remdesivir on virus entry. to this end, we performed experiments using different methods, as follows. first, cells were pretreated with remdesivir for 2 h, and then, ev71 was adsorbed for 1 h at 4 • c (figure 2a) . intriguingly, after pretreatment, remdesivir slightly enhanced ev71 replication at low concentrations and inhibited virus replication at 100 µm ( figure 2b) ; similar results were observed for remdesivir-treated sars-cov-2 (wang et al., 2020) . although we cannot find an explanation for the recent phenomenon, the latter inhibition may be because the removal of remdesivir was not sufficient or the intracellular level of remdesivir was still enough to inhibit ev71 replication.to study whether remdesivir affects ev71 binding to viral receptors on the cell surface, we mixed ev71 and remdesivir and coadsorbed them to hela cells for 1 h at 4 • c. then, the mixture was discarded, and the cells were washed with dpbs to remove any unabsorbed ev71. next, fresh medium was added, and the culture plate was transferred to a 37 • c incubator until 24 h hpi (figure 2a) . as depicted in figure 2c , remdesivir did not inhibit ev71 binding to cells.to investigate whether remdesivir affects ev71 entry into the cell, ev71 was first added to hela cells for 1 h at 4 • c. then, the unbound virions were discarded, and the cells were washed with dpbs. next, medium containing remdesivir at different concentrations was added, the plate was transferred to a 37 • c incubator to initiate virus entry for 1 h (figure 2a) , and then, the medium was refreshed. as expected, remdesivir did not affect ev71 entry into the cell at low concentrations ( figure 2d) . the reduction in ev71 rna at high remdesivir levels may be due to insufficient removal of the drug.as a control, the effects of remdesivir on viral replication were determined by adding fresh medium containing remdesivir after ev71 binding (4 • c) and entry (37 • c), and culturing cells until 24 hpi (figure 2a) . as expected, under this condition, remdesivir severely inhibited ev71 replication, and even abolished ev71 transcription at high concentrations ( figure 2e) .combined, these data illustrate that remdesivir effectively inhibits the proliferation of ev71 post virus entry. , coadsorbed remdesivir and ev71 (c), remdesivir after ev71 adsorption that was removed after virus entry (d), or remdesivir after virus entry (e), and at 24 hpi, the ev71 viral rna copy number was quantified by qrt-pcr (mean ± sd, n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001.frontiers in microbiology | www.frontiersin.org figure 3 | remdesivir inhibits ev71 replication at the viral transcription stage. (a) schematic representation of reverse transcription and pcr protocol for conventional real-time pcr (top) and tagged primer-mediated qrt-pcr (bottom). the tag within the tagged rt primer is shown in green, and the amplified products contained a portion of the tag and cdna. (b,c) synthesis of ev71 crna (normalized to the actin expression level) was inhibited by remdesivir (mean ± sd, n = 3). p > 0.05, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001.to investigate the possible mechanism by which remdesivir inhibits ev71 infection, we first sought to detect the level of ev71 crna upon remdesivir treatment. to this end, we designed a specific primer containing a unique tag for reverse transcription, and a forward qrt-pcr primer was designed to specifically target the tag (figure 3a ) (kawakami et al., 2011) . the different levels of ev71 crna were determined by qrt-pcr, and after normalization of the ev71 level crna to actin expression, a reduction in ev71 crna was observed after remdesivir treatment (figures 3b, c) . therefore, remdesivir reduced both crna and vrna synthesis of ev71. enterovirus crna and vrna are both synthesized by 3d/rdrp. within the palm subdomain, three motifs (a, b, and c) are highly conserved. in particular, motif b forms a "loop-α-helix" structure to assist binding of template rna, and an asn residue is involved in substrate discrimination, which preferentially selects ribonucleoside triphosphates over dntps (shu and gong, 2016; warren et al., 2016; peersen, 2017) . a previous study superimposed different rna virus rdrp sequences, revealing that rhinoviruses, flaviviruses, and noroviruses share high similarity between nucleotide binding domains (lo et al., 2017) . hence, the antiviral spectrum of remdesivir may be extended to other enteroviruses.based on protein amino acid sequences retrieved from uniport, motif b is highly conserved among the four human enterovirus species (figure 4a) . to further verify whether remdesivir also inhibits the replication of other enteroviruses, we selected two enteroviruses stocked in the laboratory and found that remdesivir also showed potent efficacy toward cvb3 ( figure 4b ) and ev70 (figure 4c) , with ec 50 = 0.097 µm, and ec 50 = 0.026 µm, respectively. these data demonstrated that remdesivir exhibits broad-spectrum antiviral efficacy against enterovirus.human enteroviruses can cause a wide range of diseases in humans, from mild respiratory illness to myocarditis and from hfmd to severe aseptic meningitis. the most harmful virus, pv, is possibly the next virus that will be eradicated after variola major. the top two hfmd causative pathogens figure 4 | remdesivir exhibits broad-spectrum inhibition of enterovirus replication. (a) phylogenetic analyses of the human enterovirus amino acid sequence. ev-a is marked in light blue, ev-b is marked in gold, ev-c is marked in orange, and ev-c is marked in green. cvb3 (b) and ev70 (c) rna synthesis was inhibited by remdesivir (mean ± sd, n = 3). *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001. are ev71 and cav16 (lee, 2016) . ev71 is responsible for severe neurological complications and is considered the most critical enterovirus in the post-polio era. however, the lack of specific antivirals makes enterovirus infection treatment largely dependent on supportive therapy; thus, pan-enterovirus antivirals are needed.here, we discovered that a phosphoramidate prodrug of nuc, remdesivir, which has already been shown to be effective against ebov (jacobs et al., 2016; warren et al., 2016; tchesnokov et al., 2019) , cov (sheahan et al., 2017; agostini et al., 2018) , and niv (lo et al., 2017; lo et al., 2019) , exhibits prominent efficacy against ev71. further experiments revealed that the antiviral effects of remdesivir begin after virus entry and include inhibition of viral crna and vrna synthesis.the possible mechanism by which remdesivir inhibits rna virus replication has been elucidated in paramyxoviridae and filovirus. for rsv and niv, remdesivir causes premature termination of nascent rna transcripts (warren et al., 2016; jordan et al., 2018) ; a similar result was observed for ebov rdrp. in addition, remdesivir caused a delayed chain termination that could not be overcome by the addition of higher concentrations of nucleotides (tchesnokov et al., 2019) . although the precise mechanism by which remdesivir inhibits enterovirus replication still needs further investigation, using crna pcr, we noticed that ev71 crna was nearly undetectable after exposure to high concentrations of remdesivir. hence, 3d may incorporate remdesivir into its nascent rna and cause subsequent inhibition of ev71 crna synthesis.besides, rdrp motif b within the 3d protein of different enteroviruses is highly conserved (bruenn, 2003; shu and gong, 2016; peersen, 2017) , and remdesivir inhibited cvb3 and ev70 replication, which represent human enteroviruses b and d, respectively. consequently, remdesivir can be further developed as a pan-enterovirus antiviral.one limitation of our study is the lack of an in vivo efficacy evaluation of remdesivir due to the lack of a suitable animal model. for ev71, two conventional models are used: a mouseadapted virus strain that can cause neurological symptoms after infection (wang et al., 2011; chang et al., 2015) and intracranial infection of newborn suckling mice (lee et al., 2014) . however, our laboratory does not possess the mouse-adapted strain, and the newborn mouse model is ineffective for evaluating the efficacy of antivirals. in the most prevalent suckling mouse model, it is challenging to compare antiviral efficacy due to an excessive number of variations. future studies can be adopted by utilizing scavenger receptor class b member 2 (scarb2), a receptor of ev71, in transgenic mice to evaluate the effect of remdesivir on ev71 (chang et al., 2013; fujii et al., 2013) . regarding the other receptor, p-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (psgl-1), transgenic mice are insufficient for evaluation of ev71 infection (liu et al., 2012) . the in vivo efficacy of remdesivir against other enteroviruses might be evaluated in existing enteroviral mouse models, e.g., cvb3.an intriguing result observed in this study was that remdesivir slightly enhanced ev71 replication at low concentrations (0.01 ∼ 0.1 µm). moreover, this effect is likely related to remdesivir pretreatment, which may affect subsequent viral entry steps. additionally, remdesivir was found to enhance sars-cov-2 entry compared to chloroquine slightly. the mechanism by which remdesivir enhances virus replication after pretreatment needs further investigation. however, this study suggests the possibility that combining remdesivir with other virus entry inhibitors, e.g., neutralizing antibody or nafamostat, may be efficient for the treatment of viral diseases by compensating for the virus replication enhancing effects of remdesivir. also, these findings should be taken into account when considering the remdesivir research during the current sars-cov-2 pandemic.in summary, remdesivir is a potent inhibitor of replication of ev71 and other enteroviruses in cells. hence, future studies may combine accurate diagnosis and effective antivirals to prevent possible neurological disorders resulting from enterovirus infection, especially in ev71-induced cases.the datasets generated for this study can be found in ncbi under accession number mk904809. all other datasets generated for this study are included in the article/supplementary material. ralf stahlmann, hartmut lode t he virus sars-cov-2, first isolated in wuhan, china and the pathogen responsible for covid-19, is spreading rapidly across the world. ever more urgent questions are being asked about vaccines to prevent coronavirus infection and virustatics for effective treatment. over 80 clinical trials have already been initiated in patients with covid-19 to resolve the numerous issues around the disease.coronaviruses have long been recognized as a cause of respiratory tract infections in humans. the coronavirus genome comprises the longest known plus-strand rna, around 30 000 bases in length. its high genetic variability means that new variants are constantly emerging. this family of pathogens first became a focus of public attention when, from 2002 onwards, the zoonosis known as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) spread outwards from china. ten years later, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) hit the headlines. mers was first diagnosed in saudi arabia in 2012 and was fatal in around one in three patients.the world health organization (who) has dubbed the new virus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2), and the disease is called covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019). comparisons with other members of the coronavirus family show that the highest correspondence is with a virus from bats; however, direct transmission from bats to humans is considered improbable. a number of factors indicate the existence of an as yet unidentified intermediate host (1) (2) (3) .viruses cannot replicate outside cells. they therefore need access to the cells of a host organism before they can spread. transmission of a zoonosis to humans implies the existence of a (new) route by which it infiltrates human cells. the sars virus uses angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) in the lungs as receptor, docking by means of the spikes on its envelope. in the renin-angiotensin system, ace2 serves to counter the action of ace, which is well known in pharmacology as a target structure for antihypertensives (ace inhibitors). ace2 can metabolize both angiotensin i and angiotensin ii. the resultant angiotensin-(1-7) exerts summary background: with the worldwide spread of sars-cov-2 infection, it is becoming increasingly urgent to develop a vaccine to prevent covid-19, as well as effective drugs to treat it.methods: this article is based on a selective literature search in pubmed and clinicaltrials.gov, followed by an assessment of the ongoing clinical trials that were revealed by the search.results: a number of substances have been found to prevent the reproduction of sars-cov-2 in vitro. these include virustatic agents that have already been approved for the treatment of other types of viral infection, as well as drugs that are currently used for entirely different purposes. high in vitro activity has been found for the nucleotide analogue remdesivir, for the antimalarial drug chloroquine, and for nitazoxanide, a drug used to treat protozoan infections. because the virus enters human cells by way of the membrane-associated angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), keeping the virus from docking to this receptor is a conceivable treatment approach. transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) plays a role in the fusion of the virus with cells; inhibitors of this enzyme are known as well. the potential therapeutic efficacy and tolerability of these and other active substances remain to be investigated in clinical trials. at present, more than 80 trials on covid-10 have already been registered with clinical-trials.gov. some initial findings should already be available in late april 2020.conclusion: clinical trials are now indispensable in order to determine the true clinical benefits and risks of the substances that have been found to be active against sars-cov-2 in vitro. there is not yet any recommendation for the therapeutic use of any particular agent beyond standard supportive treatment. genome analysis of the new viruses has shown that-despite a number of mutations-there are structural analogies between the binding sites of the sars virus and sars-cov-2. for the new viruses too, ace2 serves as receptor and thus as entry point to the human body (3, 4) . a crucial part is also played by a serine protease in the host cells: this enzyme, known as transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), enables fusion with the host cell and is thus an important factor in the dissemination of influenza viruses and coronaviruses in the cells of the human body.potential candidates for the prevention and treatment of coronavirus infection are therefore peptides or small-molecular substances that block the membrane-associated enzyme ace2, or alternatively inhibitors of tmprss2 (figure) . camostat, an inhibitor of this protease, is licensed in japan for treatment of chronic pancreatitis (4), but no clinical trials of camostat in coronavirus infection have yet been conducted. among the clinical trials initiated to date, one project is investigating the administration of recombinant ace2 enzyme to treat the infection (table 1) . soluble ace2 might slow the spread by competitive binding to the virus. on the other hand, ace2 antibodies might be a suitable means of blocking the virus's access to the patient's cells (5) .according to preliminary reports, the antimalarial drug chloroquine prevents the terminal glycosylation of ace2. moreover, chloroquine-or its derivative hydroxychloroquine-increases the ph in the endosomes involved in the uptake of the virus into the cells. in cell cultures, the replication of sars-cov-2 was inhibited at a chloroquine concentration (ec50 = concentration with half-maximal effect) of 1.13 μm (6) . several clinical trials are investigating the efficacy and tolerability of chloroquine in the prevention and treatment of covid-19 (table 1) .although vaccination strategies were developed in the context of previous epidemics, such as sars and mers, no vaccine for coronavirus infections is yet available. potential vaccines are directed against the viral proteins. the spike (s) protein is of particular interest as a possible antigen for vaccination, because of its crucial role in viral dissemination. different types of vaccines can be distinguished: for instance, they can contain inactivated viruses, which induce neutralizing antibodies. a plausible alternative is administration of rna-or dna-based vaccines, with nucleic acids coding for the s protein. in these cases, the human organism produces the protein by which an immune response is induced. subunit vaccines contain the s protein or another viral protein, without carrier virus. however, the immunogenicity is relatively low, so an adjuvant is needed. vector-based vaccines comprise a protein, e.g., the s protein, that is coupled to nonreplicating carrier virus particles. this concept was pursued in the development of a vaccine for mers, but no finished vaccine for this coronavirus infection ever became available. in any case, it will take some time until we have a vaccine for covid-19. it goes without saying that the safety of a vaccine is extremely important (7, 8) .no specific treatment for covid-19 is yet known, but the search for a suitable drug is well under way. on 11 march 2020, 84 trials were listed on www.clinicaltrials. gov under the keyword "covid-19." the substances under investigation range from immunomodulatory approaches with immunoglobulins, interferon, thalidomide, and glucocorticoids to treatment with virustatics such as oseltamivir, darunavir, and umifenovir, which was developed in russia for the treatment of influenza (table 1 ). in view of the possibility of resistance developing, it would certainly be desirable to have more than one option for treatment. on the basis of experience with antiviral therapeutics to date, it is to be expected that evolutionary mutations of the viral genome will endow sars-cov-2 with new properties, including resistance to certain substances.glucocorticoid treatment was tried two decades ago in patients with sars, but turned out not to be beneficial because it delayed elimination of the virus. treatment with corticosteroids is also not recommended for covid-19 (9) (10) (11) . the nucleoside analog ribavirin was used at the beginning of the sars epidemic in 2002. this substance can be administered to treat infections with respiratory syncytial (rs) viruses or chronic hepatitis c. in patients with sars it was usually given in combination with glucocorticoids. clinically and also radiologically confirmed successful treatment was reported, but none of the studies included a control group, so it remains uncertain whether the medications took effect or whether recovery was spontaneous. the situation is similar for the administration of some antiretrovirals, such as lopinavir and nelfinavir, that were developed for the treatment of hiv infection.the protease inhibitor lopinavir has been used-together with a small booster dose of ritonavir-to treat patients with covid-19 in the current pandemic. five of 18 patients with worsening clinical symptoms received this medication in a singapore hospital. improvement was seen in three patients, but not in the other two. details of the disease course were published, but yielded no clear evidence for the potential efficacy of lopinavir (12) . in wuhan, 41 (21%) of 181 patients were treated with lopinavir/ritonavir, but no decrease in virus excretion was seen (13) .a detailed report of the treatment of a 35-year-old man with covid-19 in the usa was published on 5 march 2020 (14) . this was the first instance of treatment with the as yet unlicensed nucleoside analog remdesivir. the otherwise healthy patient first a cough and fever, followed by vomiting and diarrhea. four days after onset of the symptoms he was admitted to the hospital. the initial treatment was unspecific, with antipyretics such as ibuprofen and paracetamol. chest radiography then indicated pneumonia, upon which the antibiotics vancomycin and cefepime were given. they were discontinued a day later, however, because the suspicion of bacterial pneumonia was not confirmed. remdesivir was infused on the evening of day 11. the patient was no longer febrile the next day and could be discharged a few days later. whether the recovery was effected by remdesivir or occurred spontaneously is unknown. efficacy can be determined only in randomized controlled clinical trials. large clinical studies of remdesivir were initiated in february 2020, and the first results can be expected in a few weeks.no specific treatment has yet been developed for coronavirus infections, despite the enormous advances in antiviral drug therapy in recent years. chronic diseases such as infections with hiv or hepatitis b virus can now be treated with virustatics. these substances bring about long-term suppression of viral replication-and in the case of chronic hepatitis c, cure. drugs are also available for acute viral infections. treatment with aciclovir can save the life of a patient with herpes encephalitis. nucleoside analogs may shorten the course of a herpes simplex infection, but the effect tends to be minor in patients with an intact immune system. the course of influenza can be slightly abbreviated by neuraminidase in-hibitors such as oseltamivir, but only if treatment is initiated very early. as a number of placebocontrolled studies have shown, no additional benefit is achieved-in a patient with functioning immune defenses-when administration of the drug is delayed to even just a few days after onset of infection.no account of pharmacotherapy for viral infections would be complete without a mention of the numerous setbacks that have occurred. right at the beginning of the "nucleoside era," in the 1970s, it was recognized that cytarabine could not be used as a virustatic in disseminated herpes despite its high antiviral activity. dissemination of the virus persisted for longer in the treatment group than in the placebo group (15) . decades later, the nucleosides fialuridine and clevudine were tested for possible use against hepatitis b. in both cases, the treatment had to be discontinued owing to toxicity with long-term intake, and research was abandoned (16, 17) . trials of various combinations for hiv infection were also discontinued because the treatments were insufficiently effective or poorly tolerated.some pharmacological substances are known to possess high activity against coronaviruses in vitro, but their efficacy and tolerability remain to be explored. since most cases of covid-19 run a mild course, it has to be clarified whether administration of virustatics would be advisable in such cases and whether early initiation of treatment would be essential. this requires careful consideration of the virus in the endosomehost cell the first data on inhibition of sars-cov-2 by various substances in cell culture were published online on 4 february 2020 (table 2) . seven different pharmaceuticals were investigated in vero-e6 cells, a renal cell line from primates. the concentration that evoked a half-maximal response (ec50) varied between <1 µm and >100 µm. as shown in table 2 , the nucleoside analog penciclovir had a relatively weak effect (ec50: 96 µm). favipiravir, licensed for the treatment of influenza in japan, exhibited moderate activity, as did nafamostat. a striking finding was the relatively high in vitro activity of nitazoxanide, a drug that was developed mainly for the treatment of protozoal infections but also acts against some bacteria and viruses. the highest activity under the experimental conditions described in this publication was displayed by remdesivir, with an ec50 of 0.77 µm and an ec90 of 1.76 µm (1 µm = 0.6 mg/l) (6).remdesivir is a nucleotide analog that is intracellularly metabolized to triphosphate (18) . as well as ebolaviruses, remdesivir inhibits coronaviruses and a range of other viruses (19) . it was developed as a substance to treat ebola infection. it was effective in an experiment on non-human primates, but the results of a clinical trial in patients with ebola were not convincing. after a preliminary analysis revealed that monoclonal antibodies offered better protection from a fatal outcome, no further patients were treated with remdesivir. the reasons for remdesivir's poor efficacy against ebola in this clinical trial remain unexplained (20) .in the past few weeks a number of clinical trials have been initiated to investigate the efficacy of remdesivir, chloroquine, and other substances against covid-19 (table 1) . since no specific treatment for this infection has yet been established, and in the light of previous experience, some of these trials are planned as placebo-controlled doubleblind studies. they differ with regard to their inclusion criteria, e.g., severity of disease and time from diagnosis to randomization. the first trials are expected to reach completion by the end of april 2020. details of all these studies can be found at www.clinicaltrials.gov.none of the medications mentioned in this article is yet licensed for the treatment of covid-19. any administration of drugs approved for other indications constituted off-label use in an individual attempt to achieve cure that deviates from standard medical practice. it is not yet known whether any of the the substances currently undergoing clinical testing will prove to be beneficial and have no adverse effects. the outbreak of infection with a novel coronavirus is the latest reminder of the dangers associated with zoonoses. several drugs are known to inhibit the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 in vitro. since no treatment has yet proved efficacious, the strengths and weaknesses of the new substances must be established in clinical trials. until an effective therapy is developed, the spread of sars-cov-2 must be restricted as far as possible and patients with severe covid-19 must be treated with the means at our disposal. a 44-year-old bavarian woman with allergic asthma consulted a community medical practice at the end of february 2020 with a febrile airway infection and breathing difficulties after visiting a carnival-related event. she was first assumed to have seasonal influenza and treated symptomatically with antipyretics, and on day 4 empirical antimicrobial treatment was initiated on the assumption of community-acquired pneumonia. six days after the onset of her symptoms, nucleic acid amplification of material from a nasopharyngeal swab demonstrated the new coronavirus sars-cov-2. at the time of hospital admission on day 7, the patient had marked dyspnea at rest (respiration rate: 30 breaths per minute; oxygen saturation: 90% in ambient air) and a chest radiograph showed atypical infiltration of both lungs ( figure 1a) . thoracic computed tomography revealed peripheral ground-glass opacities in both lungs, compatible with covid-19 pneumonia ( figure 1b) . after the occurrence of covid-19associated hepatitis on day 12, the clinical and laboratory findings gradually improved with antipyretic and antimicrobial treatment of a bacterial superinfection. the novel coronavirus pneumonia (coronavirus disease 2019, is caused by a novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, sars-cov-2) infection . sars-cov-2 that seriously endangers human health has been found throughout china and around the world, including america, brazil, russia, india, peru, england, and other countries (zhang et al., 2020a) . as of april 14, 2020, a total of 83700 confirmed cases and 3351 deaths in china, and more than 1.85 million of covid-19 confirmed cases in other countries were reported. according to the speed of sars-cov-2 infection, the number of confirmed and deaths of covid-19 in the world is still increasing. the prevention and treatment of covid-19 is undoubtedly one of the biggest challenges in the history of human development. chinese government formulated quickly strict prevention and control mechanism, issued the "guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia (the seventh trial version)", and encouraged the front-line clinical workers to try to use the marketed medicines for covid-19 treatment (national health commission et al., 2020) . fortunately, as of april 14, 2020, more than 78000 of patients had been successfully cured in china. a number of drugs exhibit certain inhibitory effects on sars-cov-2 in china, which are expected to be specific drugs for the treatment of covid-19. meanwhile, a large number of clinical and fundamental studies on these potentially effective drugs are being carried out. some drugs that have been clinically tested in advance have good curative effects, and some drugs also have shown certain antiviral effects in vitro experiments. however, most of these drugs have not yet been tested in standardized clinical studies, especially large sample randomized controlled trials (rcts).in the face of the battle between human health and viruses, chinese scholars should share these potential drugs to cooperate with other countries and regions for resisting this virus attack.this review lists current clinical trial drugs and potential drugs against sars-cov-2 in china, including chemical drugs, traditional chinese medicines (tcms), and biological products, which is beneficial to promote researchers around the world to discover specific drugs for covid-19 treatment as soon as possible.clinical trials to verify the efficacy and safety. the chemical structures, pharmacological actions, indications, adverse reactions, and general usage of these chemical drugs for covid-19 treatment were listed in table 1 .kaletra consists of two kinds of protease inhibitors lopinavir and ritonavir, which both can block the division of gag-pol polyproteins and generate non-infectious virus particles to specifically inhibit retroviral infection (van der laan et al., 2018) . initially, this drug is mainly used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection in adults and children over 2 years of age. studies in vitro experiments showed that lopinavir and ritonavir could reduce the levels of sars-cov and mers-cov (chu et al., 2004) . based on the results of substantial clinical benefits of lopinavir and ritonavir in patients with sars-cov infection, scientists speculated that this drug might be effective in patients with sars-cov-2 infection . the team in zhongshanuniversity constructed a structural model of two new coronavirus proteases-coronavirus endopeptidase c30 and papain-like protein through homology modeling, and docked lopinavir/ritonavir with protease models, respectively. results showed that lopinavir and ritonavir more easily combined with coronavirus endopeptidase c30 compared with papain-like enzymes, which expressed excellent anti-sars-cov-2 effects (lin et al., 2020) . however, after using lopinavir/ritonavir tablets in 40 patients diagnosed with covid-19, 29 cases had adverse reactions related to lopinavir/ritonavir, such as the elevated triglycerides, nausea, and diarrhea (liang et al., 2020) . therefore, larger clinical trials of this drug should focus on its safety.ribavirin, a broad-spectrum antiviral drug, can be phosphorylated in red blood cells to produce ribavirin monophosphate, diphosphate, and triphosphate. ribavirin monophosphate is a strong inhibitor of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, which can inhibit cellular guanylate synthesis, reduce cellular guanylate triphosphate, and block viral nucleic acid synthesis. ribavirin triphosphate inhibits influenza virus rna polymerase, thereby interfering with virus μmol/l in a549 cells (chang et al., 2011) . when ribavirin was used in combination with ifn-α2b, anti-mers-cov activity of ribavirin was significantly enhanced in rhesus macaques (falzarano et al., 2013) . ribavirin was shown to inhibit sars-cov replication in five different cell types derived from animals or humans at therapeutically achievable concentration (morgenstern et al., 2005) . however, some adverse reactions should be noted during ribavirin application. for example, 61% of patients developed hemolytic anemia, 58% hypocalcemia, and 46% hypomagnesemia in 110 sars patients treated with ribavirin (knowles et al., 2003) . given the efficacy of ribavirin in the treatment of diseases caused by sars-cov and mers-cov, it is expected to become an effective drug for covid-19 treatment. however, the efficacy of ribavirin for the treatment of covid-19 is still controversial, which are needed to further confirm in clinical trials.chloroquine is an anti-malarial and anti-inflammatory drug, which is widely used in the treatment of malaria and rheumatoid arthritis for more than 70 years. anti-malarial effect of chloroquine may interfere with the replication and transcription of the plasmodium schizont dna or hinder its endocytosis, thereby leading to the parasite to die due to amino acids deficiency. chloroquine also has immunomodulatory activity, which can synergistically enhance antiviral effects (wang et al., 2020a) . chloroquine phosphate and hydroxychloroquine destroy the terminal glycosylation of angiotensin converting enzyme ii (ace2) in vitro. therefore, chloroquine may be potent inhibitors of sars-cov-2 infection. based on the results of previous studies, chloroquine phosphate has a therapeutic effect on covid-19 in vitro (wang et al., 2020a) . at present, several clinical trials were successively announced. the results of an open-label non-randomized clinical trial revealed that hydroxychloroquine was significantly associated with viral load reduction or disappearance in patients with covid-19 (philippe et al., 2020) . similarly, another randomized clinical trial also confirmed the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine on covid-19, which are manifested with the shortening of the body temperature recovery time and the cough remission time of patients with covid-19 . preliminary evidence from a multicenter prospective observational study showed that the median time to undetectable viral rna was shorter in chloroquine than in non-chloroquine, and no serious adverse reactions were observed in the chloroquine group . in contrast, the results of some clinical studies showed j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f negative for the treatment of covid-19 with chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine. for example, an open-label, randomized, controlled trial indicated that hydroxychloroquine did not result in a higher negative conversion probability than standard-of-care alone in mild to moderate covid-19 patients, and adverse events, especially diarrhea, were higher after receiving hydroxychloroquine (tang et al., 2020) . another randomized, double-blinded, phase ⅱb clinical trial showed that the high dosage chloroquine phosphate group (total 12 g) presented more qtc>500 ms and higher mortality rate (17%) than the low dosage group (total 2.7 g) (mayla et al., 2020) . hence, the safety and efficacy of chloroquine for the treatment of covid-19 still need to be testified by more and bigger clinical trials.arbidol inhibits the fusion between viral envelope and cell membrane of the target cells, thereby preventing the virus from entering the target cells (teissier et al., 2011) . arbidol is often used to resist influenza viruses in russia and china, which has not yet been approved for marketing in other countries. in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that arbidol has antiviral activity against influenza virus, rsv, rhinovirus, coxsackie virus, coxsackie virus b5, and adenovirus (shi et al., 2007; zhong et al., 2009) . previous studies have shown that arbidol can inhibit rna viruses and filoviridae, such as sars-cov and mers-cov(guan et al., 2018; hulseberg et al., 2019) .chinese scientists found that arbidol could effectively inhibit the pathological effects of sars-cov-2 at a concentration of 10~30 μmol/l with 60 times of viral load in vitro through screening a variety of antiviral drugs. at present, two rcts have been initiated to evaluate the efficacy and safety of arbidol in the treatment of covid-19 in china.favipiravir is a viral rna polymerase inhibitor, which can be mediated by its metabolite ribofuranosyl-5'-triphosphate (rtp) that inhibits influenza virus rna polymerase activity.favipiravir was urgently used and presented good inhibitory effects on ebola virus in 2014 (nagata et al., 2015) . despite of fairly modest antiviral activity, favisiravir could completely inhibit murine norovirus (mnv) replication at a concentration of 100 μg/ml with little or no side effects on cells (cell survival rate> 80%) (rocha-pereira et al., 2012) . favipiravir is proven to protect mice from lethal infection with various influenza viruses (furuta et al., 2013) . however, previous reports showed that favipiravir might have a prolonged qt interval during treatment, which should be paid attention to monitoring during medication (kumagai et al., 2015) . favipiravir has been j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f officially approved by chinese medical products administration for marketing and formally put into production in china. favipiravir is the first approved drug with the potential curative effect on covid-19 in china, which will play an important role in prevention and control of sars-cov-2 infection.remdesivir produced by gilead sciences inc. is mainly used as a test drug against ebola virus.one review suggested that remdesivir might be more suitable against coronaviruses (john, 2020) .remdesivir has a strong anti-filovirus effect in vitro and a certain anti-coronavirus effect through inhibiting rna-dependent rna synthetase in animal experiments (wang et al., 2020b; zumla et al., 2016) . subsequent research found that remdesivir was not only effective against ebola virus, but also inhibits respiratory syncytial virus, coronavirus, nipah virus, and hendra virus (warren et al., 2016) . researchers reported that the first covid-19 patient in the united states recovered after receiving remdesivir treatment (holshue et al., 2020) . in november 2019, the results of a phase ii clinical trial showed that 175 of 681 ebola patients were treated with remdesivir, following 29 serious adverse reactions, only one of which was related to remdesivir (mulangu et al., 2019) . research showed that giving remdesivir could prevent rhesus macaques from getting sick before mers-cov infection and improve their symptoms after being infected (de wit et al., 2020) . furthermore, remdesivir treatment initiated early during infection had a clear clinical benefit in sars-cov-2-infected rhesus macaques, which predicted that early remdesivir treatment initiation in covid-19 patients might prevent progression to severe pneumonia (brandi et al., 2020) . chinese scientists have found that ec50 of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 is 0.77 μmol/l in vero e6 cells, and the selection index si is greater than 129, indicating that this drug can effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 infection in vitro (wang et al., 2020a) . preliminary results from a clinical trial conducted by the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid) in usa showed that the patients who received remdesivir had 31% faster time to recovery than those who received placebo, indicating that remdesivir has a significant positive effect in reducing recovery time for patients with covid-19. in addition, gilead sciences inc. also announced that similar clinical improvements after the 5-day and 10-day remdesivir administration in patients with severe covid-19 were found even without a placebo control. however, a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, multicentre clinical trial conducted by chinese scientists j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f revealed that remdesivir did not accelerate recovery or reduce the mortality in patients with severe covid-19 compared with the placebo group. the rate of early discontinuation due to adverse events, including nausea, vomiting, and cardiopulmonary failure, was higher in the group receiving remdesivir than that in the placebo group (11.6% versus 5.1%). although this is the first high-quality clinical trial of remdesivir in the treatment of covid-19 so far, only 237 samples are included in the clinical trial . therefore, the antiviral efficacy and safety of remdesivir still need to be supported by more high-quality and larger sample clinical studies.in china, the practice of fighting against sars-cov-2 in the past four months has fully confirmed that tcms play an important role in prevention and treatment of covid-19 before successful development of specific medicines and vaccines. the combination treatment methods of tcms and chemical drugs improved clinical efficacy, shortened the length of hospital stay, and reduced the critical mortality rate . therefore, those tcms, including chinese herbal compound prescriptions, injection preparations, and active ingredients of tcms, with certain effects for prevention and treatment of covid-19 should be summarized and shared. chinese herbal compound prescriptions and injection preparations that were tried to prevent and treat covid-19 in china were listed in table 2 .glycyrrhizic acid (ga) is the principal bioactive ingredient isolated from chinese herb university and the university of hong kong proved that ga could bind to ace2, which testified that ga preparation might have potential value in preventing sars-cov-2 infection. studies have shown that ga can not only exert antiviral effects by regulating immune function, but also has a clear anti-inflammatory mechanism (li et al., 2017) . a number of experts in hubei province of china said that patients with severe covid-19 could trigger an inflammatory storm, leading to multiple organ failure. ga derivatives also presented the antiviral activity against sars-cov (hoever et al., 2005) . a clinical retrospectively analysis of 73 sars patients showed j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f that compound glycyrrhizin could improve the symptoms of dry cough, chest tightness, shortness of breath, and other symptoms, which is believed that compound glycyrrhizin has a certain effect on sars-cov (lu et al., 2003) . at present, the commonly used oral ga+vitamin c for the treatment of covid-19 has been approved in a clinical trial in china.in addition, a study revealed that several active natural products and tcms might have therapeutic effects on covid-19 through screening the self-built "highly pharmaceutical chinese herbal compound prescription refers to a prescription consisting of two or more components for the treatment of a relatively certain disease and syndrome, which has a relatively prescribed processing method and usage method. each herb in chinese herbal compound prescription has specific curative effect, which cooperates with each other to increase the curative effect or reduce toxicity and adverse reactions. chinese herbal compound prescriptions are widely applied in clinical practice, which has overall comprehensive effects of broad-spectrum antibacterial, antiviral, and immune function regulation.huoxiang zhengqi (hxzq) is used as a common chinese herbal compound prescription to improve the symptoms of headache, dizziness, nausea and vomiting, fatigue, and gastrointestinal discomfort in chinese families. there are different dosage forms on the market, such as water, capsule, and pill. clinical reports showed that hxzq powder treated 22 cases of infectious diarrhea caused by norwalk virus, with the results of 100% effective rate (wang, 2010) . hxzq oral solution could bind to ace2 to target ptgs2, hsp90ab1, ar, camsap2, and other targets through the network pharmacology and molecular docking, thus playing a role in prevention and control of covid-19 (deng et al., 2020) . adverse reactions caused by hxzq preparations are diverse, such as skin damage being the most, followed by circulatory system, respiratory system, and nervous system symptoms (fang et al., 2015) . and ifn-γ levels in patients with influenza, thus improving the immune function (li et al., 2013; qi et al., 2016) . 300 major active ingredients of jhqg for covid-19 treatment were predicted through network pharmacology analysis, involving 414 target proteins, 47 of which are potential targets for covid-19 treated with jhqg (mao et al., 2020) . lianhua qingwen capsule (lhqw) are applied to relieve fever or high fever and cough caused by influenza, which can inhibit the proliferation of various influenza viruses and reduce il-6, il-8, and tnf-α levels, thereby exerting antiviral effects (ding et al., 2017; dong et al., 2014) . lhqw significantly enhanced the efficacy of conventional antiviral drugs, and improved fever, cough, and fatigue symptoms in a clinical study of 63 suspected covid-19 cases . in addition, a retrospective clinical study of lhqw combined with conventional treatment patients, lhqw could significantly improve fever, fatigue, cough, sputum, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and appetite in patients with common covid-19, and reduce the proportion of common to severe . clinical study of 42 patients with common covid-19 treated with lhqw found that compared with the control group, the disappearance rate of fever symptoms increased from 57.1% to 85.7%, and the disappearance rate of cough symptoms increased from 5.6% to 46.7%. the duration of fever was shortened by 1.5 days, the disappearance rate of expectoration increased from 9.1% to 64.3%, and the disappearance rate of shortness of breath symptoms increased from 0 to 77.8% . lhqw prescription for the treatment of mild and common covid-19 has been approved to be added to drug instruction in china.has good curative effects on fever, cough, and headache. studies showed that sfjd significantly reduced the serum levels of pge2, il-1β, and tnf-α in rats with acute pharyngitis (qian, 2019) .sfjd combined with arbidol could significantly improve clinical symptoms, including the increased white blood cells and lymphocytes, and the absorption of chest ct image in 100 patients with mild covid-19 . fangfeng tongsheng pill (ffts) can effectively reduce serum tnf-α level, thus exerting anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic and immune-regulating effects (jin et al., 2017; wang et al., 2018) . sars-cov-2 infection is easy to cause symptoms, such as fatigue, gastrointestinal upset, and fever during the observation period. chinese herbal j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f compound prescriptions can reduce the levels of related inflammation-related factors, exert anti-inflammatory and improve immunity, and ultimately alleviate the symptoms of patients with covid-19 (zhang et al., 2020b) .qingfei paidu decoction (qfpd) is mainly used to control lung infection in clinical practice.the active ingredients of qfpd for the treatment of covid-19 were predicted by network pharmacology methods, including quercetin, luteolin, kaempferol, naringenin, and isorhamnetine . qfpd combined with antiviral drugs could significantly shorten huashi baidu prescription (hsbd) that is developed by chinese academician huang luqi's team can improve fever, promote blood circulation to remove blood stasis, and improve the immunity function. an analysis of 44672 confirmed cases with covid-19 by chinese center for disease control and prevention showed that the crude mortality rate of critical cases was 49% (epidemiology working group for ncip epidemic response et al., 2020). severe covid-19 is easy to develop into critical illness, which greatly increases the mortality rate. clinical studies have confirmed that the application of hsbd following the guidance of traditional theories can effectively relieve the symptoms of severe covid-19 and reduce the conversion rate and mortality rate of critical illness. however, the dosage of hsbd needs to be adjusted according to is mainly related to combating viral infection and repairing lung injury (wang et al., 2020b) .forsythiae fructus, which has been used to prevent infection for more than 2000 years in china.the common formulations on the market include granule, oral solution, and injection.shuanghuanglian has multiple pharmacological activities, including antibacterial, antiviral, and immune-enhancing functions. previous studies have shown that shuanghuanglian injection has obvious antiviral effects against influenza a virus h5n1 in vivo and in vitro (tang et al., 2018) . a systematic review of rcts suggested that shuanghuanglian could be applied for the treatment of acute upper respiratory tract infection (zhang et al., 2013) . preliminary studies in vitro found that shuanghuanglian oral solution inhibited sars-cov-2. but whether shuanghuanglian is effective against covid-19 requires a large number of clinical trials to confirm. at present,hospital affiliated to huazhong university of science and technology. shanghai institute of materia medica has negotiated and reached a cooperation agreement with relevant companies to jointly conduct in-depth research on the antiviral efficacy of shuanghuanglian.chinese medicine injection preparation is a sterilized solvent, powder or concentrated solution, which can be applied for injecting into the body through extracting the active ingredients from j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f tcms by the modern techniques and methods. the active component of xiyanping injection is andrographolide total ester sulfonate. xiyanping injection that is commonly used clinically for respiratory infections, pneumonia, and gastroenteritis has anti-inflammatory, blood coagulation regulation, vascular endothelial protection, immunity-enhancing and other functions through the "multi-components, multi-targets, and multi-pathways" mechanism (ma et al., 2009; ma et al., 2015) . xuebijing injection is mainly used for anti-infective treatment, which can antagonize endotoxin and inflammatory mediators and improve lung and systemic inflammation in the treatment of coronavirus (li et al., 2020a) . in clinical application, xuebijing injection had a significant effect on inflammation storm and low blood oxygen saturation caused by sars-cov-2 infection. a retrospective analysis of 44 patients with common covid-19 found that xuebijing treatment could promote the absorption of lung infection lesions, thereby improving the efficacy.but xuebijing had no obvious efficacy on inflammatory indexes, including white blood count, lymphocyte count, percentage of lymphocytes, crp, and ferritin . few patients may experience itchy skin after injecting xuebijing injection. the incidence of xuebijing injection is reported differently, probably between 2.68% and 4% (lu et al., 2013) . the components of shenfu injection that is used clinically to treat septic shock include ginseng radix et rhizoma rubra and aconiti lateralis radix praeparata extract, which contain the active ingredients ginsenosides and water-soluble alkaloids. occasionally, allergic reactions may occur after shenfu injection treatment. an analysis on 23 rcts containing 1804 participants showed that the combination of shengmai injection and chemical drugs could achieve a better effect than drugs alone in terms of improving the clinical total effective rate, pulmonary function, blood gas index, immunoglobulin and crp levels, and the lung rale disappearance time of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) (huang et al., 2019) . but shengmai injection may cause adverse reactions, such as allergic rash and severe back pain. the ingredients of reduning injection are artemisiae annuae herba, lonicerae japonicae flos, and gardeniae fructus, which are used for relieving symptoms caused by upper respiratory tract infection, such as high fever, headache, and cough. reduning injection rescued death triggered by enterovirus 71 infection in vero cells and in mice (cao et al., 2015) . severe pneumonia induced by h1n1 influenza a virus could be reversed by the combination of ribavirin and redunning administration (ma et al., 2016) . tanreqing injection is mainly used for the treatment of acute and chronic bronchitis, pneumonia, and upper j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f respiratory tract infections caused by bacteria or viruses. xingnaojing injection is well known for treating stroke in chinese clinic. animal experiments showed that xingnaojing injection improved cerebral ischaemia/reperfusion injury through inhibiting inflammatory response (zhang et al., 2020c) . a study revealed that xingnaojing had a positive effect on patients with fever, poisoning, and stroke-induced consciousness disturbance (wu et al., 2016) . shenmai injection is increasingly used in tumor therapy, which can obviously improve the immune function of tumor patients. for example, shenmai injection improved the postoperative immunological function of papillary thyroid carcinoma patients by inhibiting differentiation into treg cells (fang et al., 2018) . when combined with chemotherapeutic drugs, shenmai injection reduces adverse reactions caused by chemotherapeutic drugs. at present, these chinese medicine injection preparations are mainly tried to treat middle and severe covid-19 cases in clinical trials.as the global epidemic situation of covid-19 becomes more and more serious, many countries and regions have begun to develop biological products for the treatment of covid-19. biological products mainly stimulate immune system to produce immune substances that presents antiviral efficacy. as one of the first countries to conduct the prevention and treatment of covid-19, china has launched the development of biological products against sars-cov-2, such as ifn, vaccines, stem cells, and convalescent plasma (cp).recombinant human interferon-α (ifn-α), including ifn-α1b and ifn-α2b, exerts broad-spectrum antiviral, antitumor, cell proliferation inhibition, and immunity improvement on patients. ifn-α binding to cell surface receptors induces cells to produce a variety of antiviral proteins, which inhibits viral proliferation in cells and improves immune ability through enhancing the phagocytosis of macrophages, the cytotoxicity of lymphocytes to target cells, and the vitality of natural killer (nk) cells sugita et al., 1987) . ifn-α2b is widely used to treat some viral diseases, such as acute and chronic viral hepatitis, shingles, and genital warts. however, ifn may have adverse reactions, such as fever, fatigue, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, loss of appetite, and nausea at the early stage of medication (wang et al., 2020c) . study showed that ifn-α2b and ribavirin for the treatment of mers-cov infected rhesus macaques reduced virus replication, moderated the host response, and improved clinical outcome(falzarano j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f et al., 2013) . in vivo studies also showed that ifn-α played an effective role in promoting prognosis of mers-cov infection (momattin et al., 2013) . by comparing the clinical effects of combined ifn-α with glucocorticoid alone in treating patients with sars-cov infection, the results showed that lung image remission time was reduced by 50%, and oxygen saturation was significantly improved in ifn-α treatment group (loutfy et al., 2003) . at present, ifn-α nebulized inhalation combined with other antiviral drugs, such as ribavirin, has been clinically tested for the treatment of covid-19, which achieved a good therapeutic effect. however, it is necessary to be alert to the microbial aerosols that may be generated during ifn-α nebulized inhalation due to the possibility of aerosol transmission in sars-cov-2 infection . some medical protection and disinfection should be done to reduce the risk of infection by medical staff. chinese clinical trial registry announced that clinical trial comparing the efficacy of new recombinant high-efficiency compound ifn and ifn-α for the treatment of covid-19 has been registered.vaccines treatment is an effective method to prevent infection or improve the severity of diseases . previous evidence showed that various vaccines were designed (ju, 2020) . although stem cell therapy presents certain advantage against covid-19, more data and results are still needed to support the safety and efficacy of covid-19 treatment.cp therapy is applied for treating patients with infectious diseases through extracting the cured j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f patients' plasma, serum or immunoglobulin, which was widely used in infectious diseases outbreaks in recent years, such as pandemic influenza, sars, and mers (arabi et al., 2015; cheng et al., 2005; leider et al., 2010) . a systematic review showed that early treatment with cp might be more effective than late treatment with that (mair-jenkins et al., 2015) . in theory, most of the patients with covid-19 will produce specific antibodies against sars-cov-2 after the recovery, which can kill and clear the virus. preliminary clinical studies also confirmed that crp and il-6 levels in 3 severe covid-19 patients after plasma exchange therapy were significantly reduced, lymphocytes and prothrombin time were improved, but inflammatory factors in patients treated with tocilizumab did not decrease .the clinical symptoms improved significantly, oxygen saturation and oxygenation index tended to improve, and inflammation indicators also improved within 72 hours after cp infusion for a severe covid-19 patient (li et al., 2020b) . severe illness is the leading cause of covid-19-induced death. therefore, cp therapy may be an effective method to reduce mortality of severe covid-19 patients with serious inflammatory response in the absence of specific treatments. in china, cp therapy has been added to the "diagnosis and treatment plan for the novel coronavirus infected pneumonia (trial edition 7)", which is applicable to the treatment of cases with rapid progression, severe or critically ill.however, cp must be collected at an appropriate time and has a higher neutralizing antibody titer(bai et al., 2020).at present, a worldwide outbreak of covid-19 seriously affects people's health and economic development. sars-cov-2 infection has been widely caused in the general population and medical staff. development of specific medicines or vaccines for the treatment of covid-19 is quite urgent. chinese scientists tried various marketed drugs, especially chemical drugs and tcms, for the treatment of covid-19. a number of drugs with good effects against sars-cov-2 in vitro or preliminary clinical trials have emerged. however, there is still insufficient evidence to support the efficacy and safety of these drugs against sars-cov-2. some shortcomings exist in previous studies, such as unreliable in vitro results, non-standard clinical trials, small sample size.hence, it is necessary to summarize these potential therapeutic drugs to ensure clinical medication safety and guide further standardized clinical research. compared with the absence of any antiviral drugs. in contrast, the incidence of adverse reactions in the lopinavir and ritonavir groups was higher than that in the control group without antiviral drugs.chloroquine and remdesivir are regarded as the promising chemical drugs against sars-cov-2.however, the dosage and cycle of chloroquine need further clinical trials to confirm. the clinical pharmacokinetic reports indicated that the oral half-life of chloroquine was as long as 5-60 days, the median half-life is 21-30 days, and the clinical lethal dose is 3-5g. therefore, the clinical dosage of chloroquine needs to be adjusted according to individual differences of body weight and age. the efficacy and safety of remdesivir for covid-19 treatment still lack more high-quality evidence. therefore, the application of these chemicals in the treatment of covid-19 should pay special attention to the latest clinical trials and drug safety studies.tcm has been practiced clinically in china for thousands of years to relieve the symptoms of diseases and regulate immunity. tcm is of great value in prevention and treatment of covid-19.the therapeutic effects of tcms, including active ingredients of tcms, chinese herbal compound prescriptions, and chinese medicine injection preparations, on covid-19 have been extensively studied. currently, active ingredients of tcms against sars-cov-2 are only studied in vitro or by computer simulation. some studies have pointed out that ga can bind to ace2 by the molecular docking methods, suggesting that ga preparations have potential application value for preventing j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sars-cov-2 infection. there was a study that screened several tcms ingredients with anti-sars-cov-2 activity through virtual screening and enzymatic testing, including emodin, polydatin, chalcone, and shikonin. however, these active ingredients of tcms need to pass clinical trials to further confirm their efficacy against covid-19. hxzq, jhqg, lhqw, sfjd, ffts, tjqw, and qfpd suggested by chinese health authorities have all been tried in clinical trials, all of which have shown good curative effects, such as shorten the time for the patient to heal and relieve the development from mild to severe . hxzq can alleviate fatigue and gastrointestinal discomfort in patients with covid-19. jhqg, lhqw, and sfjd have similar effects, which can improve the symptoms of fatigue and fever in covid-19 patients.jhqg has a definite effect on the treatment of mild and common patients with covid-19, which can shorten the time of fever, improve the normalization rate of lymphocytes and leukocytes, and promote immunological function. lhqw also shows good curative effect on mild and common patients with covid-19, which is manifested with relieving fever, cough, fatigue and other symptoms, and effectively reducing the conversion rate of mild/common to severe.qfpd has a total effective rate of more than 90% in the early clinical treatment of covid-19, which is suitable for mild, common, and severe patients (he et al., 2020) . qfpd xiyanping, reduning, and tanreqing injections that all have anti-inflammatory and antibacterial effects can be used to treat patients with viral infection and mild bacterial infection. xingnaojing injection has the effects of reducing fever, resuscitating and refreshing the brain, which is mainly aimed at patients with high fever following unconsciousness. xuebijing injection can improve the cure rate and discharge rate of patients with covid-19, reduce the chance of conversion from j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f severe to critically ill, and promote the elimination of inflammatory factors. shenmai injection can provide the immunity of patients, which is mainly used to treat the immunosuppressed patients.shenfu injection has the effect of resurrecting for patients with shock. arachidonic acid metabolism pathway is involved in cytokine production (xiao et al., 2005) . the latest research showed that serum levels of inflammatory factors in patients with sars-cov-2 infection significantly increased, suggesting that sars-cov-2 infection may involve "cytokine storm" (alimuddin et al., 2020) . studies have screened 338 active ingredients of tcms that have potential inhibitory effects on the arachidonic acid metabolism pathway through the pharmacophore technology . interestingly, the above active ingredients existed in hxzq, jhqg, lhqw, qfpd, xuebijing injection, reduning injection, and tanreqing injection, which suggested that the above tcms may resist sars-cov-2 infection by inhibiting the "cytokine storm". although tcms are effective and relatively safe for prevention and treatment of covid-19, clinical medication needs to be administered under the guidance of an experienced physician, thereby avoiding adverse reactions due to overdose or misuse of tcms. moreover, clinical medication based on different symptoms and the severity of the disease is an important principle during the treatment of covid-19 with tcms. for example, preliminary clinical studies showed that lhqw was effective for the treatment of mild or common patients with sars-cov-2 infection, which is manifested with the improvement of fever, cough, and diarrhea.xuebijing had a wonderful effect on the treatment of severe and critically ill patients with covid-19.both tcms and chemical drugs can complement each other rather than replacing each other, which has been fully demonstrated in prevention and control of this outbreak of covid-19. tcm with a relatively wide range of treatment can improve the immunity and relieve symptoms in mild cases with covid-19, such as fever, cough, fatigue, and sore throat. in terms of severe covid-19, tcm can also reduce the progression from severe to critical illness, thereby reducing the mortality rate. chemical drugs have clear chemical composition and significant antiviral effect, which can quickly inhibit sars-cov-2 infection. the latest clinical evidence showed that the integrated traditional and western medicine for the treatment of covid-19 could significantly reduce the clinical symptoms of patients, shorten the course of disease, and improve the clinical cure rate . a retrospective analysis of 71 discharged patients with covid-19 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f showed that the combination therapy of ifn-α, arbidol, high-dose of vitamin c, and tcms was effective against sars-cov-2 . a systematic review showed that lhqw combined with western medicines significantly improved fever symptoms with good clinical safety (qi et al., 2020) . zhang boli's team observed the clinical effect of integrated traditional chinese and western medicine in the treatment of covid-19. the results showed that compared with the pure western medicine group (13 cases of commonl type, 4 cases of severe, and 1 case of critically ill), the average days of treatment in the integrated traditional chinese and western medicine treatment group (27 cases of common type, 6 cases of severe, and 1 case of critically ill) was shortened from 7.15 days to 5.15 days, the average recovery time of body temperature was shortened from 4.38 days to 2.64 days, the average time of hospital stay was shortened from 9.59 days to 7.38 days, the improvement rate of ct imaging was increased from 68.8% to 88.2%, clinical cure rate was increased from 61.1% to 94.1%, the conversion rate of common to severe and critically ill was reduced from 35.3% to 5.9% .biological products are currently an important means for treating severe covid-19, which can effectively relieve patients' symptoms to reduce mortality. development of biological products mainly includes ifn-α, vaccines, stem cells, and cp. although the theoretical incidence of adverse events induced by ifn-α nebulized inhalation may be lower than that of traditional administration routes, the relevant medication monitoring should still be done . ifn-α is often used clinically in combination with other antiviral drugs to treat covid-19, such as ribavirin and favipiravir. the dosage, drug stability, adverse reactions, and the risk of secondary infection should be fully considered during ifn aerosol inhalation. vaccine treatment is an effective method to prevent and treat covid-19, but the development of vaccines needs to take a long time. the safety and effectiveness of drugs in vaccine development process require sufficient clinical data to verify. fortunately, the adenoviral vector vaccine that is independently developed by china's team has entered the phase ⅱ clinical trials. stem cell therapy also shows certain potential for covid-19 treatment. the application of mscs will give new clinical plan for covid-19 treatment. preliminary clinical studies have shown that cp therapy has good efficacy for severe covid-19 treatment, but cp with high-quality antibody titers is difficult to obtain. in the absence of specific drugs, cp therapy can become a first-aid method for covid-19 patients with severe or critically ill.china has accumulated a bit of experience during the prevention and treatment of sars-cov-2 infection with the above drugs, including chemical drugs, tcms, and biological products.although these drugs are expected to be specific drugs for the treatment of covid-19, the adoption of these drugs without adequate evidence of efficacy and safety must be careful.nowadays, these potential drugs have been used to treat covid-19 by many countries and regions due to the outbreak of covid-19. the basic characteristics of these drugs, including pharmacological effects, indications, and adverse reactions, and especially advance on the treatment of covid-19, should be understood to promote reasonable medication and guide further basic research and clinical trials.the authors have no conflict of interest. note: drugs with similar efficacy can be selected according to individual conditions, or can be used in combination with another tcm. injections should be used following the principle of starting with low doses and adjusting gradually according to clinical symptoms, which can be in combination with decoctions. clinical application of the above tcms requires special attention to drug contraindications, especially allergic constitution. the above usage of tcms is for reference only, which should be adjusted appropriately according to the patient's symptoms.background: no specific antiviral drug has been proven effective for treatment of patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). remdesivir (gs-5734), a nucleoside analogue prodrug, has inhibitory effects on pathogenic animal and human coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in vitro, and inhibits middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus, sars-cov-1, and sars-cov-2 replication in animal models. methods: we did a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial at ten hospitals in hubei, china. eligible patients were adults (aged &#8805;18 years) admitted to hospital with laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infection, with an interval from symptom onset to enrolment of 12 days or less, oxygen saturation of 94% or less on room air or a ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fractional inspired oxygen of 300 mm hg or less, and radiologically confirmed pneumonia. patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to intravenous remdesivir (200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg on days 2-10 in single daily infusions) or the same volume of placebo infusions for 10 days. patients were permitted concomitant use of lopinavir-ritonavir, interferons, and corticosteroids. the primary endpoint was time to clinical improvement up to day 28, defined as the time (in days) from randomisation to the point of a decline of two levels on a six-point ordinal scale of clinical status (from 1=discharged to 6=death) or discharged alive from hospital, whichever came first. primary analysis was done in the intention-to-treat (itt) population and safety analysis was done in all patients who started their assigned treatment. this trial is registered with clinicaltrials.gov, nct04257656. findings: between feb 6, 2020, and march 12, 2020, 237 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned to a treatment group (158 to remdesivir and 79 to placebo); one patient in the placebo group who withdrew after randomisation was not included in the itt population. remdesivir use was not associated with a difference in time to clinical improvement (hazard ratio 1·23 [95% ci 0·87-1·75]). although not statistically significant, patients receiving remdesivir had a numerically faster time to clinical improvement than those receiving placebo among patients with symptom duration of 10 days or less (hazard ratio 1·52 [0·95-2·43]). adverse events were reported in 102 (66%) of 155 remdesivir recipients versus 50 (64%) of 78 placebo recipients. remdesivir was stopped early because of adverse events in 18 (12%) patients versus four (5%) patients who stopped placebo early. interpretation: in this study of adult patients admitted to hospital for severe covid-19, remdesivir was not associated with statistically significant clinical benefits. however, the numerical reduction in time to clinical improvement in those treated earlier requires confirmation in larger studies. funding: chinese academy of medical sciences emergency project of covid-19, national key research and development program of china, the beijing science and technology project.remdesivir in adults with severe covid-19: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trialthe current novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic, caused by a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), is a rapidly spreading viral disease. patients with covid-19 are at significantly increased risk for mortality and morbidity. since the first report of sars-cov-2 infection, it has spread to more than 210 countries around the world (2,726,776 active cases and 191,087 death [till april 24, 2020]). to date, india has recorded 23,502 active cases and 722 death (till april 24, 2020). there is currently no specific treatment of covid-19. current management remains supportive care, ranging from symptomatic outpatient management to full intensive care support, including intravenous fluids, invasive and noninvasive oxygen supplementation, and antibiotics. 1 the objective of this paper is to briefly review the literature and update the concept of prevention and treatment of covid-19. we have highlighted here the potential therapeutic role of remdesivir, chloroquine/ hydroxychloroquine (hcq), lopinavir/ritonavir, and convalescent plasma in patients with sars-cov-2 infection.in the absence of a proven therapy for sars-cov 2, the cornerstone of therapy for patients with covid-19 remains supportive care. to suppress the inflammatory response which may lead to acute lung injury and ards. in a retrospective study (n = 201), treatment with methylprednisolone was associated with a decreased risk of death (46% with steroids vs. 62% without). 2 however, the authors noted that confounding bias may exist in this observational study. because of the lack of effectiveness and possible adverse effects, routine corticosteroids should be avoided unless they are indicated for another reason (exacerbation of asthma or copd and septic shock in whom fluids and vasopressors do not restore hemodynamic stability). 1,3remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue prodrug that inhibits viral rna polymerases. it has broad-spectrum activity against rna viruses such as coronaviridae (e.g., sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus [mers-cov]) and filoviruses (e.g., ebola). it has shown prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy in nonclinical models of these coronaviruses; however, there are currently only very limited data on the use of remdesivir in patients with covid-19. in a recent multicentric study, patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection (n = 53) who had an oxygen saturation of 94% or less with or without receiving oxygen support were enrolled. besides supportive care, patients received remdesivir, consisting of 200 mg administered intravenously on day 1, followed by 100 mg daily up to 10 days. during a median follow-up of 18 days, 68% had an improvement in oxygen-support class, including 57% patients receiving mechanical ventilation. however, interpretation of the result of this study is limited by the lack of a randomized control group, small sample size, exclusion of serious cases (creatinine clearance <30 ml/min and >five-time elevation of serum aminotransferase), variable duration of remdesivir administration, noncollection of viral load data, adverse effects, and short-term follow-up. 4 a total of 60% patients reported adverse events during follow-up. the result of a study (simple trial; unpublished) demonstrated that patients receiving a 10-day course of remdesivir achieved similar clinical improvement compared with those taking a 5-day treatment course on day 14. the european medicines agency (ema) has published recommendations on compassionate use of remdesivir for covid-19. 5 data from several ongoing randomized controlled trials will provide further evidence regarding the safety and efficacy of remdesivir for covid-19.the antimalarial and anti-inflammatory agents, chloroquine and hcq, appear to block viral entry into cells by inhibiting glycosylation of host receptors, proteolytic processing, and endosomal acidification. these agents also have immunomodulatory effects through attenuation of cytokine production and inhibition of autophagy and lysosomal activity in host cells. 6, 7 both drugs have in vitro activity against sars-cov-2, with hcq having relatively higher potency. early results obtained from more than 100 patients enrolled in studies conducted in the china showed the superiority of chloroquine compared with the controls in terms of reduction of exacerbation of pneumonia, duration of symptoms, and delay of viral clearance, all in the absence of severe side effects. 8 a recent open-label study of 36 patients reported improved virologic clearance with hcq (n = 36) compared with the controls (n = 20). addition of azithromycin to hcq in six patients resulted in superior viral clearance (100%) compared with hcq monotherapy (57%). 9 an uncontrolled observational study in a cohort of covid-19 inpatients (n = 80) treated with a combination of hcq and azithromycin showed a rapid fall of nasopharyngeal viral load (93% at day 8). 2 in a randomized parallel-group trial, covid-19 patients (n = 31) were assigned to receive an additional 5-day hcq (400 mg/d) treatment. clinical recovery time was significantly shortened in the hcq treatment group. improvement in pneumonia was more in the hcq treatment group (80.6%) compared with the controls (54.8%). however, the patients had mild disease. 10 in a prospective study (n = 30), patients were randomized to hcq (400 mg/day for 5 days) plus standard of care and standard care alone groups. virologic clearance was similar in both the groups. 11 a study of 11 patients with covid-19 reported persistence of sars-cov-2 in the nasopharyngeal swab in 8 of 10 patients receiving hcq. in a randomized, double-blinded, phase-iib clinical trial (clorocovid-19 study), preliminary findings suggest that the higher chloroquine dosage is associated with higher rate of qtc prolongation and mortality. studies of chloroquine prophylaxis in health care workers (nct04303507) and hcq for postexposure prophylaxis after high-risk exposures (nct04308668) are planned or enrolling. 12 some studies show no benefit at all, while others show a benefit of taking hcq/chloroquine. some of the aforementioned clinical studies showed hcq/chloroquine as promising agents for the treatment of mild-to-severe covid-19. however, these trials have been criticized for their limitations, including small sample size, nonuniform study design, absence of control arm, and enrolment of less severe cases. 2, 9, 10, 13 results from other clinical studies could not replicate these positive findings. 11, 12, 14 therefore, there is currently no strong evidence of efficacy of hcq or chloroquine in the treatment or prevention of covid-19. chinese and italian guidelines recommend early use of hcq or chloroquine for the treatment of covid-19 on case-to-case basis; however, this is based on weak evidence. the food and drug administration (fda) and ema has granted an emergency-use authorization for chloroquine and hcq to treat patients when a clinical trial is not available or participation is not feasible. 5, 15 indian council of medical research (icmr) recommends the use of hcq for prophylaxis of sars cov-2 infection in high-risk cases. qt-prolongation and life-threatening cardiac arrhythmia is major concern in patients receiving hcq with or without azithromycin, especially in patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease.lopinavir/ritonavir demonstrated in vitro activity against other corona viruses via inhibition of 3-chymotrypsin-like protease. results of a few small case series showed clinical benefit of using with lopinavir/ritonavir in patients with covid-19. however, an open-label randomized trial at a single hospital concluded that lopinavir/ritonavir recipients and those receiving standard care did not differ significantly in time to clinical improvement (median, 16 days), duration of intensive care unit stay, and duration of mechanical ventilation/oxygen supplementation. 16 at present, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of lopinavir/ritonavir for treatment of covid-19.convalescent plasma from patients who have recovered from viral infections has been used as a treatment in previous virus outbreaks including sars and ebola virus. convalescent plasma or immunoglobulins were used in patients with sars whose condition continued to deteriorate despite treatment with intravenous corticosteroids. a systematic review and exploratory meta-analysis from 32 studies of sars coronavirus infection and severe influenza showed a statistically significant reduction in the pooled odds of mortality following treatment with convalescent plasma compared with placebo (odds ratio = 0.25; 95% confidence interval [ci]:0.14-0.45; i[2] = 0%). study showed consistent evidence for a reduction in mortality, especially when convalescent plasma is administered early after symptom onset. no serious adverse events were seen. however, studies were commonly of low or very low quality, lacked control groups, and at moderate or high risk of bias. 17 luke et al identified eight studies involving 1,703 patients with spanish influenza pneumonia treated with influenza-convalescent human blood products infusion, which showed a pooled absolute reduction of 21% (p < 0·001) in the overall crude case-fatality rate. mortality rate was lower in patients who received early treatment (after <4 days of complications) compared with late treatment group (after >4 days of complications; 26 vs. 50% [pooled risk difference = 41% (ci: 29-54%)]). 18 convalescent plasma has also been tried in treatment of covid-19. a few small preliminary case series showed clinical improvement after treatment with convalescent plasma; however, these studies had many limitations. 19, 20 limited evidence shows that convalescent plasma can be used as a treatment of covid-19 without the occurrence of severe adverse events. 19 convalescent plasma that contains antibodies to sars-cov-2 might suppress viremia. the patient usually develops a primary immune response by days 10 to 14, which is followed by virus clearance. therefore, logically, it should be more effective to transfuse the convalescent plasma at the early course of disease. studies showed lower mortality rate in whom convalescent plasma is administered early after symptom onset. 17, 18 the fda has issued guidance for use of covid-19 convalescent plasma in patients with serious covid-19. about 3 to 4 weeks after a person recovers, blood can be drawn to look for the antibodies. the approach involves giving covid-19 patients an infusion of antibody-rich plasma (single dose of 200 ml) from people who have recovered from an infection with sars-cov-2.the rapidly expanding knowledge regarding sars-cov-2 virology provides a significant number of potential drug targets. potential mechanisms of action of antiviral agents are (1) virus-based therapy, like monoclonal antibodies or antiviral peptides, targeting the various steps of viral machinery-like spike glycoprotein, viral enzyme inhibitors, and viral nucleic acid synthesis inhibitors, and (2) host-based therapies to potentiate the interferon response, affect host signalling pathways, or host factors utilized by sars-cov-2 for replication. 21 the world health organization (who) has started an international multicentric clinical trial ("solidarity"). this trial comprises of four treatment groups (remdesivir, chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir with ritonavir, and lopinavir with ritonavir plus interferon β-1a) against standard of care, to assess their relative effectiveness against covid-19. 1 several therapies are currently being investigated globally, including nitazoxanide, stem cell therapy, intravenous immunoglobulin, interleukin-6 receptor antagonist (e.g., tocilizumab, sarilumab, and siltuximab), bacille calmette-guerin (bcg) vaccine, angiotensin-ii receptor antagonists, and other antivirals (e.g., oseltamivir, danoprevir, darunavir, ganciclovir, favipiravir, baloxavir marboxil, umifenovir, sofosbuvir, ribavirin, and interferon alfa/β).the most effective long-term strategy for prevention of future outbreaks of this virus would be the development of a vaccine providing protective active immunity. as of april 8, 2020, the global covid-19 vaccine research and development landscape included 115 vaccine candidates. out of 78 confirmed active projects, 73 are currently at preclinical stages. 22 a few vaccine candidates have moved into clinical trial phase, including mrna-1273 (moderna), ad5-ncov (cansino biologicals), ino-4800 (inovio), lv-smenp-dc, and pathogen-specific aapc (shenzhen geno-immune medical institute). unfortunately, a vaccine is unlikely to be ready for use before the end of 2020 or 2021 at the earliest.who and centers for disease control and prevention guidance emphasizes the role of supportive care based on severity of illness, ranging from symptomatic treatment for mild disease to evidence-based ventilator management for ards, and early recognition and treatment of bacterial infections and sepsis in critically ill patients. use of routine systematic corticosteroids should be avoided for the treatment of covid-19. there is currently no strong evidence of efficacy of hcq/chloroquine and remdesivir or other antivirals in the treatment or prevention of covid-19. the fda and ema has granted an emergency-use authorization for chloroquine/ hcq to treat patients when a clinical trial is not available or participation is not feasible. the icmr recommends the use of hcq for prophylaxis of sars-cov-2 infection in high-risk cases. the ema recommends use of remdesivir for covid-19 on a compassionate basis. guidelines are issued for use of convalescent plasma in patients with serious or immediately life-threatening covid-19. data from several ongoing randomized controlled trials will provide further evidence regarding the safety and efficacy of these drugs for covid-19.coronaviruses are a group of enveloped viruses named for their coronary appearance with positive single-stranded rna genomes [2] . in addition to six known strains of coronaviruses that are infectious to humans, a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was detected recently in wuhan, china [3, 4] . like the other two highly pathogenic coronaviruses sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 also caused severe respiratory illness and even death. moreover, the population's susceptibility to these highly pathogenic coronaviruses has contributed to large outbreaks and evolved into the public health events, highlighting the necessity to prepare for future reemergence or the novel emerging viruses [5] .similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 is initiated by zoonotic transmission likely from bats and spreads rapidly among humans [6] . the basic reproduction number (r0) of person-to-person spread is about at 2.6, which means that the sars-cov-2 infected cases grow at an exponential rate. as of february 07, 2020, 57,620 cases of the sars-cov-2 have been reported in china, including 26,359 suspected cases, and a sustained increase is predictable. the initial patient cluster with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection was reported wuhan pneumonia with unknown aetiology, which bore some resemblance to sars-cov and mers-cov infections and was associated with icu admission and high mortality. moreover, high concentrations of cytokines https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2020.104761 received 29 february 2020; received in revised form 14 march 2020; accepted 17 march 2020 were recorded in plasma of patients requiring icu admission, such as gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα, suggesting that the cytokine storm was associated with disease severity [7] . a retrospective clinical study indicated the risk of fatality among hospitalized cases at 4.3 % in single-center case series of 138 hospitalized patients [8] , and the infection fatality risk could be below 1% or even below 0.1 % in a large number of undetected relatively mild infections [9] . however, it is challenging to judge the severity and predict the consequences with the information available so far. since no specific antiviral treatment for covid-19 is currently available, supportive cares, including symptomatic controls and prevention of complications remain the most critical therapeutic regimens, especially in preventing acute respiratory distress syndrome [10] . although the control of sars-cov-2 still presents multiple challenges in the short term, more potent antiviral drugs are urgent to be developed [4] .at present, some drugs are effective in eliminating sars-cov-2 and improving symptoms. the most promising antiviral drug for sars-cov-2 is remdesivir that is currently under clinical development for the treatment of ebola virus infection [11] . however, the efficacy and safety of remdesivir for sars-cov-2 pneumonia patients need to be assessed by further clinical trials. in addition, in the prevention and treatment of covid-19, tranditonal chinese medicines have received broad adoption, especially in treating cases of mild symptoms [12] . lianhuaqingwen (lh), a chinese patent medicine composed of 13 herbs, has played a positive role in the treatment of sars-cov-2. a retrospective analysis of clinical records was conducted in the sars-cov-2 infected patients at wuhan ninth hospital and cr & wisco general hospital. lh combination could significantly relieve cardinal symptoms and reduce the course of the covid-19 [13] , making it successively included in the guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) pneumonia (on trials, the fourth/fifth/ sixth/seventh edition) issued by national health commission of the people's republic of china and also recommended by 20 provincial health commissions including hubei, beijing, and shanghai as well as national administration of traditional chinese medicine for the treatment of covid-19. moreover, lh exerted broad-spectrum effects on a series of influenza viruses by inhibiting viral propagation and regulating immune function and achieved similar therapeutic effectiveness with oseltamivir in reducing the course of h1n1 virus infection [1, 14, 15] . notably, the anti-influenza activity of lh in infected mice might depend on the regulation of cytokines, particularly in cytokine storm associated cytokines, such as ip-10, mcp-1, mip1a, and tnf-α [1] . in the present study, we evaluated the antiviral and anti-inflammatory efficiency of lh against a clinical isolate of sars-cov-2 from guangzhou in vitro.the african green monkey kidney epithelial (vero e6) cells and the human hepatocellular carcinoma (huh-7) cells were cultured in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem, gibco, usa) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (fbs) at 37°c. a clinical isolated sars-cov-2 virus (genebank accession no. mt123290.1) was propagated in vero e6 cells, and viral titer was determined by 50 % tissue culture infective dose (tcid 50 ) according to the cytopathic effect by use of reed-muench method [17] . all the infection experiments were performed in a biosafety level-3 (bls-3) laboratory.lh capsule (lot no.b2001019) was obtained from yiling pharmaceutical co. ltd. (shijiazhuang, china). uplc fingerprints of lh consist of 32 common peaks. 9 of 32 common peaks are identified. the similarities in 10 batches of lh capsules samples were all above 0.96 ( supplementary fig. 1 ). the black powder of raw material of lh was first dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso) to 240 mg/ml. after shaking for 30 min at room temperature, the lh solution was diluted with serum-free dmem to 24 mg/ml as a stock solution and stored at −20°c before using. remdesivir was kindly provided by prof. jiancun zhang from guangzhou institutes of biomedicine and health, chinese academy of sciences and was dissolved in dmso to 100 mm and stored at −20°c before using. dmem with 2% fbs was used as the dilution buffer in the follow-up experiments.the cytotoxic effects of the lh on vero e6 and huh-7 cells were evaluated by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (mtt) assay. briefly, monolayers of vero e6 cells and huh-7 cells in 96-well plates were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) followed by incubation with indicated concentrations of lh. after 72 h, the cells were stained with mtt solution at 0.5 mg/ml for 4 h. the supernatants were then removed, and the formed formazan crystals were dissolved in 200 μl dmso. the absorbance was measured at 490 nm using multiskan spectrum reader (thermo fisher, usa). the 50 % cytotoxic concentration (cc 50 ) was calculated by the graphpad prism 7.0 software.the vero e6 cell monolayers were grown in 96-well plates and inoculated with 100 tcid 50 of coronavirus strains at 37c for 2 h. the inoculum was removed, and the cells were subsequently incubated with indicated concentrations of lh or the positive control remdesivir. following the 72 h of incubation, the infected cells shown 100 % cpe under the microscope. the percentage of cpe in lh-treated cells were recorded. the 50 % inhibition concentration (ic 50 ) of the virus-induced cpe by lh was calculated by the reed-muench method [17] .the vero e6 cell monolayers in 6-well plates were infected with 50 plaque-forming units (pfu) of sars-cov-2 for 2 h at 37°c. after incubation, the cell monolayers were covered with agar overlay (final concentration: 0.6 % agar, 2% fbs, indicated concentrations of lh or remdesivir). the plates were then incubated for 48 h at 37°c with 5% co 2 . subsequently, the agar overlays were removed, and the cell monolayer was fixed with 10 % formalin, stained with 1% crystal violet, and then the plaques were counted and photographed.the huh-7 cell monolayers in 12-well plate were rinsed with pbs and then exposed to coronavirus at a multiplicity of infection (moi) of 1 for 2 h at 37°c. the inoculum was removed and replaced with the indicated concentrations of lh or mock-treated with dmem supplemented with 2% fbs for subsequent 48 h incubation at 37°c with 5% co 2 . the cells were then harvested for rna isolation and qpcr as described previously [16] . the primer and probe sequences used for analysis are listed in supplementary table 1 . the relative mrna expression was calculated using the 2 −△△ct method with gapdh as an internal reference gene.monolayers of vero e6 cells in 6-well plates were incubated with sars-cov-2 at a moi of 0.001 for 2 h at 37°c. the virus inoculum was then removed and replaced with dmem medium supplemented with 2% fbs containing lh (600 μg/ml) or remdesivir (5 μm). at 48 h p.i., the cells were fixed, dehydrated and embedded as described previously l. runfeng, et al.pharmacological research 156 (2020) 104761 [18] . ultrathin sections (70 nm) of embedded cells were prepared, deposited onto formvar-coated copper grids (200 mesh), stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and then observed under jem-1400 plus transmission electron microscopy (japan electron optics laboratory co., ltd., jem-1400 plus).statistical analysis was performed using graphpad prism 7.0 software. the differences in mrna expression levels of cytokines were compared using a one-way analysis of variance (anova). values of p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.the cell viability after lh or remdesivir treatment was determined by mtt assay in both vero e6 and huh-7 cells. lh showed unapparent cytotoxicity for both cell lines at concentrations up to 600 μg/ml (fig. 1a, c) . the positive control remdesivir showed no cytotoxicity to cells at a concentration of 50μm (fig. 1b, d) .to investigate the antiviral effect of lh against sars-cov-2 virus, the vero e6 cells were infected with 100 tcid 50 of virus and incubated with lh at various concentrations for 72 h. as shown in fig. 2a , lh inhibited the replication of sars-cov-2 virus with an ic 50 value of 411.2 μg/ml by cpe assay (fig. 2a) . meanwhile, treatment with lh following infection also had a dose-dependent inhibitory effect on plaque formation of the sars-cov-2 virus (fig. 2c) . we selected remdesivir as the positive control in our study and the results showed that remdesivir potently inhibited virus-induced cpe with an ic 50 of 0.651 μm and a total plaque formation inhibition at 5 μm (fig. 2b, c) .to further confirm the efficacy of lh in inhibiting sars-cov-2 virus replication in cells, we detected the viral particles in ultrathin sections of infected cells under electron microscopy. at 48 h p.i., viral particles were found in cytoplasm, intracellular vesicles, endoplasmic reticulum, and cell membrane and presented spherical crown-like appearance, which was typical coronavirus morphology (fig. 3b, g) . lh (600 μg/ ml) and positive control remdesivir (5 μm) treatment resulted in a reduction of the number of virions compared with mock-treated infected cells (fig. 3g-j) . it was interesting to note that some virions in the surface of lh-treated cells presented spindle sharp which was in contrast to the typical spherical particles in the mock-treated cells (fig. 3i ).to determine the effect of lh on the expression of cytokines and chemokines induced by sar2-cov-2, the mrna expression levels of tnf-α, il-6, ccl-2/mcp-1, and cxcl-10/ip-10 were detected and compared between the lh-treated and mock-treated huh-7 cells. the results showed that the elevated expressions of these four cytokines were significantly inhibited by lh treatment in a concentration-dependent manner (fig. 4) .starting from december 2019, a pandemic of respiratory illness caused by a novel coronavirus named sars-cov-2 is sweeping the mainland of china. this virus has spread to several foreign countries, threatening to trigger a global outbreak. several antiviral agents can be envisaged to control or prevent viral infections by antiviral assay in vitro [14, 17] . however, the efficacy and safety of novel candidates need validations in vivo, even for those clinically approved medicines, which means that it will take months to years for clinical practices. at present, symptomatic and supportive treatments remain key to clinical practices. thus, traditional chinese medicines (tcm) carried both the antiviral effect and the symptomatic relief might bring more clinical benefits [12] . as a classical tcm prescription for respiratory diseases, our previous study showed that lh exhibited in vitro anti-influenza activity with ic 50 ranging from 200 to 2000 μg/ml [1] . here we demonstrated that lh also has a comparable antiviral potency against the sars-cov-2 virus with an ic 50 value of 411.2 μg/ml (fig. 2) . transmission electron microscopy (tem) has been a potent tool to observe virus entry, virus particle assembly, viral ultrastructure, and budding from the plasma membrane [17] . to understand the antiviral details of lh, em pictures were taken from each group. abundant virus particles assembled at the surface of membrane, cytoplasm, and plasma vesicles in the sars-cov-2 infected cells, decreased in the treatment of lh at 600ug/ml. notably, slight deformation of virus particles was seen in the lh treatment, which required us to make further studies.highly pathogenic coronaviruses such as sars-cov and mers-cov cause fatal pneumonia, which is mainly associated with rapid virus replication, massive inflammatory cell infiltration and elevated proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine responses. although the pathophysiology of fatal pneumonia caused by highly pathogenic coronaviruses has not been completely understood, accumulating evidence suggests that the cytokine storm plays a crucial role in causing fatal pneumonia [18] . excessive amounts of proinflammatory cytokines were reported (e.g., il-1β, il-6, il-12, ifn-γ, ip-10, and mcp-1) in the serum of sars patients [18] , similar in the serum of mers patients [19] . chaolin huang et al. confirmed the occurrence of the cytokine storm in the covid-19 patients in icu rather than those in non-icu patients [7] . based on the excessive cytokines responses, suxin wan et al. claimed that il-6 and il-10 levels could be used as one of the bases for predicting the outcome and prognosis of the covid-2019 [20] . in this study, host cells infected with hcov-229e and sars-cov-2 increased the cytokine release such as tnf-α, il-6, ccl-2/mcp-1, and cxcl-10/ ip-10, which was suppressed by lh in a dose-dependent manner. the change of cytokine profiles suggested that lh might have a potential effect on the inhibition of cytokine storm induced by sars-cov-2, which also needed to be validated in vivo.since the launch of lh, it has been widely used as a broad spectrum of antiviral agent in the clinical practice, especially for various respiratory virus infections. previous studies have shown that lh a broad spectrum of effects on a series of influenza viruses by interfering with both viral and host reactions. although lh significantly relieved the clinical symptoms of the covid-19, the underlying mechanism of antiviral effects on coronavirus, especially in the sars-cov-2, was still elusive. in this study, we demonstrated that lh exerted its anti-coronavirus activity by inhibiting virus replication and reducing the cytokine release from host cells, which supported the clinical application of lh in combination with existing therapies to treat covid-2019.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. a novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak has caused a global pandemic resulting in tens of thousands of infections and thousands of deaths worldwide. the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp, also named nsp12), which catalyzes the synthesis of viral rna, is a key 5 component of coronaviral replication/transcription machinery and appears to be a primary target for the antiviral drug, remdesivir. here we report the cryo-em structure of 2019-ncov full-length nsp12 in complex with cofactors nsp7 and nsp8 at a resolution of 2.9-å. additional to the conserved architecture of the polymerase core of the viral polymerase family and a nidovirus rdrp-associated nucleotidyltransferase (niran) domain featured in coronaviral rdrp, nsp12 10 possesses a newly identified β-hairpin domain at its n-terminal. key residues for viral replication and transcription are observed. a comparative analysis to show how remdesivir binds to this polymerase is also provided. this structure provides insight into the central component of coronaviral replication/transcription machinery and sheds light on the design of new antiviral therapeutics targeting viral rdrp.corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by a novel coronavirus 2019-ncov has recently emerged (1) (2) (3) . according to the world health organization (who) on march 11, 2020, 11800 infections and 4291 fatalities have been confirmed globally. 2019-ncov is reported to be a new member of the betacoronavirus genus and is closely related to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and to several bat coronaviruses (4). compared to sars-cov and 5 mers-cov, 2019-ncov appears to exhibit faster human-to-human transmission, thus leading to the who declaration of a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) (1, 3) .covs employ a multi-subunit replication/transcription machinery, being assembled by a set of non-structural proteins (nsp) produced as cleavage products of the orf1a and orf1ab viral polyproteins (5) to facilitate virus replication and transcription. a key component, the rna-10 dependent rna polymerase (nsp12), catalyzes the synthesis of viral rna and thus plays a central role in the replication and transcription cycle of 2019-ncov, possibly with the assistance of nsp7 and nsp8 as co-factors (5, 6). therefore, nsp12 is a primary target for the nucleotide analog antiviral inhibitors, e.g. remdesivir which shows potential to treat 2019-ncov infections (7, 8) . to inform drug design we have determined the structure of nsp12, in complex with its cofactors nsp7 15 and nsp8 by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) using two different protocols, one in the absence of dtt (dataset-1) and the other in the presence of dtt (dataset-2).the bacterially expressed full-length 2019-ncov nsp12 (residues s1-q932) was incubated with nsp7 (residues s1-q83) and nsp8 (residues a1-q198), and the complex was then purified (fig. s1). cryo-em grids were prepared using this complex and preliminary screening revealed 20 excellent particle density with good dispersity. after collecting and processing 7,994 micrograph movies, we obtained a 2.9-å resolution 3d reconstruction of one nsp12 monomer in complex with one nsp7-nsp8 pair and one nsp8. like that observed in sars-cov nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 (6), we observed classes corresponding to an nsp12 monomer in complex one nsp8, as well as individual nsp12s, but these do not give atomic resolution reconstructions ( fig. s2 ). however, the nsp12-25 nsp7-nsp8 complex provides all the structural information for complete and comprehensive analysis.the structure of the 2019-ncov nsp12 contains a "right hand" polymerase domain (residues s367-f920), and a nidovirus-unique n-terminal extension domain (residues d60-r249) adopting a nidovirus rdrp-associated nucleotidyltransferase (niran)(9) architecture, being connected by 30 an interface domain (residues a250-f369) (figs. 1, a and b). an additional n-terminal β-hairpin (v31-k50) was built with the guidance of an unambiguous cryo-em map ( fig. s3a ), inserting into the groove clamped by the niran domain and the palm subdomain in the rdrp domain (fig. 2) . the nsp7-nsp8 pair shows a conserved structure similar to the sars-cov nsp7-nsp8 pair (6, 10). the orientation of the n-terminal helix of another individual nsp8 bound to nsp12 is shifted 35 compared with that in the nsp7-nsp8 pair ( fig. s4 ). the polypeptides of nsp12 can be traced in the map, except for s1-v30, t51-s68, h75, k103-v111, d336, t896-s904, f921-q932, which cannot be observed.although the overall architecture of 2019-ncov nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex is generally similar to that of sars-cov with an r.m.s.d value of 0.82 for 1,078 cɑ atoms there are key features that 40 distinguish them. first, the cryo-em map allows us to build the structure of 2019-ncov nsp12 covering almost all residues, presenting the first insight into the complete architecture of coronaviral rdrp. in sars-cov nsp12, there are seven helices with a three-stranded β-sheet at the end that make up the niran domain (6) ( fig. 2a) . residues y69-r118 constitute an additional structural block with three anti-parallel β-strands and one helix. residues n215-d218 form a β-strand in 2019-ncov nsp12. we reasoned that the contact of this region with the strand (residues v96-a100) helps to stabilize it. as a result, these four strands form a compact semi βbarrel architecture. therefore, we identify residues y69-r249 as the complete coronaviral niran domain. second, the cryo-em map helps us to identify a unique n-terminal β-hairpin (figs. 1a and 2a). this β-hairpin inserts in the groove clamped by the niran domain and the palm 5 subdomain in the rdrp domain and forms a set of close contacts to stabilize the overall structure ( fig. 2b and fig. s5 ). another point to note is that, we have observed c301-c306 and c487-c645 form disulfide bonds in the absence of dtt (dataset-1). however, in the presence of dtt (dataset-2), chelated zinc ions are present and in the same location as that observe in sars-cov ( fig. s3b) . we reasoned the different purification buffer has led to this variation.the polymerase domain adopts the conserved architecture of the viral polymerase family (11) and is composed of three subdomains, including a fingers subdomain (residues s397-a581 and k621-g679), a palm subdomain (residues t582-p620 and t680-q815), and a thumb subdomain (residues h816-e920) (fig. 1) . the catalytic cations, which are usually observed in viral polymerase structure for rna synthesis (12, 13) are not observed, possibly because manganese in this structure, the four positively charged solvent-accessible paths converge into a central cavity 30 where the rdrp motifs mediate template-directed rna synthesis (fig. 3d ). the configurations of the template/primer entry paths, the nucleoside triphosphate (ntp) entry channel, and the nascent strand exit path are similar to those described for hcv and pv polymerase (14) (figs. 3, b and c). the ntp entry channel is formed by a set of hydrophilic residues, including k545, r553 and r555 in motif f. the rna template is expected to enter the active site composed of motifs a and 35 c through a groove clamped by motif f and g. motif e and the thumb subdomain support the primer strand. the product-template hybrid exits the active site through the rna exit tunnel at the front side of the polymerase.remdesivir, the single sp isomer of the 2-ethylbutyl l-alaninate phosphoramidate prodrug (15) ( fig. s7 ), has been reported to inhibit 2019-ncov proliferation and have potential to treat patients 40 in the clinic (7, 8). the efficacy of chain-terminating nucleotide analogs requires viral rdrps to recognize and successfully incorporate the active form of the inhibitors into the growing rna strand. because of the structural conservation on the polymerase catalytic chamber between 2019-ncov and hcv ns5b polymerase, as well as the likely similar mechanisms of action of remdesivir and sofosbuvir (12, 16) (2'-f-2'-c-methyluridine monophosphate prodrug which targets hcv 45 ns5b and has been approved for the treatment of chronic hcv infection) ( fig. s7 ), a model of 2019-ncov nsp12 with remdesivir diphosphate is proposed (fig. 4) . in 2019-ncov nsp12, the 2' hydroxyl of the incoming ntp is likely to form hydrogen bonds with t680 and n691 in motif b (figs. 4, a and b). in addition, d623 in motif a is positioned to interrogate the 3' hydroxyl through hydrogen bonding. moreover, the hydrophobic side chain of v557 in motif f is likely to stack with 5 and stabilize the +1 template rna uridine base to base pair with the incoming triphosphate remdesivir (ppp-remdesivir). in the structures of hcv ns5b elongation complex or its complex with pp-sofosbuvir, a key feature is that the incorporated pp-sofosbuvir disrupts the hydrogen bonding network between s282 and d225 (figs. 4, c and d), which is necessary to stabilize the incoming natural nucleotide (12). however, key contacts formed by s282 with the incoming nucleotide and the surrounding environment can result in an s→t resistance mutation that is already observed in the clinic (17). in the structure of apo 2019-ncov nsp12, the orientation of s682 and d623, which are strictly conserved with s282 and d225 in hcv ns5b, is similar to that observed in the hcv ns5b-pp-sofosbuvir complex, indicating a different recognition mechanism with that inhibitor. nevertheless, the close distance of s682 with the incoming ppp-remdesivir and 15 the environment surrounding the inhibitor alters the appearance of a drug-resistant mutation associated with remdesivir treatments.the rapid global spread of 2019-ncov has emphasized the need for the development of new coronavirus vaccines and therapeutics. the viral polymerase nsp12 looks an excellent target for new therapeutics, especially given that lead inhibitors already exist in the form of compounds such 20 as remdesivir. this target, in addition to other promising drug targets such as the main protease, whose structure was recently determined by our group (18) in complex with an inhibitor (19, 20) will support the development of a cocktail of anti-coronavirus treatments that potentially can be used for the discovery of broad-spectrum antivirals. we would like to pay an exceptional tribute to shanghaitech university and their administrative team, as well as the bio-electron microscopy facility for their great care and support to our research team to enable us to carry out this research in a safe and healthy environment. it would have been impossible for us to attain this achievement without their tremendous efforts in the last two months during the ncov-19 pandemic. we also would like to 5 convey our special thanks to tsinghua university for their exceptional permission to allow five of z. r.'s students to go back to the laboratory to prepare the protein samples for this study. we also must express our gratitude to the campus service team of shanghaitech university scientific research platform of shanghai institute for advanced immunochemical studies (siais), and national center for protein science shanghai (ncpss), as well as all the manager and technician figures s1-s7tables s1references (21-28) protein production and purification the 2019-ncov nsp12 (genbank: mn908947) gene was cloned into a modified pet-22a 5 vector, with the c-terminus possessing a 10 × his-tag. the plasmids were transformed into e. coil bl21 (de3), and the transformed cells were cultured at 37 °c in lb media containing 100 mg/l ampicillin. after the od600 reached 0.8, the culture was cooled to 16 °c and supplemented with 0.5 mm iptg. after overnight induction, the cells were harvested through centrifugation, and the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mm tris-hcl, ph 8.0, 150 mm nacl, 4 mm mgcl, 10 10% glycerol) and homogenized with an ultra-high-pressure cell disrupter at 4 °c. the insoluble material was removed through centrifugation at 12,000 rpm. the fusion protein was first purified by ni-nta affinity chromatography and elution with lysis buffer and then further purified by passage through a hitrap q ion-exchange column (ge healthcare, usa) before loading onto a superdex 200 10/300 increase column (ge healthcare, usa) in a buffer containing 20 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 250 mm nacl and 4 mm mgcl2. purified nsp12 was concentrated to 4 mg ml/l and stored at 4 °c. the full-length 2019-ncov nsp7 and nsp8 were co-expressed in e. coil bl21 (de3) cells as a notagged protein and a 6 × his-sumo fusion protein, respectively. after purification by ni-nta (novagen) affinity chromatography, the nsp7-nsp8 complex was eluted through on-column tag 20 cleavage by ulp protease. the eluate was further purified by hitrap q ion-exchange column (ge healthcare, usa) and a superdex 200 10/300 increase column (ge healthcare, usa) in a buffer containing 20 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 250 mm nacl and 4 mm mgcl2.cryo-em sample preparation and data collection 25 an aliquot of 3 μl of the sample at 0.7 mg/ml (added with 0.025% ddm) was applied onto a h2/o2 glow-discharged, 300-mesh quantifoil r1.2/1.3 grid (quantifoil, micro tools gmbh, germany). the grid was then blotted for 3.0 s with a blot force of 0 at 8°c and 100% humidity and plunge-frozen in liquid ethane using a vitrobot (thermo fisher scientific, usa). cryo-em data were collected with a 300 kev titan krios electron microscope (thermo fisher scientific, 30 usa) and a k2 summit direct electron detector (gatan, usa). images were recorded at eftem with a 165000× magnification and calibrated super-resolution pixel size 0.82 å/pixel. the exposure time was set to 5 s with a total accumulated dose of 60 electrons per å 2 . all images were automatically recorded using serialem (21). for dataset-1, a total of 7,994 images were collected with a defocus range from 1.0 μm to 1.8 μm. for dataset-2 (under reducing conditions), a total of 35 8494 images were collected with a defocus range from 1.1 μm to 2.0 μm. statistics for data collection and refinement are in table s1 .all dose-fractioned images were motion-corrected and dose-weighted by motioncorr2 40 software (22) and their contrast transfer functions were estimated by cryosparc patch ctf estimation. for dataset-1, a total of 2,334,248 particles were auto-picked using blob picker and extracted with a box size of 300 pixels in cryosparc (20). the following 2d, 3d classifications and refinements were all performed in cryosparc. 918,133 particles were selected after two rounds of 2d classification. 100,000 particles were used to do ab-initio reconstruction in five classes, and then these five classes were used as 3d volume templates for heterogeneous refinement with all selected particles, with 110,176 particles converged into one class. next, this particle set was used to perform homogeneous refinement, yielding a resolution of 3.1 å. after local refinement, the final resolution reached 2.9 å. for dataset-2, the image processing was conducted using a similar pipeline. 753,481 particles were auto-picked initially, and 145,388 5 particles were selected after final heterogeneous refinement. the resolution reached 2.99 å after non-uniform refinement and 2.95 å after local refinement with a mask.model building and refinement to solve the structure of the 2019-ncov nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex, the structure of the 10 sars-cov nsp12 (24) and nsp7-8 (25) were individually placed and rigid-body fitted into the cryo-em map using ucsf chimera (26). after the corresponding amino acids were replaced with those from 2019-ncov, the model was manually built in coot (27) with the guidance of the cryo-em map, and in combination with real space refinement with phenix (28). the data validation statistics are shown in table s1 . interaction between the β-hairpin with other domains. * numbers represent the number of atom-to-atom contacts between the residues of β-hairpin and the residues in other domains. these were analyzed by the contact program in the ccp4 suite (with a distance cutoff of 3.5 å). 5 β-hairpin contact * target residues m67-n192 s1-e73 t84-l122; k127-a191 table s1 . cryo-em data statistics.the covid-19 virus nsp12 (genbank: mn908947) gene was cloned into a modified pet-22a vector, with the c-terminus possessing a 10 × his-tag. the plasmids were transformed into e. coli bl21 (de3), and the transformed cells were cultured at 37 °c in lb media containing 100 mg/l ampicillin. after the od600 reached 0.8, the culture was cooled to 16 °c and supplemented with 0.5 mm iptg. after overnight induction, the cells were harvested through centrifugation, and the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mm tris-hcl, ph 8.0, 150 mm nacl, 4 mm mgcl2, 10% glycerol) and homogenized with an ultra-high-pressure cell disrupter at 4 °c. the insoluble material was removed through centrifugation at 12,000 rpm. the fusion protein was first purified by ni-nta affinity chromatography and then further purified by passage through a hitrap q ion-exchange column (ge healthcare, usa) before loading onto a superdex 200 10/300 increase column (ge healthcare, usa) in a buffer containing 20 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 250 mm nacl and 4 mm mgcl2. purified nsp12 was concentrated to 4 mg/ml and stored at 4 °c. full-length covid-19 virus nsp7 and nsp8 were co-expressed in e. coli bl21 (de3) cells as a no-tagged protein and a 6 × his-sumo fusion protein, respectively. after purification by ni-nta (novagen) affinity chromatography, the nsp7-nsp8 complex was eluted through on-column tag cleavage by ulp protease. the eluate was further purified by hitrap q ion-exchange column (ge healthcare, usa) and a superdex 200 10/300 increase column (ge healthcare, usa) in a buffer containing 20 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 250 mm nacl and 4 mm mgcl2. for assembling stable nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex, purified nsp12 was incubated with nsp7 and nsp8 at 4 ℃ for three hours, at a molar ratio of 1: 2: 2 in a buffer containing 20 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.5, 250 mm nacl and 4 mm mgcl2. for the sample in reduced condition, the complex was further transferred to a reducing buffer containing 20 mm tris-hcl, ph 7.0, 250 mm nacl and 4 mm mgcl2, 4 mm dtt using a centrifugal ultrafiltration device (amicon® ultra filters).in total, 3 μl of protein solution at 0.7 mg/ml (added with 0.025% ddm, both samples the same) was applied onto a h2/o2 glow-discharged, 300-mesh quantifoil r1.2/1.3 grid (quantifoil, micro tools gmbh, germany). the grid was then blotted for 3.0 s with a blot force of 0 at 8°c and 100% humidity and plunge-frozen in liquid ethane using a vitrobot (thermo fisher scientific, usa). cryo-em data were collected with a 300 kev titan krios electron microscope (thermo fisher scientific, usa) and a k2 summit direct electron detector (gatan, usa). images were recorded at eftem with a 165000× magnification and calibrated super-resolution pixel size 0.82 å/pixel. the exposure time was set to 5 s with a total accumulated dose of 60 electrons per å 2 . all images were automatically recorded using serialem (18) . for dataset-1, a total of 7,994 images were collected with a defocus range from 1.0 μm to 1.8 μm. for dataset-2 (under reducing conditions), a total of 8494 images were collected with a defocus range from 1.1 μm to 2.0 μm. statistics for data collection and refinement are in table s1 .all dose-fractioned images were motion-corrected and dose-weighted by motioncorr2 software (19) and their contrast transfer functions were estimated by cryosparc patch ctf estimation. for dataset-1, a total of 2,334,248 particles were auto-picked using blob picker and extracted with a box size of 300 pixels in cryosparc (20) . the following 2d, 3d classifications and refinements were all performed in cryosparc. 918,133 particles were selected after two rounds of 2d classification. 100,000 particles were used to do ab-initio reconstruction in five classes, and then these five classes were used as 3d volume templates for heterogeneous refinement with all selected particles, with 110,176 particles converged into one class. next, this particle set was used to perform homogeneous refinement, yielding a resolution of 3.1 å. after local refinement, the final resolution reached 2.9 å. for dataset-2, the image processing was conducted using a similar pipeline. 753,481 particles were auto-picked initially, and 145,388 particles were selected after final heterogeneous refinement. the resolution reached 2.99 å after non-uniform refinement and 2.95 å after local refinement with a mask.to solve the structure of the covid-19 virus nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex, the structure of the sars-cov nsp12 (9) and nsp7-8 (21) were individually placed and rigid-body fitted into the cryo-em map using ucsf chimera (22) . after the corresponding amino acids were replaced with those from covid-19 virus, the model was manually built in coot 0.8 (23) with the guidance of the cryo-em map, and in combination with real space refinement using phenix 1.9 (24) . the data validation statistics are shown in table s1 . interaction between the β-hairpin and other domains. * numbers represent the number of atomto-atom contacts between the residues of β-hairpin and the residues in other domains. these were calculated by the contact program in the ccp4 suite (with a distance cutoff of 3.5 å). m67-n192 s1-e73 t84-l122; k127-a191 table s1 . cryo-em data statistics.movie s1. experimental cryo-em map of nsp12 n-terminal region (a4 to r118)corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by a novel coronavirus emerged in december 2019 (1) (2) (3) and has since become a global pandemic. covid-19 virus is reported to be a new member of the betacoronavirus genus and is closely related to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and to several bat coronaviruses (4) . compared to sars-cov and mers-cov, covid-19 virus exhibits faster human-to-human transmission, thus leading to the who declaration of a world-wide public health emergency (1, 2) .covs employ a multi-subunit replication/transcription machinery. a set of non-structural proteins (nsp) produced as cleavage products of the orf1a and orf1ab viral polyproteins (5) assemble to facilitate viral replication and transcription. a key component, the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp, also known as nsp12), catalyzes the synthesis of viral rna and thus plays a central role in the replication and transcription cycle of covid-19 virus, possibly with the assistance of nsp7 and nsp8 as co-factors (6) . nsp12 is therefore considered a primary target for nucleotide analog antiviral inhibitors such as remdesivir, which shows potential for the treatment of covid-19 viral infections (7, 8) . to inform drug design we have determined the structure of nsp12, in complex with its cofactors nsp7 and nsp8 by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) using two different protocols, one in the absence of dtt (dataset-1) and the other in the presence of dtt (dataset-2).the bacterially expressed full-length covid-19 virus nsp12 (residues s1-q932) was incubated with nsp7 (residues s1-q83) and nsp8 (residues a1-q198), and the complex was then purified (fig. s1). cryo-em grids were prepared using this complex and preliminary screening revealed excellent particle density with good dispersion. after the collection and processing of 7,994 micrograph movies, we obtained a 2.9-å resolution 3d reconstruction of an nsp12 monomer in complex with one nsp7-nsp8 pair and an nsp8 monomer, as was previously observed for sars-cov (9) . in addition to the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex, we also observed single particle classes corresponding to the nsp12-nsp8 dimer, as well as individual nsp12 monomers, but these do not give atomic resolution reconstructions ( fig. s2 ). however, the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex reconstruction provides the structural information for complete structural analysis.the structure of the covid-19 virus nsp12 contains a "right hand" rdrp domain (residues s367-f920), and a nidovirus-unique n-terminal extension domain (residues d60-r249) that adopts a nidovirus rdrp-associated nucleotidyltransferase (niran) (10) a novel coronavirus (covid-19 virus) outbreak has caused a global pandemic resulting in tens of thousands of infections and thousands of deaths worldwide. the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp, also named nsp12) is the central component of coronaviral replication/transcription machinery and appears to be a primary target for the antiviral drug, remdesivir. we report the cryo-em structure of covid-19 virus fulllength nsp12 in complex with cofactors nsp7 and nsp8 at 2.9-å resolution. in addition to the conserved architecture of the polymerase core of the viral polymerase family, nsp12 possesses a newly identified βhairpin domain at its n terminus. a comparative analysis model shows how remdesivir binds to this polymerase. the structure provides a basis for the design of new antiviral therapeutics targeting viral rdrp. domain (residues a250-r365) (fig. 1, a and b ). an additional n-terminal β-hairpin (d29-k50), built with the guidance of an unambiguous cryo-em map ( fig. s3a ), inserts into the groove clamped by the niran domain and the palm subdomain in the rdrp domain (fig. 2) . the nsp7-nsp8 pair shows a conserved structure similar to the sars-cov nsp7-nsp8 pair (9, 11) . the orientation of the n-terminal helix of the separate nsp8 monomer bound to nsp12 is shifted compared with that in the nsp7-nsp8 pair ( fig. s4a ). the 13 additional amino acid residues resolved at the n-terminal of nsp8 show that the long "shaft" of its well-known "golf club" shape is bent ( fig.  s4b ).the overall architecture of the covid-19 virus nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex is similar to that of sars-cov with an rmsd value of 0.82 for 1,078 cɑ atoms ( fig. s4c ). however, there are key features that distinguish the two. the cryo-em map allowed us to build the complete structure of covid-19 virus nsp12 including all residues except s1-d3 and g897-d901. in contrast the first 116 residues were not resolved in sars-cov nsp12 (9) . the portion of the niran domain resolved in sars-cov-12 (residues 4 to 28 and 51 to 249) comprises eight helices with a five-stranded β-sheet at the n terminus. (9) ( fig. 2a ). in the covid-19 virus structure we additionally resolved residues a4-r118. these constitute a structural block with five anti-parallel β-strands and two helices. residues n215-d218 form a β-strand in covid-19 virus nsp12 whereas these residues are less ordered in sars-cov nsp12. this region make contact with the strand that includes residues v96-a100, thus contributing to the stabilization of its conformation. as a result, these four strands form a compact semi β-barrel architecture. therefore, we identify residues a4-t28 and y69-r249 as the complete coronaviral niran domain. with the resolution of n-terminal residues, we are also able to identify an n-terminal β-hairpin (d29 to k50, figs. 1a and 2a). this β-hairpin inserts in the groove clamped by the niran domain and the palm subdomain in the rdrp domain and forms a set of close contacts to stabilize the overall structure ( fig. 2b and fig. s5 ). another point to note is that, we have observed c301-c306 and c487-c645 form disulfide bonds in the absence of dtt (dataset-1). however, in the presence of dtt (dataset-2), chelated zinc ions are present and in the same location as that observe in sars-cov ( fig. s3b ).the polymerase domain adopts the conserved architecture of the viral polymerase family (12) and is composed of three subdomains; a fingers subdomain (residues l366-a581 and k621-g679), a palm subdomain (residues t582-p620 and t680-q815), and a thumb subdomain (residues h816-e920) (fig. 1) . the catalytic metal ions, which are observed in several structures of viral polymerases that synthesize rna (13, 14) are not observed here in the absence of primer-template rna and ntps.the active site of the covid-19 virus rdrp domain is formed by the conserved polymerase motifs a-g in the palm domain and configured like other rna polymerases (figs. 1a and 3a and fig. s6 ). motif a comprising residues 611-tphlmgwdypkcdram-626 contains the classic divalentcation-binding residue d618, which is conserved in most viral polymerases including hcv ns5b (residue d220) and poliovirus (pv) 3d pol (residue d233) (13, 14) (fig. 3 , b and c) and motif c (residues 753-fsmmilsddavvcfn-767) contains the catalytic residues (759-sdd-761) in the turn between two β-strands. these catalytic residues are also conserved in most viral rdrps, e.g., 317-gdd-319 in hcv ns5b and 327-gdd-329 pv 3d pol with the first residue being either serine or glycine.in this structure, as in other rna polymerases, the template/primer entry, nucleoside triphosphate (ntp) entry, and nascent strand exit paths are positively charged and solventaccessible and converge in a central cavity where the rdrp motifs mediate template-directed rna synthesis (fig. 3d) . the configurations of the template/primer entry paths, the nucleoside triphosphate (ntp) entry channel, and the nascent strand exit path are similar to those described for sars-cov and for other rna polymerases such as hcv and pv polymerase (14) (fig. 3, b and c) . the ntp entry channel is formed by a set of hydrophilic residues, including k545, r553 and r555 in motif f. the rna template is expected to enter the active site composed of motifs a and c through a groove clamped by motif f and g. motif e and the thumb subdomain support the primer strand. the product-template hybrid exits the active site through the rna exit tunnel at the front side of the polymerase.remdesivir, the single sp isomer of the 2-ethylbutyl l-alaninate phosphoramidate prodrug (15) (fig. s7 ), has been reported to inhibit covid-19 virus proliferation and therefore have clinical potential (7, 8) . we will briefly discuss its possible binding and inhibition mechanism based on the results of this study. the efficacy of chain-terminating nucleotide analogs requires viral rdrps to recognize and successfully incorporate the active form of the inhibitors into the growing rna strand. sofosbuvir (2'-f-2'-c-methyluridine monophosphate) is a prodrug which targets hcv ns5b and has been approved for the treatment of chronic hcv infection (16) . it acts by binding to the catalytic site of hcv ns5b polymerase (12, 16) . given that remdesivir and sofosbuvir are both nucleotide analogs and the structural conservation of the catalytic site between covid-19 virus nsp12 and hcv ns5b polymerase (13, 16) (fig. s7 ), we modeled remdesivir diphosphate binding to covid-19 virus nsp12 based on superposition with sofosbuvir bound to hcv ns5b ( fig. 4a and fig. s4d ). overall, we found that the nsp12 of covid-19 virus has the highest similarity with the apo state of ns5b. given the conformational changes of ns5b in apo/elongation/inhibited states, it appears catalytic residues d760, d761 and the classic d618 will undergo a conformational change to coordinate the divalent cations (fig. 4b) . the latter will anchor the phosphate group of the incoming nucleotide or inhibitors together with the allosteric r555 in motif f (fig. 4c) . in the structures of hcv ns5b elongation complex or its complex with pp-sofosbuvir, a key feature is that the incorporated pp-sofosbuvir interacts with n291 (equivalent to n691 in covid-19 virus) but, due to a fluorine substitution on its sugar moiety, is not capable to joint into the hydrogen bonding network with s282 and d225 (fig. 4d) , which is necessary to stabilize the incoming natural nucleotide (13) . however, remdesivir keeps an intact ribose group, so it may be able to utilize this hydrogen bonds network like a native substrate. in addition, t680 in covid-19 virus nsp12 is also likely to form hydrogen bonds with the 2' hydroxyl of remdesivir and of course with incoming natural ntp (fig. 4d) . moreover, the hydrophobic side chain of v557 in motif f is likely to stack with and stabilize the +1 template rna uridine base to base pair with the incoming triphosphate remdesivir (ppp-remdesivir) (fig. 4e) .the rapid global spread of covid-19 virus has emphasized the need for the development of new coronavirus vaccines and therapeutics. the viral polymerase nsp12 looks an excellent target for new therapeutics, especially given that lead inhibitors already exist in the form of compounds such as remdesivir. considering the structural similarity of nucleoside analogs, the binding mode and inhibition mechanism discussed here may also be applicable to other such kind drugs or drug candidates include favipiravir, which proves effective in clinical trials (17) . this target, in addition to other promising drug targets such as the main protease, could support the development of a cocktail of anti-coronavirus treatments that potentially can be used for the discovery of broadspectrum antivirals. an exopeptidase expressed on epithelial cells of the respiratory tract, may constitute a pharmacological target to limit cell entry of sars-cov-2. the established antimalarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have been shown to inhibit terminal phosphorylation of ace2 and to elevate the ph in endosomes, respectively. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine constitute candidate drugs against sars-cov infection and covid-19 disease, and are now investigated for their therapeutic efficacy in international clinical trials with covid-19 patients (i. e. solidarity trial).the glycosylated s protein of sars-cov is highly immunogenic to the host immune system, and murine polyclonal antibodies against sars-co-v s protein potently inhibit sars-cov-2 s-mediated cell entry, indicating that cross-neutralizing antibodies targeting conserved s epitopes can be elicited upon vaccination [9] . similar to the earlier sars and mers beta coronaviruses, sars-cov-2 primarily infects alveolar epithelial cell of the lung, leading to a severe bilateral peripheral pneumonia with ground glass opacity in ct images (covid-19 disease), with a mortality rate of 2 % to 5 % [10] .sars-cov-2 also can contribute to multiple organ failure, affecting heart, liver, kidney, central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract [11] . epidemiology thus far suggests that sars-cov-2 is more contagious than sars-cov or mers-cov [12] . multiple mechanisms now identified in the infective and replication processes of sars-cov-2 offer targets for pharmacological interventions. infection of pneumocytes, macrophages and pulmonary mast cells requires viral s protein. this invasion process which involves attachment of s protein to the ace2 receptor is facilitated by host cell derived serine protease tmprss211 [8] . agents that inhibit tmprss211, such as camostat mesilate, may be useful in blocking viral host cell entry. after host cell entry, the viral single-stranded positive rna, is released for replication of virus rna and translation of virus polyproteins that are finally cleaved into mature effector proteins by virus proteases [13] . the s protein interaction with ace2 on host cell cytoplasmic membrane initiates viral infection. strategies capable of disrupting s protein interaction with ace2 could be of significant therapeutic value, because the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 s protein to ace2 is 10-20-fold higher than for the s protein of sars-cov which may contribute to the higher contagiousness of sars-cov-2 as compared to sars-cov [12] . although sars-cov and sars-cov-2 have only 79% genomic sequence similarity, they share a highly conserved receptor binding domain for their s proteins [1] there is also potential for targeting other highly conserved proteins associated with sars-cov and sars-co-v-2, including rdrp and 3clpro (also termed mpro), which share over 95% similarity between the two viruses, despite only 79% genomic sequence sharing.rdrp is an rna-dependent rna polymerase required for replicating the viral genome within the host cell. 3clpro and plpro are both viral proteases which break down viral polyprotein into functional units within host cells that are finally assembled into new viruses. the 3clpro sequences between the two viruses are 96% similar, the plpro sequence identity is 83%, and their active sites show a high degree of conservation [14] . drugs that have recently been shown to target mers-cov in mice [15] , and to inhibit ebola virus rdrp and sars-cov-2 proteases in humans, such as remdesivir and ritonavir/lopinavir, also constitute candidate drugs against sars-cov-2 and are now investigated for their therapeutic efficacy in covid-19 patients in 2 international clinical trials (solidarity trial and discovery trial). finally, certain phytochemicals and natural products with high antiviral activity should be considered for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19 disease. results from previous studies reveal that diverse viruses, including ebola virus, sars-coronavirus (sars-cov), mers-coronavirus (mers-cov) and influenza virus employ host cell proteases for activation of their envelope glycoproteins [16] [17] [18] . cleavage and activation of the spike protein (s protein) of sars-cov that is required for membrane fusion and host cell entry is mediated by transmembrane protease/serine subfamily member 2 (tmprss2), an airway and alveolar cell serine protease [19] [20] [21] . pöhlmann and coworkers recently demonstrated that sars-cov-2 also employs tmprss2 for sars-cov-2 s protein priming and s protein-driven cell entry [8] . using camostat mesilate, a clinically proven and commercial serine protease inhibitor that partially blocks infection by [26, 27] , and chronic pancreatitis [28] [29] [30] [31] . camostat mesilate (ni-03) is manufactured as an oral drug by nichi-iko pharmaceutical co., ltd., and ono pharmaceutical, japan, with a three times daily dose recommendation of 100 mg to 300 mg [30, 31] . in a clinical trial investigating camostat mesilate against dyspepsia associated with non-alcoholic mild pancreatic disease, 95 patients received 200 mg camostat mesilate three times daily for 2 weeks and showed only mild, but no severe adverse effects [28] , indicating that camostat mesilate is a well-tolerated drug.nafamostat mesilate (buipel tm ), (6-amidino-2-naphthyl-4-guanidino benzoate-dimethanesulfonate) (fut-175), (cas number: 81525-10-2), is a clinical proven and synthetic serine protease inhibitor approved in japan for the treatment of acute pancreatitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation and for anticoagulation in extracorporeal circulation [32] [33] [34] . in a screening approach of about 1,100 drugs approved by the fda, nafamostat mesilate has been identified to inhibit mers-cov s protein-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f mediated viral membrane fusion with tmprss2-expressing lung calu-3 host cells by inhibiting tmprss2 protease activity [35] . since the s proteins of mers-cov and sars-cov-2 share considerable amino acid sequence homology [1, 9] , nafamostat mesilate may also inhibit cell entry of sars-cov-2. in cell culture experiments with simian vero e6 cells infected with sars-cov-2, nafamostat mesilate was shown to be inhibitive against sars-cov-2 infection at ec50 of 22.50 µm [36] , suggesting that nafamostat mesilate is able to prevent sars-cov-2 infection. in a multicenter, randomized, open-label, phase 2 trial in 19 patients with severe acute pancreatitis, nafamostat mesilate was administered intravenously at a daily dose of 240 mg for 5 days without severe adverse effects [34] .sars-cov and related coronaviruses directly interact via their s proteins with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a host cell exopeptidase and metallocarboxypeptidase that catalyses the conversion of angiotensin i to the nonapeptide angiotensin and the conversion of angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7, to initiate s protein-mediated cell entry [37] [38] [39] . it was demonstrated recently that also sars-cov-2 uses ace2 as a receptor for s protein-driven host cell entry [8, 9] . therefore, ace2 constitute a molecular target to inhibit cell entry of sars-cov-2. unfortunately, ace inhibitors as standard drugs for the treatment of hypertension and chronic heart failure fail to inhibit ace2 [40] , but a number of other drugs and compounds have been shown to inhibit ace2.chloroquine phosphate (resochin tm ) and its derivative hydroxychloroquine (quensyl tm , plaquenil tm , hydroquin tm , dolquine tm , quinoric tm ) have been used for decades for the prophylaxis and treatment of malaria and for the treatment of chronic q fever and various autoimmune diseases [41] , and have recently been demonstrated as potential broad-spectrum antiviral drugs [42, 43] . chloroquine phosphate inhibits terminal phosphorylation of ace2, and hydroxychloroquine elevates the ph in endosomes which are involved in virus cell entry [44, 45] , both mechanisms constitute relevant antiviral mechanisms of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. in vivo, hydroxychloroquine is metabolized into chloroquine. chloroquine phosphate has previously been shown to inhibit sars-cov infection and spread in vitro [44, 46] , and results from very recent studies reveal that chloroquine phosphate and, more effectively, hydroxychloroquine also inhibit replication of sars-cov-2 in simian vero cells [46, 47] . by using a physiologically-based pharmacokinetic model for chloroquine phosphate and hydroxychloroquine in human lung fluid, it was demonstrated that the concentrations of hydroxychloroquine recommended for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection comprise an oral loading dose of 400 mg twice daily at day 1, followed by an oral maintenance dose of 200 mg twice daily for 4 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f days [47] . these results were deduced from in vitro data obtained from sars-cov-2-infected vero cells treated with hydroxychloroquine [47] . a recent pilot trial conducted in more than 10 hospitals in wuhan, jingzhou, guangzhou, bejing, shanghai, chongqing and ningbo, china, with more than 100 patients with covid-19 disease demonstrated that treatment with chloroquine phosphate is superior to control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting laboratory virus-negative conversion, and shortening the course of covid-19 disease [48] .chloroquine phosphate should be administered as an oral daily dose of 250 mg until clinical convalescence [49] . thus, in view of these results and the urgent clinical demand regarding sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemia, chloroquine phosphate should be recommended to treat covid-19 associated pneumonia in larger populations [48] . a recent open-label non-randomized clinical trial conducted in march 2020 in france with 20 covid-19 patients treated with daily 600 mg hydroxychloroquine for 6 days demonstrated at day 6 a negative viral load (negative nasopharyngeal pcr) in 57% of the hydroxychloroquine-treated patients, as compared to negative viral load in 12.5% of untreated covid-19 patients (control group, n=16) [50] . in a randomized clinical trial conducted in february 2020 in wuhan, china, sixty two covid-19 patients were randomized to receive either daily 400 mg hydroxychloroquine for 5 days (n=31) or no pharmacological treatment (n=31) [51] .improvement and absorption of pneumonia as analyzed in chest ct at day 6 was observed in 80.6% of the hydroxychloroquine-treated patients vs. 54.8% in the untreated patients [51] . the results from these small studies therefore strongly suggest that hydroxychloroquine has therapeutic efficacy inthus, a considerable number of clinical trials investigating therapeutic efficacy of chloroquine phosphate and hydroxychloroquine in patients with sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19 disease have been initiated in china, great britain, spain and thailand [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] .the triple combination of cepharanthine (an anti-inflammatory alkaloid from stephania cepharantha gx_p2v/2017/guangxi (gx_p2v), whose s protein shares 92.2% amino acid identity with that of sars-cov-2 [60] . further, it was demonstrated that gx_p2v also uses ace2 as the receptor for viral cell entry [60] . two libraries of 2,406 clinically approved drugs were screened for their ability to inhibit cytopathic effects on vero e6 cells by gx_p2v, and only the combination of cepharanthine, selamectin and mefloquine hydrochloride was identified as candidate drug combination against sars-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fshortly after the identification of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a metallocarboxypeptidase that mediates various cardiovascular and renal functions, peptide inhibitors of the enzyme were developed by selection of constrained peptide libraries displayed on phage [61] .the most potent inhibitor, termed dx600, with the amino acid sequence of ac- vero-e 6 cells, and inhibits infection of engineered human capillary organoids and kidney organoids by sars-cov-2 isolated from a nasopharyngeal sample of a patient with confirmed covid-19 disease [74] , suggesting that hrsace2 can block host cell entry of sars-cov-2 and early stages of sars-cov-2 infections.remdesivir (gs-5734), (cas number: 1809249-37-3), is a novel small-molecule adenine nucleotide analogue antiviral drug that has shown efficacy against ebola virus in rhesus monkeys. once-daily intravenous administration of 10 mg kg(-1) remdesivir for 12 days resulted in profound suppression of ebola virus replication and protected 100% of ebola virus-infected animals against lethal disease [75] .remdesivir displays antiviral activity against other single stranded rna viruses, including filoviruses, pneumoviruses, paramyxoviruses, and the coronaviruses mers-cov and sars-cov [76] [77] [78] .remdesivir is a prodrug that is metabolized into its active form gs-441524, an adenine nucleotide analogue that interferes with the activity of viral rna polymerase and that promotes evasion of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f proofreading by viral exoribonuclease, leading to inhibition of viral rna synthesis [78] . remdesivir acts early in infection, and decreases viral rna levels in a dose-dependent manner that parallels impairment of viral load in vitro [78] . these and related mechanisms of action of remdesivir have been demonstrated in vitro for sars-cov [78] , ebola virus [79] and mers-cov [80] . a recent study demonstrates in cell culture experiments with simian vero e6 cells infected with sars-cov-2 that remdesivir is inhibitive against sars-cov-2 infection at ec90 of 1.76 µm, a concentration achieved in vivo in nonhuman primate models [36] . it was further shown that remdesivir efficiently inhibited sars-cov-2 infection of human liver cancer huh-7 cells, which are sensitive to sars-cov-2 infection [36] . [87, 88] , in the usa [89] , and in france [90, 91] .lopinavir (abt-378) is a highly potent inhibitor of the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) protease essential for intracellular hiv assembly that was developed in 1998 to circumvent hiv resistance towards the protease inhibitor ritonavir (abt-538), caused by mutation of valine at position 82 (val 82) in the active site of hiv protease in response to ritonavir therapy [92] . because the metabolism of lopinavir is strongly inhibited by ritonavir, concomitant oral administration of lopinavir and ritonavir exceeded the in vitro antiviral ec50 of lopinavir by >50-fold after 8 h in rat, dog, and monkey plasma j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [92] . coadministration of 400 mg lopinavir with 50 mg ritonavir enhanced in healthy human volunteers the area under the concentration curve of lopinavir in plasma by 77-fold over that observed after dosing with lopinavir alone, and mean concentrations of lopinavir exceeded the ec50 for >24 h [92] .therefore, the combination of lopinavir and ritonavir (kaletra tm ) has been established as an effective oral drug for the treatment of hiv-infected individuals when used in combination with other antiretroviral agents [93, 94] .an initial study in 2003 demonstrated that lopinavir at 4 µg/ml inhibited the cytopathic effect in a plaque reduction assay with fetal rhesus kidney-4-cells infected with sars-cov (hku-39849 isolate) [95] . in this study, newly diagnosed sars patients infected with sars-cov were treated with the combination of lopinavir (400 mg)/ritonavir (100 mg) orally every 12 hours for 14 days.at day 21, sars patients treated with lopinavir/ritonavir had a milder disease course in terms of diarrhea, recurrence of fever, worsening of chest radiographs and reduction of viral load, compared to a historical control group [95] . in a nonhuman primate model of common marmosets infected with mers-cov, lopinavir/ritonavir-treated animals displayed an improved clinical outcome compared to untreated animals, with improved weight loss, lung imaging and pathological findings, and lower mean viral loads in necropsied lung and extrapulmonary tissues [96] . in response to these findings, an ongoing randomized control trial (miracle trial) was initiated to determine the therapeutic efficacy of lopinavir/ritonavir combined with interferon β-1b in patients infected with mers-cov [97] . in a recent [98] . treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir was not associated with a difference from standard care in the time to clinical improvement, and mortality at 28 days was similar in the lopinavir/ritonavir group and the standard-care group [98] .moreover, treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir treatment did not reduce viral rna loads or duration of viral rna detectability as compared with standard supportive care. sars-cov-2 rna was still detected in 40.7% of the patients in the lopinavir/ritonavir group at the end of the trial at day 28 [98] .however, the numbers of lopinavir/ritonavir recipients who had serious complications (acute kidney injury and secondary infections) or requiring noninvasive or invasive mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure were fewer than in those not receiving lopinavir/ritonavir treatment [98] . these results and observations require additional studies to determine whether treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir given at a certain disease stage can reduce some complications in covid-19 patients [98] .china [99] [100] [101] [102] , hong kong [103] , republic of korea [104] , and in europe (discovery trial), investigating remdesivir, lopinavir/ritonavir, and lopinavir/ritonavir plus interferon β-1a [91] .umifenovir [112] . in view of these promising clinical results, clinical trials with umifenovir alone or in combination with lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine phosphate or carrimycin have been recently initiated in china [113] [114] [115] [116] . the human interleukin-6 receptor, tocilizumab [123] or favipiravir in combination with chloroquine phosphate and the viral neuramidase inhibitor oseltamivir [124] have been initiated recently in china.3clpro (also termed mpro) constitutes the main protease of beta coronaviruses that is essential for processing of polyproteins translated from the viral rna [125] . recently, the x-ray structures of the unligated sars-cov-2 3clpro and its complex with α-ketoamides designed as specific inhibitors of 3clpro were reported [126] . two pyridine-containing α-ketoamides, designated 13a and 13b, displayed favorable pharmacokinetic properties in mice and were detected at sufficient concentrations in lung tissue and broncheo-alveolar lavage fluid within 4 hours to 24 hours after subcutaneous administration, demonstrating lung tropism of the compounds [126] . besides subcutaneous administration, inhalation of nebulized 13b by mice resulted in high and long-lasting (24 hours) concentrations in lung tissue, without any adverse effects [126] , pointing out a role of pyridinecontaining α-ketoamides in covid-19 therapy. in a recent study that employed combined structureassisted drug design, virtual drug screening and high-throughput screening, a mechanism-based inhibitor of mpro, termed n3, was identified by computer-aided drug design [127] . n3, a michael acceptor inhibitor that can inhibit the mpros of sars-cov and mers-cov, was shown to form a covalent bond with and to be an irreversible inhibitor of sars-cov-2 mpro [127] . further, in a highthroughput screening approach for identifying inhibitors of sars-cov-2 mpro, ebselen, an organoselenium compound with anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and cytoprotective properties, was identified [127] . in a plaque-reduction assay with simian vero cells infected with sars-cov-2, n3 and ebselen displayed antiviral and cell protection efficacy at ec50 values of 16.77 µm and 4.67 µm, respectively [127] , ultimately demonstrating their antiviral potential against sars-cov-2.natural products can inhibit various steps in viral infection and replication, and many of them have broad-spectrum antiviral effects, the mechanisms of which have not been fully characterized. they also can function as immunomodulators, suppressing inflammatory reaction responsible for the major morbidity and mortality of sars-cov-2 infection. phytochemicals, especially flavonoids, which are widely distributed in food plants and botanicals, have been shown to interfere with nlrp3inflammasome signaling [128] . the respiratory distress syndrome associated with sars coronaviruses develops in part due to viral activation of the nlrp3 inflammasome within activated macrophages and t helper-1 lymphocytes, which causes increased production of inflammatory cytokines [129] . several flavonoids that interfere with activation of the nlrp3 inflammasome may modulate inflammatory response to sars beta coronaviruses: luteolin [130] , myricetin [131] , apigenin j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [132] , quercetin [133] kaempferol [134] , baicalin [135] , and wogonoside [136] . these flavonoids have been shown to be active against a wide variety of viruses, via multiple mechanisms [137, 138] , and are available as nutraceutical supplements at a daily dose ranging from 100 mg to 500 mg. emodin (6methyl-1,3,8-trihydroxyanthraquinone) (cas number: 518-82-1) is an anthraquinone compound found in various chinese herbs and is also produced by many species of fungi, including members of the genera aspergillus, pyrenochaeta, and pestalotiopsis. emodin has been shown to inhibit the interaction of sars-cov s protein with its receptor ace2 in a dose-dependent manner [139] . [140] , suggesting that resveratrol may also be effective against sars-cov-2 infection.the emergence of the novel beta coronavirus sars-cov-2 from wuhan, hubei province, china in december 2019 rapidly led to a pandemic involving more than 2,500,000 infected persons and more proven drugs such as camostat mesilate which prevents virus host cell entry by inhibiting tmprss2 [8] , and chloroquine phosphate which inhibits terminal phosphorylation of ace2, or hydroxychloroquine which is metabolized in vivo to chloroquine [44] . for the treatment of ordinary and severe covid-19 pneumonia, and to lower the mortality rate of covid-19 disease, the antiviral drugs remdesivir, favipiravir, umifenovir, and lopinavir/ritonavir plus interferon β-1a should be administered, in particular after the consideration of (preliminary) results from the recent ongoing clinical trials solidarity and discovery [141, 91] cn and dlm conceived the original idea and wrote large parts of the manuscript. as and us wrote section 3 and prepared table 1 and figure 1 . sl finished the manuscript.none.we have no conflicts of interest.sincerely, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) is an acute respiratory infection that is caused by the 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2), which has spread rapidly across china and has become a global health challenge confronting the entire international community. [1] however, the agents that are available to treat covid-19 cannot be used for prevention and they have serious side-effects, such as diarrhea, emesis and hyperlipidemia. [2−4] furthermore, their mechanisms of action are unclear, and this has hindered the individualized strategies of prevention and treatment. therefore, there is an urgent need to sort and develop novel agents, and efforts at improving the optimistic outcome have been directed more recently at clinical therapies of covid-19. [5−7] the complete viral genome analysis has revealed that sars-cov-2 belongs to the -coronavirus genus, and its gene sequence is most closely related (89.1% nucleotide similarity) to that of coronavirus derived from rhinolophus sinicus, in contrast the homology of sars-cov-2 with sars-cov (mers-cov) is ∼70(40)%. [8, 9] in addition, the open reading frame (orf1a), which encodes the replicase complex, accounts for about 2/3 of the total length of sars-cov-2 genome. the other 1/3 encodes spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) proteins. [9] the sequence homologies of the five proteins between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov (or mers-cov) are relatively low, especially the considerable genetics distance of the spike (s) protein. [9, 10] during the prepara-tion of this paper, cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) and biolayer interferometry experiments evidenced that the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 spike protein and human ace2 is ∼20 times higher than the case of sars-cov with ace2, and antibodies that work against sars-cov may not work against sars-cov-2. [10] thus, numerous efforts have been made to explore specific therapeutic agents of covid-19, including their explicit mechanisms. [10−12] nowadays, standard structure-based virtual screening has been routinely implemented in drug discovery to quickly prioritize potential compounds for in vitro activity tests. however, a significant practical problem is encountered when we account for intrinsic receptor flexibility, which leads to considerable computational costs. in our previous works, we applied an ensemble-based screening method to determine the binding profiles of ligands with flexible receptors, with advantages in the discovery of novel efficacious agents and cost-effectiveness. [13, 14] with this in mind, a rapid structure-based virtual screening strategy was used to identify compounds as therapeutic agents of covid-19 by utilizing crystal structures of human ace2 (accession code: 1r42 [15] ) and sars-cov-2 main protease (3clpro, accession code: 6lu7), and homology modeling structures of viral spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) proteins.the coordinates of viral spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) proteins were constructed by the modeler module, [16] with the templates of 5x58(6nb6), 2mm4, 1buc and 1ssk. each homology modeling structure is partially in accordance with the respective templates, with the amino acid sequence similarities of 91.1, 70.7, 31.1 and 31.0%, respectively ( fig. s1 in supplemental material). note that the constructed spike (s) structure is in a manner consistent with the latest x-ray and cryo-em results, with the rmsd values being 1.7 and 1.8 å (fig. s2 ). virtual screening was performed using the cdocker algorithm [17] and charmm force field, [18] which has shown to have many advantages in the development of novel antiviral drugs. [13, 19] during the screening processes, each binding site sphere was assigned with a sphere of 10.0 å. the optimal orientations of ligands within proteins were probed on the basis of interactions with binding residues and geometrical matching qualities, [14,20−22] and then the selected docked complexes were energy-minimized using the conjugate gradient (cg) method, and further refined by 100.0-ns explicit solvent molecular dynamics (md) simulations using the amber16 package. [23] all values of binding free energies (∆ bind ) were calculated in averages over 200 snapshots, which were evenly extracted from the 60-100 ns md trajectories. details of this simulation were published previously. [14, 22] primarily, 10 agents with the in vitro cellular activities (arbidol, (r)-chloroquine, (s)-chloroquine, darunavir, lopinavir, remdesivir, ritonavir, ribavirin, triazavirine and -d-n4-hydroxycytidine (nhc)), were, respectively, docked to the envelope, spike, main protease (3clpro), membrane, nucleocapsid and human ace2 structures. note that interaction energy ( int ) refers to the receptor-ligand interaction energy, and total energy ( total ) includes int and internal ligand strain energy. these were derived from the cdocker module, consistent with the previous works. [14, 22] it was found that arbidol, chloroquine, remdesivir, nhc and triazavirin have relatively good binding affinities, and envelope, ace2, spike and 3clpro are more likely target proteins for drug design (table 1) . for example, the envelope-remdesivir, ace2-arbidol, spike-(s)-chloroquine and 3clpro-remdesivir complexes are well-behaved during the 100-ns md simulations (figs. s3 and s4), while the spike-ribavirin and membrane-ribavirin complexes represent obvious structural fluctuates and thermodynamic instabilities. in particular, ribavirin moves far from the binding pocket of membrane protein over the 100-ns md simulation (fig. s5 ). this motion indicated that though the interactions ( int < 0) between agents and membrane/nucleocapsid structures look relatively good, yet their docked complexes ( total > 0) might find it difficult to maintain stability (e.g., membrane-ribavirin complex) ( table 1) . recent in vitro cell experiments have confirmed that arbidol, chloroquine, and remdesivir can effectively inhibit the infection of sars-cov-2, and the treatments in combination with necessary supportive cares could significantly improve the pneumonia-related symptoms. [24] arbidol effectively inhibits sars-cov-2 at 10-30 µm, with the suppression of cytopathic effect. on vero e6 cells, half maximal effective concentration (ec 50 ) value of chloroquine (antimalarial drug) equals 1.13 µm, and selection index (si) >88. remdesivir (gs-5734) is a nucleoside analogue and is currently in phase iii clinical trials for covid-19, with the ec 50 value of 0.77 µm and si> 129. nhc is also a nucleotide analogue, and its effect is similar to that of remdesivir. triazavirin could protect influenza virus infected mice and inhibit the accumulation of virions. envelope protein plays an important role in the assembly and release of sars-cov-2 virion. according to our results, arbidol, (s)-chloroquine, (r)-chloroquine, remdesivir, nhc and triazavirin can bind to envelope protein. the hiv-1 protease inhibitors ritonavir and lopinavir interact with envelope protein in a similar manner, with the interaction energies ( int ) values of −51.44 and −43.87 kcal/mol (table 1) . while, the interaction energies ( int ) of arbidol, remdesivir and nhc with envelope protein are −38.62, −52.20 and −30.79 kcal/mol (table 1), and they possess the h-bonding interactions with residues arg38 and val58 (fig. 1) . it is worth noting that (s)-/(r)-chloroquine bind with envelope 058701-2 protein by the hydrophobic interactions with residues val52, val58, tyr59, val62 and val75 (figs. 1(d) and 1(e)). the receptor-binding region (rbd) of sars-cov-2 spike protein has high binding affinity with human ace2, and this motion is responsible for the recognition between virions and host cells, and subsequent membrane fusion. [10] our results revealed that arbidol, (s)-chloroquine, (r)-chloroquine and nhc can bind with ace2, with the interaction energies ( int ) values of −29.81, −30.84, −27.44 and −35.24 kcal/mol, respectively (table 1) . among them, arbidol has the h-bonding interactions with residues asn394, arg514 and tyr515, electrostatic interaction with residue asp206, and the hydrophobic interaction with residue tyr510 (fig. 2(b) ). there are h-bonding interactions involving (s)-/(r)-chloroquine with residue arg514. in addition, (s)-chloroquine also forms the hydrophobic interactions with three tyr amino acids (figs. 2(c) and 2(d)). nhc has the h-bonding interactions with residues tpr203, asp206, ser511 and arg514, respectively (fig. 2(e) ). taken together, the residues asp206 and arg514 are important in the binding processes of ligands with ace2. [ not work against the case of sars-cov-2, and small-molecule drugs may prove to be a better approach. [10−12] the interaction energies ( int ) of (s)-chloroquine, (r)-chloroquine and nhc with spike protein are −36.02, −34.12 and −38.22 kcal/mol, respectively (table 1 ). (s)-chloroquine has the hbonding interaction with residue gly10. the two iso-mers of chloroquine both have the hydrophobic interactions with residues phe9, phe13, tyr36 and leu184 (figs. 3(b) and 3(c) ). nhc possesses the h-bonding interactions with residues asp35 and val38, as well as the hydrophobic interactions with residues phe9, tyr36 and leu39 (fig. 3(d) ). this analysis of structure and energy shows that the main protease (3clpro) of sars-cov-2 should be a rational target for the drug development, with a relatively explicit and conservative structure. while the high-resolution crystal structure (accession code: 6lu7) determined by the group of professor zihe rao was used in the rapid structure-based screening with approved drug library of zinc database. [25] in accordance with our results, seven commercial drugs (mitoguazone, metformin, biguanide hydrochloride, gallic acid, caffeic acid, sulfaguanidine and acetylcysteine) should have therapeutic potentials in infections of sars-cov-2, with the ∆ bind values of −5.03, −6.72, −2.11, −12.81, −16.72, −18.54 and −9.13 kcal/mol, respectively (fig. 5) . van der waals components (∆ vdw + ∆ surf ) primarily drive the binding processes, with the contributions over 60% of ∆ bind , which is consistent with previous simulation results of antiviral drugs. [13, 19] in contrast to reported agents remdesivir, arbidol and chloroquine, the seven agents seem to induce more favorable bindings and possible inhibition of 3clpro ( fig. 4 and fig. s6 ). for instance, the seven sorted agents generally have the h-bonding interactions with residues met49, cys145, his164 and gln189 of 3clpro (fig. 4) , and all the docked complexes represent relatively good thermodynamic stabilities (fig. s6) . what is more interesting is that some of them are known to be used for the antiviral applications. mitoguazone (mgbg), which is a guanidino-containing compound with the similar structure of spermidine, inhibits the key enzymes of s-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase pathway or polyamine biosynthesis pathway. mgbg has been widely used in the treatment of aids. metformin and biguanide hydrochloride are hydrophilic and metabolically stable drugs, with minimal passive membrane permeability. metformin is now used as an oral hypoglycemic agent. [26] gallic acid has many potential therapeutic properties including anticancer and antimicrobial properties. [27] caffeic acid is an anti-inflammatory antioxidant, and has shown significant efficacy as an inhibitor of the jak2/stat3 pathway in the cancer cell lines. [28] sulfaguanidine is a very useful antibacterial drug that is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. in addition, it does not enter the bloodstream, and even very young children may be given in fairly large doses. [29] acetylcysteine is an antioxidant with thiol group, and could improve the experimental or clinical toxicity of ischemiareperfusion syndrome in the heart, kidney, lung and 058701-4 liver. moreover, acetylcysteine could inhibit inflammatory stimulation and hiv replication. [30] on basis of the steric and hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity characteristics of 3clpro, the charged groups (e.g., guanidino/carboxylate group) might contribute considerably to the ligand bindings, and benefit the inhibition of protease activities.in summary, we have performed a rapid structurebased virtual screening of the available information of protein structures and approved drug library. molecular modeling, docking and molecular dynamic simulations are used to reveal the inhibiting mechanisms of reported drugs (e.g., arbidol, chloroquine and remdesivir). these drugs may hinder the entry and release of virions through the bindings with human ace2, and viral spike and envelope proteins. in addition, nhc and triazavirin present the potential of clinical application. main protease (3clpro) is a kind of protease related to the virus replication, and should be a feasible target for rational drug design. based on the mechanism of action, mitoguazone, metformin, biguanide hydrochloride, gallic acid, caffeic acid, sulfaguanidine and acetylcysteine should be potential inhibitors of 3clpro, and their guanidino/carboxylate groups are helpful for the binding processes. in terms of low toxicity and druggability, they also seem to be drugs that can be used in clinical studies.the authors wish to thank professor zihe rao for supplying the crystal structure of main protease.zhi-wei yang(杨志伟) 1, 2, # , yi-zhen zhao(赵轶祯) 1, # , yong-jian zang(臧永健) 1 the same amino acid residues were highlighted by the colored bars. the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has caused a pandemic, threatening global public health. in the current paper, we describe our successful treatment of one covid-19 pneumonia patient case with high mortality risk factors. our experience underlines the importance of the use of a multidisciplinary therapeutic approach in order to achieve a favorable clinical outcome. further, enhancing the capability of the covid-19 diagnosis with the use of the chest imaging modalities is discussed.since late december 2019, there has been an outbreak of a novel enveloped rna betacoronavirus called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). this virus causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), whose spread has become an ongoing pandemic. the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 is the seventh member of the coronaviridae family known to infect humans (1). the estimated mortality rate of covid-19 so far is lower than that of sars or middle east respiratory syndrome covid19 (2) . however, the ongoing covid-19 pandemic is a significant health threat worldwide (3) . the clinical symptoms of covid-19 pneumonia are the same as the common upper respiratory tract infection, but the chest ct has a certain specificity (4) (5) . unfortunately, there are no vaccines or medicines approved for the novel coronavirus infection (6) , but more than 80 clinical trials have been launched to test coronavirus treatments, including some drug repurposing or repositioning for covid-19 (7).a 50-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with ongoing fever, chills, cough, fatigue, and shortness of breath for more than 20 days. in 2018, he had a history of follicular non-hodgkin lymphoma previously treated with chemotherapy. at the time of the last hospitalization he was in hematological remission. the initial physical examination revealed a bt of 39,4°c, blood pressure of 93/53 mm hg, pulse of 87 bpm, respiratory rate of 20 breath/min, and spo2 of 96% room air. the laboratory results reflected wbc 1,66 x 10^3 lymphopenia (0,35 x 10^3 ), aspartate aminotransferase 38 u/l, alanine aminotransferase 22 u/l, (in the normal range), c-reactive protein 9,37 mg/dl (range 0,00-0,49 mg/dl), and lactate dehydrogenase 350 u/l (range 0-247u/l). blood gas analysis showed ph :7,510; pco2 :30,0 mmhg; po2 :109,0 mmhg. high-resolution computed tomography (hrct) scan showed an alveolar interstitial thickness defined by ground-glass opacities with bilateral perihelia and peripheral distribution in combination with thickened interlobular and intralobular lines resembling an interstitial infection (fig1). the nucleic acid test of nasopharyngeal swabs was negative on two occasions. a diagnosis of severe covid-19 pneumonia and moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) was made by bronchoscopy and by concurrent bronchoalveolar lavage (balf), and the patient was placed in isolation. he was tested negative for influenza a/b virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), mycoplasma pneumoniae, cryptococcus haemolyticus antigen, aspergillus antigen, epstein-barr virus capsid antigen igm, and epstein-barr virus. on the other hand, the balf sample tested positive for sars-cov-2 ribonucleic acid. this suggests that the lung is possibly the main target of the sars cov-19 virus (8) . he was immediately admitted to the isolation ward. initial management consisted of hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, and large spectrum antibiotics for sars-cov19 pneumonia and possible concomitant bacterial infection. in order to reduce viral infectivity, viral replication, and the aberrant host inflammatory response, baricitinib tablets 4 mg/day was started. baricitinib is an inhibitor of janus kinase jak 1 and jak 2 and therefore it might help in managing the inflammation (9) . however, his cough, dyspnea, fatigue, and fever did not improve. when the patient's respiratory symptoms worsened in the setting of persistently elevated inflammatory markers, (interleukin6 (il)6 was 191 pg/ml) treatment with steroids 1mg/kg and the anti-interleukin (il) 6 receptor blocker tocilizumab, with 8 mg/kg body weight intravenously was started. after tocilizumab administration, the il-6 level decreased gradually, (from 196 pg/ml to 73 pg/ml) with gradual improvement of the respiratory symptoms and lung function, and his fever disappeared. hrct after 4 days from tocilizumab infusion showed an increase of ground-glass pattern with a widespread bilateral posterior predominance (involving 80% inferior lobes). the alterations described are highly suggestive for interstitial pneumonia which is highly concerning for changes secondary to viral pneumonia (fig 2) . the patient's clinical condition worsened, with dyspnea and spo2 to 91%under ambient air. given the radiographic findings and laboratory results (il6 was increased to 580 pg/ml and ferritin was 3.160,0 ng/m), the idea of persistent or active 2019-ncov rna viral replication was considered. clinicians pursued use of an investigational antiviral therapy. a request for the use of remdesivir was submitted. remdesivir arrived and a 200 mg iv loading dose was administered to the patient. this was followed by orders for remdesivir 100 mg iv maintenance dose every 24 hours for the next 9 days. supportive measures, in addition to hydroxychloroquine and steroids, were maintained. during the following 24 hours, the patient's clinical conditions improved, including dry cough and shortness of breath, and his spo2 improved to 92%-100% under ambient air. hrct (fig. 3) confirmed the improvement: reduction of ground-glass pattern, appearance of parenchymal consolidation with inferior lobar prevalence and perilobular and peribronchovascular distribution. the patient continues to be in stable condition on room air, his walking test is absolute negative, and he is progressing toward discharge. several host factors regulate the replication of coronaviruses and they simultaneously induce dramatic changes in the host cellular structure and function. t cell exhaustion is a state of t cell dysfunction that arises during many chronic infections and cancer. it is defined by poor effector function, sustained expression of inhibitory receptors, and a transcriptional state distinct from that of functional effector or memory t cells (10) . persistent stimulation by the virus may induce t cell exhaustion, leading to loss of cytokine production and reduced function (11) (12) . the number of total t cells and cd4+ and cd8+ t cells were dramatically reduced in covid-19 patients, especially in patients requiring intensive care. this case report describes that the positive rate of bronchoalveolar lavage for detection of new coronavirus nucleic acid was high, and balf analysis for suspected or confirmed new coronavirus pneumonia patients with negative detection of nucleic acid in pharynx swabs but showing residual lung lesions was helpful for early diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. we speculate that the virus migrates from the upper respiratory tract to the lower respiratory tract as the infection progresses, which may explain the negative test results of nasopharyngeal swabs. the application of potent antiviral treatments to prevent the progression to t cell exhaustion in susceptible patients may thus be critical to their recovery. we have read with great interest the successful application of remdesivir to cure a covid-19 patient, and clinical trials indicate that this drug may have significant potential as an antiviral (13-14-15) . there are some limitations to this report that must be considered. our context comes from a single patient treated with remdesivir in the course of the disease. this patient also received hydroxychloroquine, large spectrum antibiotic, janus kinase inhibitor, anti-jak, and tocilizumab. it is possible that these medications may have impacted his clinical course. he is also a 50-year-old patient with few comorbidities and his most significant risk factor for mortality is a history of follicular non-hodgkin lymphoma previously treated with chemotherapy in 2018, with additional recurrent pneumonia infection.this case report described an effective supportive medication scheme to treat sars-cov-2 infected patients and emphasized the necessity of detection of the viral genome using balf samples. our observation confirms that the radiologist plays a crucial role in the rapid identification and early diagnosis of new cases, which can be of great benefit not only to the patient but also to the larger public health surveillance and response system. the unconventional aspect of this case is that the analysis of the patient's upper respiratory tract specimen was repeatedly sars-cov-2 negative while that of balf sample was positive for sars-cov-2 virus. our report strongly suggests that tocilizumab can block the downstream signal transduction by binding mil-6r and sil-6r, and it plays a role in the treatment of cytokine storm caused by covid-19. previous literature has shown significantly reduced lung viral load and improved clinical signs of disease following remdesivir administration (16) and highlights that early initiation of remdesivir may be effective in treating sars-cov-2 .the novel coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) also known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is an enveloped, non-segmented positive-sense rna virus belonging to the beta-coronaviridae family. [1] covid-19 has been found to be the cause of severe pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) with a significantly high mortality rate. [2] according to the world health organization, there are 207,855 confirmed cases and 8648 deaths from covid-19 as of march 19, 2020 and rapidly increasing. [3] originating from bats like other virulent coronavirus (cov) strains such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), covid-19 has become the focus of the medical world and the pandemic of 2020. [1, 4] we present a case of elderly female presenting with fever, cough, and shortness of breath found to be positive for covid-19 and started on high-dose iv ascorbic acid, anti-interleukin-6, hydroxychloroquine, and remdesivir requiring high ventilator settings and eventually requiring vasopressors and continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (cvvhd).editor: maya saranathan.the authors have no conflicts of interests to disclose. this manuscript is a unique submission and is not being considered for publication by any other source in any medium. further, the manuscript has not been published, in part or in full, in any form.the patient's next of kin provided consent for this manuscript to be published.data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.a 77-year-old middle-eastern female with a medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia presented to the emergency department (ed) from a day care facility apartment where 2 people at the facility have tested positive for covid-19 but she did not have any direct contact with these individuals. about 5 days before admission the patient developed a fever with a temperature of 102°f at home, and went to her primary medical doctor who sent her to the ed. in the ed she was found to have bilateral opacities on chest x-ray and had continued intermittent fevers with generalized weakness, cough, lethargy, and dyspnea and was sent for testing for covid-19 then transferred to our facility for further management. in our facility, her temperature was 101.7°f, blood pressure 148/76 mm hg, heart rate of 99 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 per minute, and oxygen saturation of 93% on room air. physical exam was significant for a dry cough and bilateral rales on auscultation of the lung fields bilaterally but was unremarkable otherwise. a chest x-ray ( fig. 1 ) was performed showing bilateral opacities throughout the lung fields with predominance of the lower lung lobes she was admitted for possible pneumonia with isolation precautions for suspected covid-19 and was started on oxygen via nasal cannula and on 1-gram ceftazidime intravenously every 8 hours and 500 mg azithromycin orally daily. ct scan of the chest ( fig. 2 ) was performed showing bilateral ground glass appearance throughout the lung with predominance in the peripheral lower lobes. respiratory viral panel was sent including a repeat covid-19 test (table 1) . all results came back negative however the patient's condition deteriorated 2 days after admission to our facility, and she became hypoxic to 85% oxygen saturation while on nasal cannula and remained spiking fevers up to 103.4°f. she was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (icu) for further management and was switched to ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously daily and azithromycin 500 mg via orogastric tube daily and was started on hydroxychloroquine 400 mg loading dose followed by 200 mg twice daily for a 7-day course. she required 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (fio2) and a positive end-expiratory pressure (peep) of 12 to maintain an oxygen saturation of >90%. 12 hours later, the covid-19 test from the initial facility returned positive results. on day 3 of hospitalization she was started on 6 g of iv ascorbic acid twice daily and given one dose of 8 mg per kg (567 mg) of tocilizumab, an antiinterleukin-6 monoclonal antibody. due to a shortage of vitamin c in the hospital, her dose was decreased to 1 g iv daily on the 6th day of hospitalization and she was given another dose of tocilizumab. on day 7, her peep increased from 12 to 16 due to worsening oxygen saturation and increased requirement despite 100% fio2. due to severe ards, the decision was made to prone the patient for 18 hours a day. she completed her course of antibiotics and hydroxychloroquine but remained on vitamin c and zinc. approval for remdesivir was obtained from gilead sciences inc and she was given a loading dose of 200 mg on day 10 and due to worsening oxygen saturation her peep was again increased to 18. on day 11, the patient was unable to tolerate being prone due to significant desaturation to 65% on pulse oximetry and remained supine. she eventually required levophed for maintenance of hemodynamic stability and her creatinine increased from her baseline of 0.5-0.6 since admission until day 10 to 2.65 on day 12. for this reason, remdesivir was discontinued and nephrology was consulted and recommended cvvhd on day 13. on day 14 her peep requirement again increased to 20 while on 100% fio2 to maintain an oxygen saturation >90%. her condition remained critical while being aggressively managed in the icu and ultimately the patient's family decision was to pursue comfort measures and the patient passed away.covid-19 is the cause of severe viral pneumonia rapidly leading to ards. in a case series of 135 patients, wan et al reported 88.9% of patients presented with a fever and 76.5% had a cough. [5] fatigue and myalgias (32.5%), headache (17.7%), and dyspnea (13.3%) were less commonly reported. [5] these symptoms were also found on presentation with our patient. while the covid-19 tests were pending, the ct scan of the chest provided valuable information as it met the trend of findings in infected patients. wan et al obtained ct scans on all patients in their study and found bilateral involvement and multiple patchy or ground glass appearance to be the primary finding. [5] huang et al found similar findings where 98% of ct scans obtained had bilateral involvement and multilobular consolidations. [6] these findings on ct scans are not unusual for a viral pneumonia. influenza a (h1n1) was first found to cause a pandemic in 2009, a retrospective review of 92 patients by çörtük et al found 69.6% of patients with h1n1 had bilateral patchy pneumonic infiltrates douedi and miskoff medicine (2020) 99:19 www.md-journal.com and 41.3% had bilateral ground glass opacities. [7] while the lack of rapid testing for covid-19 has caused a delay in diagnosis, perhaps the use of ct scans could provide an increased suspicion of covid-19 infection leading to earlier treatment and management.our patient presented in this case received treatment with vitamin c and zinc, both of which are known to improve the human immune system and aid in shortening the duration of and improving outcomes in respiratory infections including pneumonia. [8, 9] in addition to vitamin and mineral supplements, hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin have obtained a large amount of attention for the treatment of covid-19. hydroxychloroquine, a well-known antimalarial and auto-immune medication, is relatively inexpensive and has been extensively studied in the treatment for covid-19. studies have suggested hydroxychloroquine can interfere with glycosylation of the coronavirus receptors and increase endosomal ph thus inhibiting viral fusion and decreasing viral load. [10, 11] gautret et al reported a synergistic effect using hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin in viral elimination and decreasing viral load. [12] despite this evidence, the use of hydroxychloroquine for viral infections has been questioned. roques et al reported a study using chloroquine in chikungunya virus reporting cytokines were reduced causing the adaptive immune response to be delayed, exacerbating fever, and unchanged suppression of viral load. [13] while further studies are in need to provide concrete evidence on the use of hydroxychloroquine, clinical trials from china have already shown promising results for covid-19 and several countries around the world have begun using these medications. tocilizumab, a recombinant humanized anti-interleukin-6 receptor monoclonal antibody, has been extensively used in auto-immune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. [14] with this monoclonal antibody, interleukin-6 function is blocked and hence the differentiation of t helper cells and b cells into immunoglobulin-secreting cells are inhibited. [14] the cytokine storm observed in patients with covid-19 has been difficult to control and manage leading to increased mortality, tocilizumab therefore helps decrease the immune response and the resulting damage caused by cytokines. [6, 15] while still not approved in the united states, tocilizumab has thus far shown promising results in clinical trials. [15] other treatments for covid-19 have also emerged and have thus far shown promising results in ongoing clinical trials. of these, remdesivir (gs-5734) and favipiravir (t-705) have become the center of attention. remdesivir is an adenosine analog that incorporates into viral rna causing premature termination. [10, 14] it has been found effective at inhibiting viral replication in ebola, sars-cov, and mers-cov infections. [10, 16, 17] favipiravir, an rna-dependent rna polymerase inhibitor, has already obtained approval for the treatment of covid-19 in china on february 15th, 2020. [18] studies have shown favipiravir inhibited rna polymerase activity and thus prevented replication of rna viruses like covid-19 with minimal side effects. [18] remdesivir (gs-5734, gilead sciences inc.) is currently under several clinical trials and all of its side effects have not yet been defined. in our patient, within 2 days of starting remdesivir our patient had worsening renal function eventually requiring cvvhd and vasopressors thus preventing further treatment with the medication. while our patient was critically ill in the icu, it is not known if this medication was the cause for further decompensation due to kidney injury. further studies and clinical trials are required to fully understand the role of remdesivir and other medications in covid-19 infected patients.covid-19 is a serious infection that has led to thousands of cases of severe pneumonia, ards, and even deaths across the globe. as of now there are no approved treatments for this viral pandemic. while several medications have shown to be effective in clinical trials, further studies are needed to establish dosing, treatment course, and side effects of these medications. as the number of cases and deaths continue to increase in the world, the race to develop faster testing modalities to rapidly diagnose and manage these patients earlier continues to be the focus of the global healthcare system. in december 2019, a novel pneumonia caused by a previously unknown pathogen emerged in wuhan, a city of 11 million people in central china. the initial cases were linked to exposures in a seafood market in wuhan.1 as of january 27, 2020, the chinese authorities reported 2835 confirmed cases in mainland china, including 81 deaths. additionally, 19 confirmed cases were identified in hong kong, macao and taiwan, and 39 imported cases were identified in thailand, japan, south korea, united states, vietnam, singapore, nepal, france, australia and canada. the pathogen was soon identified as a novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), which is closely related to sever acute respiratory syndrome cov (sars-cov).2 currently, there is no specific treatment against the new virus. therefore, identifying effective antiviral agents to combat the disease is urgently needed.an efficient approach to drug discovery is to test whether the existing antiviral drugs are effective in treating related viral infections. the 2019-ncov belongs to betacoronavirus which also contains sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov). several drugs, such as ribavirin, interferon, lopinavir-ritonavir, corticosteroids, have been used in patients with sars or mers, although the efficacy of some drugs remains controversial.3 in this study, we evaluated the antiviral efficiency of five fad-approved drugs including ribavirin, penciclovir, nitazoxanide, nafamostat, chloroquine and two well-known broad-spectrum antiviral drugs remdesivir (gs-5734) and favipiravir (t-705) against a clinical isolate of 2019-ncov in vitro.standard assays were carried out to measure the effects of these compounds on the cytotoxicity, virus yield and infection rates of 2019-ncovs. firstly, the cytotoxicity of the candidate compounds in vero e6 cells (atcc-1586) was determined by the cck8 assay. then, vero e6 cells were infected with ncov-2019betacov/wuhan/wiv04/20192 at a multiplicity of infection (moi) of 0.05 in the presence of varying concentrations of the test drugs. dmso was used in the controls. efficacies were evaluated by quantification of viral copy numbers in the cell supernatant via quantitative real-time rt-pcr (qrt-pcr) and confirmed with visualization of virus nucleoprotein (np) expression through immunofluorescence microscopy at 48 h post infection (p.i.) (cytopathic effect was not obvious at this time point of infection). among the seven tested drugs, high concentrations of three nucleoside analogs including ribavirin (half-maximal effective concentration (ec50) = 109.50 μm, half-cytotoxic concentration (cc50) > 400 μm, selectivity index (si) > 3.65), penciclovir (ec50 = 95.96 μm, cc50 > 400 μm, si > 4.17) and favipiravir (ec50 = 61.88 μm, cc50 > 400 μm, si > 6.46) were required to reduce the viral infection (fig. 1a and supplementary information, fig. s1). however, favipiravir has been shown to be 100% effective in protecting mice against ebola virus challenge, although its ec50 value in vero e6 cells was as high as 67 μm,4 suggesting further in vivo studies are recommended to evaluate this antiviral nucleoside. nafamostat, a potent inhibitor of mers-cov, which prevents membrane fusion, was inhibitive against the 2019-ncov infection (ec50 = 22.50 μm, cc50 > 100 μm, si > 4.44). nitazoxanide, a commercial antiprotozoal agent with an antiviral potential against a broad range of viruses including human and animal coronaviruses, inhibited the 2019-ncov at a low-micromolar concentration (ec50 = 2.12 μm; cc50 > 35.53 μm; si > 16.76). further in vivo evaluation of this drug against 2019-ncov infection is recommended. notably, two compounds remdesivir (ec50 = 0.77 μm; cc50 > 100 μm; si > 129.87) and chloroquine (ec50 = 1.13 μm; cc50 > 100 μm, si > 88.50) potently blocked virus infection at low-micromolar concentration and showed high si (fig. 1a, b).remdesivir has been recently recognized as a promising antiviral drug against a wide array of rna viruses (including sars/mers-cov5) infection in cultured cells, mice and nonhuman primate (nhp) models. it is currently under clinical development for the treatment of ebola virus infection.6 remdesivir is an adenosine analogue, which incorporates into nascent viral rna chains and results in pre-mature termination.7 our time-of-addition assay showed remdesivir functioned at a stage post virus entry (fig. 1c, d), which is in agreement with its putative anti-viral mechanism as a nucleotide analogue. warren et al. showed that in nhp model, intravenous administration of 10 mg/kg dose of remdesivir resulted in concomitant persistent levels of its active form in the blood (10 μm) and conferred 100% protection against ebola virus infection.7 our data showed that ec90 value of remdesivir against 2019-ncov in vero e6 cells was 1.76 μm, suggesting its working concentration is likely to be achieved in nhp. our preliminary data (supplementary information, fig. s2) showed that remdesivir also inhibited virus infection efficiently in a human cell line (human liver cancer huh-7 cells), which is sensitive to 2019-ncov.2chloroquine, a widely-used anti-malarial and autoimmune disease drug, has recently been reported as a potential broad-spectrum antiviral drug.8,9 chloroquine is known to block virus infection by increasing endosomal ph required for virus/cell fusion, as well as interfering with the glycosylation of cellular receptors of sars-cov.10 our time-of-addition assay demonstrated that chloroquine functioned at both entry, and at post-entry stages of the 2019-ncov infection in vero e6 cells (fig. 1c, d). besides its antiviral activity, chloroquine has an immune-modulating activity, which may synergistically enhance its antiviral effect in vivo. chloroquine is widely distributed in the whole body, including lung, after oral administration. the ec90 value of chloroquine against the 2019-ncov in vero e6 cells was 6.90 μm, which can be clinically achievable as demonstrated in the plasma of rheumatoid arthritis patients who received 500 mg administration.11 chloroquine is a cheap and a safe drug that has been used for more than 70 years and, therefore, it is potentially clinically applicable against the 2019-ncov.our findings reveal that remdesivir and chloroquine are highly effective in the control of 2019-ncov infection in vitro. since these compounds have been used in human patients with a safety track record and shown to be effective against various ailments, we suggest that they should be assessed in human patients suffering from the novel coronavirus disease.in late february, when reports of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) transmission in california started to emerge, nevan krogan's molecular biology lab went into overdrive. everyone in the lab switched to studying how viral proteins affect host cells. the group, at the university of california, san francisco, came up with a schedule of lab shifts to work around the clock while maintaining at least six feet of space between colleagues. although a mass spectrometer broke down and the group failed to synthesize three viral proteins, the last pieces of data-revealing which host proteins interacted with viral proteins-came in just as the lab shut down to comply with the state's shelter-inplace orders.last month, the team published a preprint describing 69 potential drugs-24 of them already approved by the us food and drug administration (fda) for other diseases-that could help treat coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) patients. the team identified the drugs by studying how 26 of the virus's 29 proteins interact with host cells (1). in cell cultures, the researchers used synthetic versions of viral proteins to uncover the human proteins that bound to each viral molecule. then they identified small molecules that bind to the host proteins or otherwise interact with them via cellular pathways.the host-virus interactions that krogan's lab identified offer up clues as to why this new coronavirus causes symptoms that range from diarrhea and an inability to smell, to pneumonia and fatal multiorgan failure. "other coronaviruses are similar but not as virulent," krogan says. "in terms of protein interactions, this virus seems to hijack and rewire so many different cellular pathways-it gets its fingers into all the key machinery of a cell."the race is on to stop the virus from wreaking havoc on those many pathways. armies of researchers around the world have launched covid-19 clinical trials and completed studies at record pace. most focus on drugs that are already approved for other indications. whereas some are studying molecules that target host proteins, others are testing drugs that attack the viral machinery, such as the oft-cited remdesivir from foster city, cabased gilead sciences. in march, the world health organization announced large-scale clinical trials for four promising drugs: the malaria medications chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, remdesivir, hiv antivirals lopinavir-ritonavir, and a combination of these hiv drugs with interferon-beta, an immune system molecule.the molecular similarities of sars-cov-2 to other pathogens such as sars have helped accelerate the hunt for treatments. it's also given clinicians muchneeded emergency options for helping severely ill patients. remdesivir has received widespread attention, and based on preliminary evidence from a few phase iii trials, the fda granted emergency use authorization for the drug on may 1. in the case of the much-touted antimalarials chloroquine and hydroxychloroquinewhich purportedly act by raising the ph inside the cell's endosomes and lysosomes to attract and trap the virus, and thus block it from proliferating-the evidence is more tenuous. the primary article suggesting some efficacy against covid-19 recently received an "expression of concern" from the society that publishes the journal in which it appeared (2). and researchers and physicians are wary of potentially dangerous cardiac side effects. although the drugs are still available for off-label use, an nih panel recommended against the combination treatment of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin because of these side effects. the infectious diseases society of america also recommended that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine should only be given to patients as part of a clinical trial.of course, doctors and patients are clamoring for some therapeutic hope. "as of now, clinicians do everything they can to keep severely ill patients breathing," says biochemical virologist matthias gotte of the university of alberta in canada. "there's no standard drug or antiviral treatment that has been approved." still, the many potential candidates being pursued by krogan's lab and others offer the possibility that one or more effective drugs, using multiple strategies, could be approved for widespread use in the coming months.there are more than 3 million confirmed covid-19 cases around the world. although the virus was first reported in late 2019, the first randomized, controlled trials to test drugs for effectiveness against the infection were only announced in march. to date, gilead's remdesivir, an antiviral originally developed to combat ebola, is among the most widely used, under the fda's compassionate use guidelines. the first person in the united states to be diagnosed with covid-19 was treated with intravenous remdesivir and improved shortly after (3). on april 4, the company announced an "expanded access" program so hospitals can apply for the drug to treat multiple patients.remdesivir mimics adenosine nucleosides, which constitute one of the building blocks of genetic material. "it's a very logical target," gotte explains. "the most compelling argument in its favor is that most currently approved antivirals for hiv, hepatitis c, and even dna viruses are such nucleotide analogs," suggesting that they are key to targeting viruses.as the viral rna polymerase enzyme builds a new copy of its rna, remdesivir competes with the nucleotide atp, inserts itself into the viral genome, and halts the virus from replicating its genetic material. this inhibition is only effective if the enzyme frequently substitutes its natural substrate with the pharmaceutical analog. "but these are analogs, so the logic is that all these viral enzymes always prefer the natural substrate," gotte says.in a recent study, gotte and his colleagues tested how remdesivir might work on middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus, a pathogen related to sars-cov-2 (4). the team expressed the mers polymerase enzyme in insect cells and found that remdesivir was incorporated three times more often than its natural counterpart, suggesting that the drug might prove to be a potent viral inhibitor.once remdesivir was inserted into a growing rna chain, the mers enzyme halted after adding just three more nucleotides, whereas the ebola polymerase, in contrast, did not accept the drug as efficiently and allowed the rna chain to grow longer before it stopped viral replication. this might be an early hint that the drug is more effective against mers than ebola. "the nuances of inhibition are different," gotte explains.on april 13, gotte's team published results testing remdesivir with the sars-cov-2 polymerase (5) . "we obtained almost identical results as previously reported with the mers enzyme," gotte says. "sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and mers use remdesivir with the same high efficiency." apart from preliminary clinical evidence, this work is the first direct mechanistic evidence that remdesivir can act against the new pathogen.right now, precisely what a doctor will prescribe to someone with symptoms of covid-19 depends on several factors, including the patient's symptoms, age, or other illnesses, explains neera ahuja, division chief of hospital medicine at stanford university in palo alto, ca. those with milder symptoms quarantined at home may receive oral medications such as chloroquine, whereas remdesivir, which must be given intravenously, is usually used in more severe cases.but researchers are frantically hunting for more evidence of what will work to treat the greatest number of patients. ahuja is leading one of several randomized trials to test remdesivir in covid-19 patients around the world. at 65 clinics, global collaborators aim to evaluate the drug in patients with varied symptoms. the trial is an "adaptive" one, so the team can alter strategies such as patient eligibility or measures of drug effectiveness as data roll in each day.in preclinical studies with ebola infections in monkeys, remdesivir didn't appear to have serious side effects and seemed most effective at treating disease when used within the first few days of infection. "animal models often set the stage to understand how these drugs will work in humans," says kari nadeau, professor of medicine and pediatrics at stanford university and co-investigator on the trial. "but it's not as if this drug has ever been tested in monkeys that were experiencing severe respiratory distress or a cytokine storm," nadeau adds, alluding to the deadly out-of-control immune system reaction that's killed some patients.several other remdesivir trials are underway, including some by drug manufacturer gilead. two weeks ago, the company's phase iii trial criteria were expanded to include thousands more participants and to include patients who are on mechanical ventilation. the company also reported preliminary results from 53 patients who received the drug via the compassionate use program; 36 of the 53 showed signs of clinical improvement (6) . but the data were not from a randomized clinical trial and hence lacked a control to gauge how patients would have done without the drug.on april 16, media outlet stat news reported that, according to a leaked video from one study site at the university of chicago, several patients treated with remdesivir in the company's phase iii trials showed significant improvements. the leaked video contained no information about a placebo-controlled group. a statement from the university of chicago, quoted by stat news, said: "drawing any conclusions at this point is premature and scientifically unsound." an april 10 statement from gilead stated that investigations into remdesivir must not only elucidate safety and efficacy but also demonstrate "in which patients it shows activity, how long should they receive treatment, and at what stage of their disease would treatment be most beneficial."then, on april 29, two further reports were published: a gilead-sponsored trial in china of 237 patients found that remdesivir offered no clinically significant benefits compared to a placebo (7). but early results from the nih-sponsored trial, where ahuja and nadeau are co-investigators, reported that compared to a placebo, remdesivir shortened the time to recovery from 15 days to 11, and also appeared to decrease mortality rates from 11.6% to 8%.because remdesivir aims at viral enzymes it's unlikely to be toxic; the drug shouldn't, in theory, interfere with human versions of rna polymerases. "but many of these small molecule drugs can also be processed by the kidney or liver, so we do have to watch out for side effects," nadeau says.concerns about side effects are greater with another group of medications: those that target host proteins that the virus needs to enter cells and cause disease. one such drug, the antimalarial chloroquine, was found to block sars-1 from entering primate cells by modifying the host cell receptors that the virus needs to bind (8) .to understand how similar sars-cov-2 is to sars-1, stefan pohlmann of the university of göttingen in germany and his colleagues studied how the new virus binds to host cells and initiates infections. they found that the two viruses used the same surface receptor, called ace2, to enter cells and the same proteincutting enzyme, known as a protease, to become infectious. "coronaviruses need to be activated by having their surface proteins cleaved by a host cell enzyme," pohlmann says. "earlier, it was believed that viruses used several different proteases for their activation."recent studies have found that many clinically relevant viruses, including mers, sars, influenza a, and the new sars-cov-2, all rely on one particular enzyme, known as tmprss2 (9) . "if this enzyme is hit, these viruses have a problem," pohlmann says. identifying broadly applicable targets such as tmprss2, says pohlmann, is "exactly what's needed to prevent pandemics like this."his team found that camostat mesylate, a molecule that inhibits tmprss2, could prevent sars-cov-2 from infecting cultured human lung cells. the drug is currently approved to treat chronic pancreatitis in japan and might prove useful in patients who display clear symptoms but aren't in critical condition, pohlmann says.krogan and his collaborators are also moving several of the drugs identified in their screen into clinical tests for covid-19. twenty-four of these drugs are approved for other indications, such as the common diabetes drug metformin, as well as others used to treat cancer, parkinson's disease, and hypertension.as is often the case with infectious diseases, the influence of the novel coronavirus on the human immune system is at times more deadly than the pathogen itself. covid-19 patients, particularly those with severe infections, often experience a runaway immune response; inflammatory molecules cause a dangerous cytokine storm. some drugs currently being tested, such as interferon-β or an interleukin-6 inhibitor (named tocilizumab), are immune regulatory molecules that may work to dial down this immune response.other trials are looking to recruit the help of the immune system. recent trials have turned to antibodies generated by people who have successfully recovered from covid-19 infections. some hospitals have begun using plasma donated by such survivors to treat patients, and researchers at several hospitals have initiated trials to evaluate convalescent plasma as a treatment. it's not a new idea. this treatment was first attempted during the 1918 flu pandemic, and doctors have turned to it as a last-ditch means to counter measles, pneumonia, and other infections.the treatment relies on antibodies that target the pathogen in question. although it's not a cure-or a sustainable way to combat infections-it can serve as a stopgap measure to help critically ill patients. early results suggest that the method may prove effective against covid-19 (10). at least two startups, chinese-us firm brii biosciences and south san francisco-based centivax, are isolating and developing antibodybased treatments.these immune-targeting medicines may prove more effective in severe cases, because "by the time patients develop serious respiratory distress, an antiviral alone may be insufficient," says paul goepfert, infectious diseases researcher at the university of alabama in birmingham. but these immunosuppressants can also increase the risk of infection from other pathogens-a possibility that will need further tests, he adds.thus far, evidence to support-or undermine-clinicians' use of remdesivir, lopinavir, and other drugs has only emerged from preclinical studies or very small studies of human patients. only data from randomized trials will reveal whether and how any of these medications should be recommended to covid-19 patients. in the future, researchers may also be able to look back to examine clinical records and identify drug combinations or patients' responses to different treatment regimens.one reason for the lack of data on these medications is that drugs developed for sars never reached clinical trials, goepfert notes. "when the sars epidemic died down, ideally we should have kept going with drug development," he says. "but nobody was willing to fund it so the research died down too."now, gilead has also rushed to scale-up remdesivir production to match global needs. the process usually requires a sequence of sensitive chemical reactions, many needing novel substrates. because the drug is given intravenously, production has to occur in specialized sterile conditions. on april 4, the company announced that they had increased available amounts and reduced production time by months.eventually, clinicians will likely use both drugs that block the virus from multiplying as well as medications that inhibit host proteins that viruses hijack. although virus-directed therapeutics are less likely to interfere with human metabolic pathways-and thus have fewer side effects-viruses can develop evasive mutations. this is less of a problem with therapies targeting host proteins.however, host-directed drugs, such as chloroquine, must minimize toxic side effects that can arise from inhibiting cellular enzymes. these issues commonly occur when drugs that target human metabolism are used to treat chronic conditions, such as autoimmune diseases. but these drugs may be less problematic "if someone just needs a few days of treatment to help fight off an acute infection," krogan explains. "in the short term, these drugs may help individuals who are in the most desperate need," he adds, "while we develop prophylactics and longerterm solutions such as vaccines." therapeutics aimed at host enzymes offer another perk: their targets appear to be used by many viruses and, because they're essential human proteins, don't mutate quickly. so they don't just offer a path out of the current crisis-they might be the solution to avoiding the next one."as we've looked at maps of how these different viruses interact with human proteins, we see similar host machinery coming up again and again," krogan says. it's a promising sign. "if we had a nontoxic treatment that targeted the human protein," krogan adds, "this could be a treatment not just for covid-19 but for something else that comes up down the line, including other viruses that we don't even know yet."coronavirus disease 2019 sars-cov-2severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 the horrific pandemic outbreak of covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) around the world caught the health care systems in every country by storm, most if not all were caught off guard without proper defense mechanisms to cope with and to control such a pandemic. covid-19, caused by a new and novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, sars-cov-2), has recently been identified and characterized [1••] . coronaviruses are named for their crown-like spikes on their surface and there are four main sub-groupings of coronaviruses, known as alpha, beta, gamma, and delta [1, 2] . sars-cov-2 belongs to the beta sub-grouping, and is one of the seventh coronavirus to date infecting humans [1••] . some coronaviruses such as 229e alpha coronavirus [3] , oc43 beta coronavirus [4] , nl63 alpha coronavirus [5] , and hku1 beta coronavirus [6] were associated with mild clinical symptoms, whereas sars-cov beta coronavirus [7] , middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) beta coronavirus [8] , and sars-cov-2 caused severe diseases [2] . sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus with 29,891 bases, 96% identical at the whole-genome level to a bat coronavirus, and shares 79.6% sequence identity to sars-cov [1••] . sars-cov-2 encodes spike s protein containing receptor binding domain (rbd) that binds to the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), and promotes membrane fusion and uptakes of the virus into human cells such as the lung by endocytosis [1, [9] [10] [11] . upon entering the human cells, sars-cov-2, like other coronaviruses, will takeover or hijack the human cells' protein synthesis machinery to synthesize the viral proteins and assemble the proteins and subsequent viral replication [12•] .once inside the human body, viruses in general will trigger a series of good versus bad host responses including autophagy, apoptosis, stress response, and innate immunity [13] . fortunately, majority (more than 80%) of sars-cov-2infected individuals are asymptomatic or have mild symptoms, most likely due to the activation of the good response. these good responders would likely activate the body's innate immune system by activating the body's antiviral defense mechanisms including natural killer cells and antiviral t cells, and induction of interferon (ifn) [13] [14] [15] [16] . unfortunately, in about 20% of sars-cov-2-infected individuals including the immune compromised, elderly, patients with underlying health conditions such as cardiovascular and pulmonary problems, diabetics, hypertension, obesity, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (or copd, such as emphysema), pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and interstitial lung disease [17, 18] would encounter more severe disease characterized by significant respiratory symptoms leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and even death. an important consideration to note is that ards occurs later in disease progression and is preceded by acute lung injury (ali) [19] . this distinction may inform treatment strategy in terms of drugs directed towards cytokine storm and thrombosis which is described in this manuscript. a study on sars-cov and mers-cov has found that these two coronaviruses appear to have evolved mechanisms to attenuate or delay ifn production, resulting in enhanced inflammatory host responses and severe lung injury [12, 13, [20] [21] [22] . this aberrant host immune response with the production of powerful inflammatory cytokines, known as "cytokine storm" found in sars-cov-and mers-covinfected patients, would correlate with disease severity and poor prognosis [13, 16, [20] [21] [22] [23] . severe covid-19 patients exhibit profound inflammatory response [24, 25] . transcriptomic rna-seq analysis of covid-19 patients has revealed that several immune pathways and pro-inflammatory cytokines cxcl, ccl2, cxcl2, ccl8, il33, and ccl3l1 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf) and tnfsf10, cxcl10, il10, timp1, c5, il18, areg, and nrg1 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmc) were induced by sars-cov-2 infection, suggesting a sustained inflammation and cytokine storm [26] . importantly, sars-cov-2 infection-induced excessive cytokine release correlates with lung tissue injury and covid-19 pathogenesis [26] . this estimated 20% of patients developing more severe disease with sars-cov-2 infection are most likely due to genetics, epigenetics, and or other factors, with dampened innate immune response to fight the virus coupled with enhanced viral load leading to cytokine storm, severe inflammatory/oxidative stress response, and severe lung injury secondary to ards. while there is clear understanding that the respiratory system is dramatically impacted in covid-19 patients, evidence suggests that other organ systems are also affected. emerging data show that sars-cov-2 may lead to damage to other organs including the heart and brain. nearly 20% of hospitalized patients with covid-19 have indication of cardiac damage [17] . furthermore, neurologic symptoms have been reported in patients and infection of sars-cov-2 has been found in the brainstem of both humans and experimental animals [18, 19] .currently, there is no vaccine and/or specific therapeutic drugs targeting the sars-cov-2. hence, it remains a major challenge to decide what potential therapeutic regimens to prevent and treat the severely sick covid-19 patients. effective vaccines are essential to combat against the extremely contagious sars-cov-2. at present, a lot of research efforts have been invested to develop vaccines around the world. until we have specific vaccines or therapeutic drugs targeting sars-cov-2, "repurposed" drugs that have been approved by the fda in the usa for other indications have been used to treat covid-19 patients. this review will summarize the most current pharmacotherapeutics prescribed in the treatment of severe cases of covid-19 patients. these include antiviral therapy, antibiotics, systemic corticosteroids and anti-inflammatory drugs (including anti-arthritis drugs), neuraminidase inhibitors, rna synthesis inhibitors, convalescent plasma, and traditional herbal medicines.in the absence of definitive and specific treatment regimens, strategies including early diagnosis, timely reporting, isolation, and supportive treatments are important line of actions against covid-19 infections. current social practices including timely release of epidemic information and maintenance of social orders and personal practices such as improving personal hygiene, wearing facial coverings or masks, adequate rest, and keeping rooms well ventilated remain some of first line of actions against covid-19 pandemic.at present, the treatments of patients with sars-cov-2 infection are mainly repurposing the available therapeutic drugs and based on symptomatic conditions. considering ards, followed by secondary infections, antibiotics, antiviral therapy, systemic corticosteroids, and anti-inflammatory drugs (including anti-arthritis drugs) are often used in the treatment regimens. in addition to antiviral interferers and antibiotics, neuraminidase inhibitors, rna synthesis inhibitors, convalescent plasma, and traditional herbal medicines have also been utilized in the treatment of covid-19 [27] . nevertheless, the efficacy of these treatment regimens remains to be verified by appropriately designed clinical trials.remdesivir is a potential drug for treatment of covid-19. it is a phosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine c-nucleoside and a broad-spectrum antiviral agent synthesized and developed by gilead sciences in 2017 as a treatment for ebola virus infection [28] . remdesivir is metabolized into its active form, gs-441524, that obscures viral rna polymerase and evades proofreading by viral exonuclease, causing a decrease in viral rna production. the antiviral mechanism of remdesivir is a delayed chain cessation of nascent viral rna.animal experiments indicate that remdesivir can effectively reduce the viral load in lung tissue of mice infected with mers-cov, improve lung function, and alleviate pathological damage to lung tissue [29] . wang [31] . in order to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the drug in patients with covid-19, a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, multicenter, phase iii clinical trial was launched on february 5, 2020 in china. patients in the experimental group received an initial dose of 200 mg of remdesivir and a subsequent dose of 100 mg for 9 consecutive days via intravenous infusion in addition to routine treatment. patients in the control group received same dose of placebo treatment. the trial is expected to conclude by the end of april 2020. the number of cases planned to be enrolled is 308 and 452, respectively [32, 33]. current recommendation for remdesivir includes a 10-day regimen of remdesivir treatment: 200 mg loading dose on day 1, followed by 100 mg once-daily maintenance doses for 9 days in both studies. this regimen of remdesivir therapy is similar to that of former randomized clinical trial against the ebola virus [32, 33]. in a summary of subjects receiving remdesivir via compassionate use in the usa, nearly 70% of patients had improvement in terms of oxygen requirements and many patients that were mechanically ventilated were extubated. this report did not include a control group; therefore, extrapolating these results is difficult. it is too early to conclude the direct antiviral effect of remdesivir on the enhanced clearing of viral loads in the respiratory tract, but it indeed suggests a promising therapeutic effect of remdesivir [34] .chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are drugs with a long history of clinical use with similar chemical structures often used in the treatment of lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and malaria [35] . compared with chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine has a hydroxyl group, which makes it less toxic while maintaining similar activity. one mechanism of action of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine is targeting lysosome which may be useful to control graft-versus-host disease in humans [36] . with the accumulation of chloroquine in lysosomes, the ph of lysosomes is significantly changed and the activity of proteases in lysosomes is directly affected, thus affecting the degradation of proteins and glycosaminoglycan [36, 37] . chloroquine can inhibit the entry of sars-cov-2 and prevent virus-cell fusion by interfering with glycosylation of ace2 receptor and its binding with spike protein, suggesting that chloroquine treatment might be more effective in the early stage of infection, before covid-19 reduces ace2 expression and activity [30, 38, 39] . hydroxychloroquine possesses anti-inflammatory effect on th17-related cytokines (il-6, il-17, and il-22) in healthy individuals, and systemic lupus erythematosus (sle) and rheumatoid arthritis (ra) patients [40] . there is some evidence that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can reduce cytokine storm. according to one analysis, the main cause of death of covid-19 patients is related to the triggering of the cytokine storm, which contributed to acute respiratory distress [41] . it has been reported that hydroxychloroquine is effective in inhibiting sars-cov-2 infection in vitro [1, 39, 42] . zinc inhibits sars-covand retrovirus rna polymerase activity in vitro and zinc ionophores block the replication of these viruses in cell culture [43] . there is also evidence that zinc enhances chloroquine intracellular uptake [44] . as such, combining zinc with chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine is intriguing and is currently under investigation. overall, more clinical trials are underway to evaluate the safety and efficacy of hydroxychloroquine as a prophylactic and treatment for covid-19. the us fda has issued emergency authorization for the use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of covid-19. a recent study by tang et al. reported that hydroxychloroquine did not lead to higher negative conversion rates, but had reduced clinical symptoms through the anti-inflammatory properties and recovery of lymphopenia [45•] . it has also been reported that high doses of chloroquine (600 mg twice daily for 10 days or total dose of 12 g) may be associated with significant cardiac risks and should not be recommended for treating covid-19 [46• ]. there is still a lack of evidence regarding the safety and effectiveness of these agents in treating covid-19. in this regard, clinicians and patients should be made aware of the risk versus benefit profile of these medications [47] .lopinavir is a protease inhibitor with high specificity for hiv-1 protease. lopinavir is marketed and administered exclusively in combination with ritonavir. this combination was first marketed by abbott under the brand name kaletra in 2000 [48] . due to lopinavir's poor oral bioavailability and extensive biotransformation, it is co-formulated with ritonavir to enhance its exposure. ritonavir is a potent inhibitor of the enzymes that are responsible for lopinavir metabolism, and its co-administration "boosts" lopinavir exposure and improves antiviral activity [48] . lopinavir is a peptidomimetic molecule, containing a hydroxyethylene scaffold that mimics the peptide linkage typically targeted by the hiv-1 protease enzyme but which by itself cannot be cleaved, thus preventing the activity of the hiv-1 protease [49] .lopinavir-ritonavir was investigated in an open-label, individually randomized, controlled trial, where patients with covid-19 received either lopinavir-ritonavir 400 mg/ 100 mg, orally twice daily plus standard of care, or standard of care alone. no benefit was observed with lopinavirritonavir treatment beyond standard care. diarrhea, nausea, and asthenia were the most frequently reported adverse effects in patients receiving lopinavir-ritonavir-based regimen [50] . interestingly, in a report from korea, lopinavir-ritonavir administration significantly decreased coronavirus titers with no or little coronavirus titers were observed in the follow-up study. however, the analysis included a single patient in the initial phase of outbreak in korea [51] .umifenovir (branded as arbidol), a derivative of indole carboxylic acids, was first developed in 1988 in russia and has since been approved in russia and china for treating prophylaxis and infections associated with influenza a and b, and other arbovirus [52] . later on, umifenovir demonstrated in vitro antiviral efficacy in widely spreading virus strains such as the ebola virus, human herpesvirus 8 (hhv-8), hepatitis c virus (hcv), and tacaribe arenavirus [53] . its major mechanism of action is to block the virus-cell membrane fusion as well as virus-endosome fusion through incorporation into cell membranes and interference with the hydrogen bonding network of phospholipids [54] . in influenza virus, it has been shown to directly interact with virus particles to stabilize hemagglutinin (ha), reducing the likelihood of reaching the low ph threshold required for conformational transition into functional fusogenic ha [55] . blaising et al. reported the in vitro activity of umifenovir against sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 [56, 57] . a retrospective cohort study has reported that compared with lopinavir-ritonavir (lpv-rtv) only group, combination of umifenovir and lpv-rtv has shown increased negative conversion rate of sars-cov-2 and improved chest ct scan results [58] . however, another prospective study (chictr200030254) has shown that compared with favipiravir, umifenovir has inferior outcome in clinical recovery rate and relief of fever and cough [59] . there are two randomized and open-label trials ongoing in china, investigating the efficacy and safety of umifenovir against covid-19. the effect of umifenovir plus standard treatment versus lpv-rtv plus standard treatment will be evaluated in nct04252885, and the effect of umifenovir plus standard treatment versus standard treatment will be tested in nct04260594.favipiravir (branded as avigan) has been developed by fujifilm toyama chemical in 2014 in japan for the treatment of avian influenza or novel influenza resistant to neuraminid a s e i n h i b i t o r s . i t i s a g u a n i n e a n a l o g u e w i t h pyrazinecarboxamide structure, and its antiviral activity is decreased at the presence of purine nucleosides due to the competition [60] . the prodrug favipiravir first enters the infected cells through endocytosis and is then transformed into active f a v i p i r a v i r r i b o f u r a n o s y l p h o s p h a t e s t h r o u g h phosphoribosylation and phosphorylation [60, 61] . the antiviral activity is exhibited through selectively targeting conservative catalytic domain of rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), interrupting the nucleotide incorporation process during viral rna replication [60] . the dysregulation in viral rna replication results in increased number and frequency of transition mutations including replacement of guanine (g) by adenine (a) and cytosine (c) by thymine (t) or c by uracil (u) which induces destructive mutagenesis in rna viruses [60] . favipiravir has been used in the treatment of infectious diseases caused by rna viruses such as influenza, ebola, and norovirus [62] . recent in vitro and human studies have repurposed favipiravir as an experimental agent against enveloped, positive-sense, single-strand rna virus sars-cov-2. an in vitro research has investigated seven potential anti-sars-cov-2 medicines including ribavirin, penciclovir, favipiravir, nafamostat, nitazoxanide, remdesivir, and chloroquine, showing that remdesivir and chloroquine have favorable selectivity index [30] . in addition, the study showed favipiravir has exerted efficacy in vero e6 cells infected with sars-cov-2 with half-maximal effective concentration (ec50) of 61.88 μm and half-cytotoxic concentration (cc50) at over 400 μm, implying the high concentration is needed for safe and effective treatment [30] . clinical trials testing favipiravir against covid-19 have been carried out vigorously in various countries including china and japan. a randomized control trial (chictr200030254) has shown that covid-19 patients treated with favipiravir have superior recovery rate (71.43%) than that treated with umifenovir (55.86%), and the duration of fever and cough relief time are significantly shorter in favipiravir group than in umifenovir group [59] . up to mid-april 2020, there are eight undergoing clinical trials in china and two in japan examining the anti-sars-cov-2 potential of favipiravir. these trials include non-randomized and randomized controlled trials evaluating t h e e f f i c a c y a n d s a f e t y o f f a v i p i r a v i r a l o n e (chictr2000030113, jprn-jrcts031190226, jprn-jrcts041190120) or in conjunction with interferon-α ( c h i c t r 2 0 0 0 0 2 9 6 0 0 ) , b a l o x a v i r m a r b o x i l (chictr2000029544, chictr2000029548), tocilizumab (chictr2000030894, nct04310228), or chloroquine phosphate (chictr2000030987, nct04319900).oseltamivir(branded as tamiflu) is a drug approved for treatment of influenza a and b. oseltamivir targets the neuraminidase distributed on the surface of the influenza virus to inhibit the spread of the influenza virus in the human body [63, 64] . a study in wuhan reported that no positive outcomes were observed after receiving antiviral treatment with oseltamivir [65] . several clinical trials are still evaluating the effectiveness of oseltamivir in treating sars-cov-2 infection. oseltamivir is also used in clinical trials in several combinations, such as with chloroquine and favipiravir [66] .in the absence of vaccine or specific antiviral drugs been proven against sars-cov-2, many adjunctive therapies are used as supportive care for covid-19 patients. the adjunctive therapies including azithromycin, ascorbic acid, corticosteroids, epoprostenol, sirolimus, tocilizumab, sarilumab, and anakinra are highlighted below. several of these therapies (i.e., tocilizumab and other interleukin-directed therapies) are administered in an effort to blunt the cytokine storm often seen in progressing disease. the optimal timing of administration is yet to be identified. conceptually, blocking cytokine production before it progresses to an exaggerated level would seem to be the most mechanistically idea. elevated serum concentration of il-6 is associated with worse outcome in covid-19 and blocking the activity of this pro-inflammatory mediator with directed therapies may be a key target [67] . other adjuncts are directed at viral replication, viral entry, or through some other alternative mechanisms.azithromycin is an antibiotic that can be used to fight many different types of infections caused by susceptible bacteria, such as respiratory infections, skin infections, and sexually transmitted diseases [68] . moreover, it has been proven to be active in vitro against zika and ebola viruses and to prevent severe respiratory tract infections when treated to patients suffering viral infection [69] [70] [71] . for the mechanism of action, azithromycin prevents bacteria from growing by interfering with their protein synthesis. it binds to the 50s subunit of the bacterial ribosome, thus inhibiting translation of mrna [72] . previously, azithromycin has been used as adjunctive therapy to provide antibacterial coverage and potential immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effects in the treatment of some viral respiratory tract infections (e.g., influenza) [73, 74] . currently, many trials are testing the effect of azithromycin conjunction with hydroxychloroquine on the course of disease in people with sars-cov-2. for example, pfizer has announced positive data for the use of its a z i t h r o m y c i n ( z i t h r o m a x ) d r u g , a l o n g w i t h hydroxychloroquine, in a covid-19 clinical trial that was performed in france. in brief, the clinical trial was conducted to assess hydroxychloroquine in 20 patients, 6 of which were co-administered with azithromycin. compared with 16 controls and 14 hydroxychloroquine alone group, the 6 patients treated with hydroxychloroquine + azithromycin presented with highest virologic cure rate following 6-day treatment [73] . three other clinical studies used azithromycin (500 mg on day 1, then 250 mg daily on days 2-5) co-treated with 10day regimen of hydroxychloroquine (600 mg daily) in an open-label non-randomized study in france (6 pts) [73] , open-label uncontrolled study in france (11 pts) [75] , and uncontrolled observational study in france (80 pts) [76] . specifically, gautret et al. reported a 100% viral clearance in nasopharyngeal swabs in their 6 patients after co-treated of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin [73] . but the findings reported by molina et al. stand in contrast with those reported by gautret. molina et al. repeated the experiments, thought the rapid and full viral clearance was quite unexpected and found 8 of 11 patients had significant comorbidities [75] . .based on those results, data presented to date are insufficient to evaluate possible clinical benefits of azithromycin in patients with covid-19 [76] . furthermore, one must consider the additive cardiac toxicity of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin. both agents are known to prolong the qt interval and may potentiate the risk for cardiac events in a population known to have cardiac-related comorbidities.vitamin c is an essential nutrient and plays significant roles within the human body. it can neutralize free radicals and assist to prevent or reverse cellular damage as a potent antioxidant agent. it is also involved in some biological processes, many of which are associated with immune health [77] . moreover, vitamin c appears to be effective as an antiviral agent, especially against influenza viruses [78] . many studies showed that vitamin c positively affects the development and maturation of t lymphocytes and nk (natural killer) cells involved in the immune response to viral agents. it also contributes to the inhibition of reactive oxygen species (ros) production and to the remodulation of the cytokine network typical of systemic inflammatory syndrome [79] . given this background, a phase ii clinical trial (nct04264533) is initiated in china to evaluate high-dose iv vitamin c in icu patients with severe covid-19-associated pneumonia [80] . some hospitals have reported giving infected patients 1500 mg of vitamin c as supportive treatment. high-dose iv vitamin c has been given in the treatment of 50 moderate to severe covid-19 patients in china [81] . the doses varied between 2 and 10 g per day, given over a period of 8--10-h iv infusion. the oxygenation index was improved in real time and all the patients eventually recovered and were discharged [81] . moreover, high-dose (1.5 mg/kg body weight) vitamin c has been used for several decades clinically and an nih panel also documented clearly that this dose regimen is safe and has no major side effects [81, 82] .as a potent anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic drug, low doses of methylprednisolone (depo-medrol or solu-medrol) have the potential to prevent an extended cytokine response and may accelerate resolution of pulmonary and systemic inflammation in pneumonia [83, 84] . recently, many medical researchers believe that corticosteroids, especially methylprednisolone, may improve dysregulated immune response caused by sepsis (possible complication of infection with covid-19) and increase blood pressure when it is low [85] . specifically, in a retrospective cohort study, 201 patients with confirmed covid-19 who developed ards were treated with methylprednisolone (1-2 mg/kg daily iv for 5-7 days) and the results showed that treatment with methylprednisolone may be beneficial for patients who develop ards in the reduction of the risk of death. briefly, of those patients with ards who received methylprednisolone treatment, 23 of 50 (46%) patients died, while those who did not receive methylprednisolone, 21 of 34 (61.8%) died [86] . in another study, 46 patients with severe covid-19 that progressed to acute respiratory failure, use of methylprednisolone was associated with improvement in clinical symptoms (i.e., fever, hypoxia) and a shortened disease course in patients who received the drug compared with those who did not [87] . moreover, according to expert consensus statement from chinese thoracic society, dosage regimen of methylprednisolone should be low to moderate (i.e., ≤ 0.5 to 1 mg/kg daily or equivalent) [88] and the most common regimens of methylprednisolone applied in china were typically 40-80 mg iv daily for a course of 3-6 days [89] . the appropriate dosage (low dose versus high dose), place in therapy (early versus late), and role for corticosteroids (cytokine storm or comorbidity management) require additional clarity. there is concern that the use of corticosteroids may have deleterious effects (i.e., inhibition of immune response and pathogen clearance) in patients with covid-19 [83] . one study reported no effect on mortality and decreased viral clearance with the use of corticosteroids [24] . furthermore, the infectious diseases society of american recommends against the routine use of corticosteroids in covid-19. however, they do recommend the use of corticosteroids in the setting of ards in the context of a clinical trial [90] . similarly, the surviving sepsis campaign recommends against corticosteroids in mechanically ventilated patients with acute lung injury in the absence of ards [91] . however, they provide a recommendation for the use of corticosteroids in patients with ards acknowledging the weak level of evidence. dexamethasone has demonstrated utility on ards by decreasing ventilator days and mortality on severe ards in patients without covid-19 [92] . whether the use of corticosteroids provides similar benefit in patients with covid-19 and ards remains to be seen. ultimately, the clinical utilization of corticosteroids still needs to be established and should be considered on a case by case basis.since patients with pre-existing pulmonary conditions are at higher risk of covid-19 and should be closely monitored and cared, pulmonary vasodilator agents have been used in some patients for hypoxemia refractory to conventional treatments, but no study has been performed specifically on covid-19 patients. the surviving sepsis campaign suggested a trial of inhaled pulmonary vasodilator method as rescue therapy in mechanically ventilated adults with covid-19, severe ards, and hypoxemia despite optimized ventilation and other rescue strategies. inhaled nitric oxide (ino) and inhaled epoprostenol (iepo, a naturally occurring prostaglandin) are two common pulmonary vasodilators that have been widely studied [93] [94] [95] . experience in patients with ards indicates that ino can substantially reduce mean pulmonary artery pressure and improve oxygenation in such patients. furthermore, in vitro evidence of direct antiviral activity against sars-cov was studied and the genetic similarity between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 suggests their potential effectiveness against sars-cov-2 [96] . for iepo, dosages up to 50 ng/kg per minute have been used [93, 94, 97, 98] . previous studies reported that to provide a clinically important increase in pao2 and reduction in pulmonary artery pressure, the most effective and safe dosage appears to be 20-30 ng/kg per minute in adults and 30 ng/kg per minute in pediatric patients [98] . for ino, therapy was given for ≥ 3 days (30 ppm on day 1, followed by 20 and 10 ppm on days 2 and 3, respectively, then weaned on day 4) in a pilot study on sars-cov [99] . additionally, clinical trials evaluating ino for treatment or prevention of covid-19 are planned or underway (nct04305457, nct04306393, nct04312243) [100, 101] . and on march 20, 2020, fda granted emergency expanded access allowing its ino delivery system (inopulse®) to be immediately used for the treatment of covid-19. finally, additional studies are needed to evaluate the potential role of iepo and ino in the treatment of covid-19 patients.sirolimus, also known as rapamycin, is an immunosuppressant that is used to prevent organ transplant rejection and to treat lymphangioleiomyomatosis (lam) by inhibiting mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) kinase. it was originally isolated from the bacterium streptomyces hygroscopicus found on easter island (rapa nui) [102] and is commercially available as rapamune (pfizer). mtor, and more specifically a protein complex mtorc1 formed by mtor, plays a key role in viral replication. in an in vitro experiment, sirolimus has been shown to affect pi3k/akt/mtor pathway which inhibited mers-cov activity [103] . a new randomized double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial (scope) by university of cincinnati is planned to be conducted between april and september 2020 to test the effect of sirolimus on progression of patients hospitalized with covid-19 to advanced respiratory support [104] . studies of patients hospitalized with influenza can further shed light on the antiviral effect of sirolimus. in a randomized clinical trial conducted on 38 patients with confirmed h1n1 pneumonia and on mechanical ventilator support, a group treated with corticosteroids and 2 mg/day of sirolimus for 14 days (n = 19) showed significantly better clinical outcomes compared with the group treated with corticosteroids only, including shorter median duration of ventilator used [105] . delayed oseltamivir plus sirolimus treatment in ph1n1-infected mouse model further suggested a significant association between the sirolimus treatment and improved outcomes [106] . additionally, a new trial by the chinese university of hong kong is planned to begin in august 2020 to investigate the effect of sirolimus and oseltamivir on normalization of respiratory status and changes in biomarkers (viral rna concentration, 10 cytokines/ chemokines and pro-inflammatory mediators) and several other clinical endpoints in influenza patients [107] . at least one in silico study identified sirolimus as one of the 16 potential candidates for treating covid-19 patients based on data from other human coronavirus infections using network-based drug repurposing model [108] .tocilizumab (branded as actemra) is a humanized mab developed by roche and chugai pharmaceutical for treating ra and systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients. at the time of publishing this article, clinicaltrials.gov listed 20 planned studies that included tocilizumab treatment arm, all of them at the recruiting stage or earlier. a study published in april 2020 reported that 21 severe or critical covid-19 patients in china were treated with the compound, with 20 of them recovered at the time of publication and 1 on the way to recovery (but still in icu). encouraged by these results, a larger multicenter clinical trial was launched (chictr2000029765) and had about 500 patients treated with tocilizumab already enrolled [109, 110] .sarilumab, (branded as kefraza), a humanized mab, was developed by regeneron pharmaceuticals and sanofi for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (ra). a phase 2/3 randomized double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial was planned by regeneron pharmaceuticals and sanofi (and in partnership with northwell health's feinstein institutes for medical research) for march 2020 targeting to enroll 400 covid-19 patients, measuring percent change in c-protein (phase 2 only) and time to improvement on a 7-point scale (based on death and type of hospitalization) in patients with serum il-6 level above a threshold as primary endpoints. as of the time of this publication, the results of this study have not been made public [111] .anakinra (branded as kineret by swedish orphan biovitrum) is a modified human il-1 receptor antagonist (il-1ra) approved in 2001 in the usa and in 2002 in europe for use in ra patients. il-1 family of receptors triggers innate immune response and was associated with damaging inflammation [112] . out of 5 approved clinical trials involving anakinra treatment, 2 also have tocilizumab as a comparison: one multicenter open-label non-randomized trial in greece with estimated enrollment of 20 patients [113] , and another multicenter randomized open-label trial in belgium with estimated 342 patients has been enrolled to date [114] .angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor is regarded as an important target in the pathogenesis of covid-19. studies reveal that frequently observed comorbidities, including hypertension and diabetes in patients infected with sars-cov-2, are under medication with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) [115] [116] [117] [118] that result in overexpression of ace2. it is speculated that sars-covand sars-cov-2 bind to human cells via interaction with ace2 receptors [118, 119] . the opposing physiological actions of ace and ace2 in the renin-angiotensin system are reviewed to determine the therapeutic efficacy of ace2 inhibitors or arbs [120, 121] . in hypertensive patients, chronic treatment with angiotensin ii type 1 receptor (at1r) antagonists like losartan, lisinopril, or olmesartan facilitates cardiac and renal ace2 overexpression according to some in vivo studies [120, 122] . in contrast, sar viral rna following entry into respiratory epithelial cells downregulates the activity of ace2, thereby increasing the levels of angiotensin 2. this may potentially cause severe lung damage [121, 123] . continued treatment with these drugs may be essential for the survival to attenuate the cardiac stress of advancing covid-19 infection and limit the vasoconstriction and profibrotic effects of angiotensin 2 in alveolar capillaries.some of the anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (nsaid), are activators of ace2 receptors, same as ace inhibitors or arbs. their usage can lead to increased risk of contracting covid-19 [118] . since fatal lung failure induced by sars-cov infections may be controlled by blocking renin-angiotensin pathway [123] , ibuprofen may not be harmful. however, there is no strong evidence, suggesting a link between intake of an nsaid and worsening symptoms due to infection caused by sars-cov-2. the fda considers ibuprofen and the likes as a potentially promising therapeutic agent against covid-19 [124] .studies have demonstrated that thiazolidinedione and its derivatives, which are type 2 diabetes mellitus drugs, show efficacious effect against pulmonary disease induced by respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) or h1n1 influenza infection [125, 126] . but their role as a therapeutic drug against coronavirus is not yet explored. interestingly, it is known that thiazolidinediones may have the potential to upregulate ace2 receptor, which is identified as a binding target for sars-cov-2 in host cells [118] . however, lack of clinical evidence makes it uncertain to determine its therapeutic efficacy against coronavirus infections.amici et al. have demonstrated that indomethacin, a wellknown nsaid and a potential cyclooxygenase (cox) inhibitor, exhibits antiviral activity against sars-cov and canine coronavirus (ccov). in vitro studies suggest that indomethacin exhibits dose-dependent response in canine a72 cell monolayers infected with ccov with an ic50 of 5 um after 24 h of exposure. also, remarkable inhibition against sars-cov-infected vero cells by more than 99% at concentrations that were non-toxic for uninfected cells is also observed. in addition, indomethacin significantly blocks viral rna synthesis in dogs infected with ccov following oral administration of the drug (1 mg/kg) [127] . this suggests probable efficacy of indomethacin against sars-cov-2 [127] .colchicine is an anti-inflammatory drug commonly used for gout management and a variety of other conditions sharing similar pathophysiology. its mechanisms of action are related to interfering with migration of neutrophils to sites of inflammation and blocking the inflammasome complex in both neutrophils and monocytes, thus reducing il-1beta activation [128] . colchicine also has inhibitory effects on macrophages via the inhibition of the nacht-lrrpyd-containing protein 3 (nalp3) inflammasome and pore formation activated by purinergic receptors p2x7 and p2x2. there may also be beneficial effects on endothelial function due to colchicine's antifibrotic activities. some patients with covid-19 present with myopathies and colchicine has been shown to reduce inflammation in the cardiac myocytes [129] . there are several ongoing studies investigating colchicine for cytokine storm (nct04326790, nct04322682, nct04322565).niclosamide, an anthelmintic drug, has been shown to be an effective sars-cov virus replication inhibitor at dose concentration of 1.56 um or higher in vero e6 cells without interfering with binding of corona virus onto the cells [130] . another study reveals the efficacy of niclosamide in inhibiting mers-cov replication in verob4 cells via reduction of skp2 regulated becn1 ubiquitination and enhancement of autophagic flux and its ic50 value is determined to be 0.3 um [131] . thus, the possibility of niclosamide to inhibit sars-cov-2 cannot be neglected. ivermectin, a potent anthelmintic drug, was first discovered to inhibit interaction between integrase (in) molecule of human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)-1 and its nuclear transport receptor importin α/β [132] . further studies exhibit its potential to prevent viral replication of a broad spectrum of viruses, including dengue virus, flavivirus, and influenza [133] [134] [135] .very recently, ivermectin has shown inhibition against sars-cov-2 up to 5000-fold at 48 h in vitro. inhibition of impα/β1-mediated nuclear import of viral proteins is suggested as the probable cause of its antiviral activity [136] . it will be interesting to know its inhibition effect against sars-cov-2 in vivo.both nitazoxanide and its metabolite and tizoxanide have shown inhibitory effects against mers-cov in llc-mk2 cells. besides, inhibition of other corona virus strains, including murine corona virus, mouse hepatitis virus strain a59 (mhv-a59), bovine corona virus strain l9 (bcov-l9), and human enteric corona virus 4408 (hecov-4408) by nitazoxanide is reported via suppression of viral n protein [137] . nitazoxanide is found to suppress pro-inflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) and il-6 in vivo. however, the relevance of this information is currently unknown [138] .this treatment option refers to transfusion of plasma loaded with antibodies from individuals after resolution from a specific pathogen. this technique has been used for decades [139] . transfusion can offer a short-term, immediate immunity for individuals. convalescent plasma can be used prophylactically and for already infected patients to attenuate clinical severity [140, 141] . mechanism of action is through binding of the transfused antibodies to the pathogen, resulting in cellular cytotoxicity, phagocytosis, or direct neutralization of the pathogen [142, 143] . previously, convalescent plasma was used for two coronaviruses, sars-cov and mers [144] . one large study in hong kong involving 80 patients with sars-cov supported early administration of antibodies for optimal clinical effect compared to later administration [145] . limited data from taiwan and south korea showed clinical benefits in severe cases of sars-cov and mers [146, 147] . reported dosage varied widely in terms of the amount of plasma transfused and antibody titer [148] . limited data on covid-19 patients from china illustrated clinical benefits [149, 150] . pilot study reported clinical improvement in terms of fever, cough, tightness of breath, and chest pain while no serious side effects were reported [150] .there has been considerable attention placed on the role of hypercoagulable state leading to micro-and macro-vascular thrombosis in covid-19. disseminated intravascular coagulation and elevated d-dimer level were identified as predictors of worse outcomes in a cohort study of patients with covid-19 [151] . patients receiving anticoagulants had a decreased mortality [152] . heparin has anti-inflammatory properties and may also inhibit viral attachment via conformational changes to the sars-cov-2 surface receptor (spike) s1 [153] . low molecular weight heparin in patients hospitalized with covid-19 was associated with lower serum il-6 concentrations, suggesting that there may be an added mechanism besides prevention/treatment of thrombosis [154] . based on available evidence, it is reasonable to administer venous thromboembolism prophylaxis with either a low molecular weight or unfractionated heparin in hospitalized patients. in patients with rapidly progressing respiratory deterioration or where clinical judgment suggests thrombosis, treatment doses of anticoagulants may be considered.historically, traditional herbal medicines have been used in the past to control and to treat epidemic outbreaks [155] including the past epidemic outbreaks, such as sars and h1n1 influenza [156, 157] . to date, china and south korea have issued traditional medicinal treatment guidelines on the prevention and treatment of covid-19 [158] . it is reported that greater than 85% of sars-cov-2-infected patients in china had received some forms of traditional chinese medicine (tcm) treatments [159] . similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 uses host receptor ace2 for the cellular entrance; it appears that some traditional medicines may have the capacity to target ace2 and these show some promises to prevent the infection of sars-cov-2 [160, 161] . due to the high similarity in epidemiologic, genomics, and pathogenesis between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, some herbal medicinal products were used for the treatment of patients with infection of sars-cov-2 in china and korea [162, 163] . the top 10 most commonly used tcm herbal medicinal products in china to treat covid-19 patients include astragalus membranaceus, glycyrrhiza uralensis, saposhnikoviae divaricata, rhizoma atractylodis macrocephalae, lonicerae japonicae flos, fructus forsythia, atractylodis rhizoma, radix platycodonis, agastache rugosa, and cyrtomium fortunei j. sm [164] . in addition, some tcm herbal products, such as shen fu injection and re du ning injection, could manifest potential immunosuppressive effects and thereby decrease the level of tnf-α, il-1β, il-6, il-8, il-10, and other cytokines, resulting in inhibition of lung inflammation or acute lung injury [159, [165] [166] [167] .as discussed above, cytokine storm/inflammatory responses may contribute to the deaths of many covid-19 patients. thus, anti-inflammatory agents presumably could reduce the severity and mortality rate [24, 168, 169] . it is reported that qingfei paidu decoction could inhibit and alleviate excessive immune response and eliminate inflammation by regulating immune-related pathway and cytokine actionrelated pathway. the herbal formula qingfei paidu decoction was recommended by both chinese and korean guidelines. according to a recent publication, this herbal formula increases immunity and reduces inflammation by targeting the lung and spleen in covid-19 patients [170] . li et al. reported that lianhuaqingwen (lh), a tcm formula, significantly inhibited sars-cov-2 replication in vero e6 cells and markedly reduced pro-inflammatory cytokine (tnf-α, il-6, ccl-2/mcp-1, and cxcl-10/ip-10) production at the mrna levels [171] . sangju yin and yinqiao san are commonly used in clinical treatment to clear "lung heat," expel phlegm, relieve cough, regulate the patient's lungs, and restore normal lung function [172] . similarly, yinqiao san may have antibacterial and antiviral functions [172] . several clinical studies showed that tcm may bring new hope for the prevention and control of covid-19 [173] [174] [175] . in general, it appears that tcm products were commonly used in covid-19 patients with mild symptoms to severe symptoms and could prevent or block the diseases progression. although the precise molecular mechanisms currently are unknown, the potential role of anti-inflammatory/antioxidative stress, improving hypoxemia/hypoxia and antiviral activities, among others, could be some of the major drivers. further investigations in the future are needed to uncover the molecular mechanisms.conclusion the covid-19 pandemic represents the greatest global public health crisis in the past 100 years. hopefully vaccines and or specific therapeutic drugs targeting sars-cov-2 will be made available in the next few months or years. with the speed and volume of basic and clinical covid-19/ sars-cov-2 research to develop potential drugs and therapies for this disease, our hope will be on the horizon.sars-cov-2 (previously termed 2019 novel coronavirus, 2019-ncov), a virus that causes covid-19, likely initially transmitted from bat to human (gorbalenya et al., 2020) , infected over 6 million people worldwide from its outbreak in december 2019 to may 2020 (china cdc, 2020; who, 2020a) . due to the relatively high basic reproduction number (r 0 ) of the 2019-ncov virus , covid-19 spread rapidly and has already become a pandemic. the world health organization (who) has declared a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) for covid-19 (who, 2020b) and has announced that covid-19 is a pandemic (national public radio, 2020) . controlling the transmission and treating the infected cases is of great urgency.to develop treatments for covid-19, many marketed drugs have been re-purposed for usage in the clinic. china, italy, germany, the ats (american thoracic society), the ssc (surviving sepsis campaign), the nih (national institutes of health), the idsa (infectious diseases society of america), and the fda (food and drug administration) released guidelines and recommended several medicines for the treatment of covid-19 (table 1) . since january 16, 2020, china's government has published seven editions of guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov)-infected pneumonia (hereinafter referred to as the chinese guidelines, table 2, figure 1 ) (the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020a;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020b;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020c;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020d;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020e;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020f;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020g) and two editions of guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of serious and critical 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov)-infected pneumonia (the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020h;  the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020i) . to date, there is still no approved specific antiviral drug for covid-19, and providing supportive care to help relieve symptoms is the most vital strategy for covid-19 treatment. in this article, we summarize the pharmacotherapy guidelines for covid-19, highlight the updates to the pharmacotherapy guidelines, and reviewed the efficacy and safety of the anti-covid-19 drugs recommended.the majority of anti-sars-cov-2 virus drugs are adopted from the treatment of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) or middle east respiratory syndrome (mers): alpha-interferon, lopinavir/ritonavir, and ribavirin. besides, novel antiviral drugs have also been applied in the clinic, such as chloroquine.considering the safety and toxicity of those antiviral drugs, the combination of three or more antiviral drugs is not recommended. most antiviral treatments still lack high-level evidence to support antiviral efficacy. clinicians should balance the benefits and risks of such drugs before medication.remdesivir, a nucleoside analog, inhibits rna replicase polyprotein 1ab (agostini et al., 2018) . it was originally developed for the treatment of the ebola virus (warren et al., 2016) . remdesivir has a superior anti-mers activity compared to lopinavir and ritonavir in vitro and in vivo (sheahan et al., 2020) and displayed anti-sars-cov-2 ability in vitro . the first covid-19 case in the usa used remdesivir, and clinical condition improved from the 2nd day of remdesivir medication (holshue et al., 2020) . it has been assessed in rcts in both china and the usa (nih, 2020).however, it showed different results in china and the usa. remdesivir was not associated with statistically significant clinical benefits or adverse events for 237 adult patients admitted to hospital for severe covid-19 in the rct enrolled in china . in the usa, compassionate use of remdesivir displayed clinical improvement in 36 of 53 hospitalized severe covid-19 patients (grein et al., 2020) and 14 of 17 patients in the infectious disease ward (antinori et al., 2020) . in an rct with 1063 patients enrolled in the usa, remdesivir was superior to placebo in shortening the time to recovery and evidence of lower respiratory tract infection; also, an ethnic difference was observed: remdesivir is effective among white patients and is not significantly effective among black and asian patients (beigel et al., 2020) . the guideline from italy recommended remdesivir (italian society of infectious and tropical diseases section, 2020), and the fda approved emergency use authorization (eua) of remdesivir for the treatment of covid-19 (fda, 2020). in short, remdesivir is helpful but not a wonder drug for covid-19 patients (mahase, 2020) .favipiravir is a modified pyrazine analog and was initially approved for therapeutic use in resistant cases of influenza. it targets rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) enzymes and inhibits the transcription and replication of viral genomes (furuta et al., 2017) . cai et al. found that favipiravir showed significant improvement in chest imaging compared with lopinavir/ritonavir for the treatment of covid-19 (35 vs. 45 patients). chen et al. found the favipiravir did not significantly improve the clinical recovery rate at day 7 compared to arbidol but significantly improved the latency to relief for pyrexia and cough in a 120 vs. 120 patient trial . however, (lou et al., 2020) . there is still a lack of sufficient evidence to support the clinical anti-covid-19 effects of favipiravir.chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are canonical quinoline antiparasitic drugs, indicated to treat infections of malaria and also used off-label for the treatment of rheumatic diseases and lupus erythematosus. besides, andrea savarino et al. demonstrated the potential therapeutic benefits of chloroquine in viral diseases (te et al., 2007) , including sars (savarino et al., 2003) . thus, it has been re-purposed for the prophylaxis and treatment of zika virus infection (li et al., 2017) . wang et al. reported that chloroquine effectively inhibits sars-cov-2 infection by increasing endosomal ph and interfering with the glycosylation of cellular ace2 receptors . the blood concentration of chloroquine can reach the ec 90 value of anti-sars-cov-2 with regular dosing for rheumatoid arthritis . in several clinical trials, chloroquine has been proved to inhibit the sars-cov-2 virus in vivo (gao et al., 2020) . therefore, it was included in the chinese guidelines for the first time in the 6th edition. concerning the toxicity of chloroquine, the dose recommended by the chinese guidelines was updated in the 7th edition (riou et al., 1988) . also, an expert consensus statement from shanghai recommended hydroxychloroquine instead of chloroquine (cutler et al., 1988;  shanghai clinical treatment expert group for corona virus disease 2019, 2020). the italian guidelines recommended chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine (when chloroquine is not available) (italian society of infectious and tropical diseases section, 2020). the fda approved the eua of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of covid-19 (fda, 2020). however, there is still controversy about the effect and safety of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. mehra and colleagues have not found a benefit of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine, when used alone or with a macrolide, for inhospital outcomes for covid-19(n=96 032) (mehra et al., 2020) . in an observational study with 1446 hospitalized patients, hydroxychloroquine administration was not associated with either a greatly lowered or an increased risk of the composite endpoint of intubation or death . the american college of physicians suggested that clinicians should not use chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine alone or in combination with azithromycin as a treatment of patients with covid-19 due to the known harms and there being no available evidence of benefits in patients with covid-19 (qaseem et al., 2020) .abidol, also called umifenovir, is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug developed by a russian pharmaceutical company and approved for marketing in russia and china (brooks et al., 2012) . it was licensed for the prophylaxis and treatment of influenza and other respiratory viral infections (brooks et al., 2012) . its mechanisms of antiviral action including interactions with certain amino acid residues to form a hydrophobic aromatic stacking structure and interactions with aromatic residues of the viral glycoproteins involved in fusion and cellular recognition (kadam and wilson, 2017; zeng et al., 2017) . its antiviral ability in the treatment of various virus infections, including sars (khamitov et al., 2008) and ebola virus (hulseberg et al., 2019) , has been studied and proved. some studies have observed anti-covid-19 potential in vitro and in clinic . chinese guidelines recommended abidol for anti-covid-19 treatment from the 6th edition. a clinical trial from shanghai did not find any effects of lopinavir/ritonavir and abidol in terms of relieving symptoms or accelerating viral clearance (jun et al., 2020) . a retrospective study showed that abidol might not improve the prognosis or accelerate sars-cov-2 clearance in non-icu patients (lian et al., 2020) .anti-hiv combination antiviral drugs, mainly lopinavir/ ritonavir and darunavir/cobicistat, have been re-purposed as anti-sars-cov-2 agents. both lopinavir and darunavir are inhibitors of the 3clpro protease of coronavirus, a key protein that cleaves the large replicase polyproteins during viral replication. ritonavir increases the bioavailability of lopinavir by cytochrome p450 isoenzyme 3a4 (cyp3a4) (mangum and graham, 2001) , and cobicistat is a more selective cytochrome p450 3a inhibitor than ritonavir without enzyme-inducing properties (kakuda et al., 2015) . lopinavir/ritonavir has shown anti-coronavirus activity in vitro, in animal model, and in non-randomized trials (chan et al., 2003; chu et al., 2004; chan et al., 2015; zumla et al., 2016) . for covid-19, lopinavir/ritonavir has been recommended by chinese guidelines since the first edition and is also recommended in the guidelines of italy; the german, ats, nih, ssc, and idsa guidelines do not recommend it ( table 1) . it has also been applied for anti-covid-19 treatment in south korea (lim et al., 2020) and thailand. however, there is still controversy about its efficacy and safety (jun et al., 2020; kim, 2020) . cao et al. did not observe any benefit with lopinavirritonavir treatment in 199 hospitalized adult patients with severe covid-19 , and cheng et al. found that lopinavir/ritonavir did not shorten the duration of sars cov-2 shedding . lopinavir/ritonavir can induce liver damage when treating covid-19 . considering the toxicity of lopinavir/ritonavir, chinese guidelines have warned that its adverse reactions should be considered carefully since the 5th edition and have stated that the treatment should last less than 10 days since the 6th edition; the italian guidelines recommend both lopinavir/ritonavir and darunavir/cobicistat (italian society of infectious and tropical diseases section, 2020). however, according to the case report of riva et al., darunavir does not prevent sars-cov-2 infection in hiv patients (riva et al., 2020) . the triple combination of interferon-b-1b, lopinavir/ritonavir, and ribavirin was found to be safe and superior to lopinavir/ritonavir alone in alleviating symptoms and shortening the duration of viral shedding and hospital stay in patients with mild to moderate covid-19 (hung et al., 2020) .interferons are broad-spectrum antiviral drugs that regulate the immune system and inhibit the replication of the virus. ifn-a has been applied for the treatment of coronavirus diseases previously, such as for the treatment of sars (haagmans et al., 2004) and mers (al ghamdi et al., 2016) . ifn-a has been recommended as an anti-sars-cov-2 virus drug in the chinese guidelines since the first edition. besides, the expert consensus statement from shanghai recommended ifn-k rather than ifn-a (shanghai clinical treatment expert group for coronavirus disease 2019, 2020). a hong kong group used ifn-b1b (hung et al., 2020) , and some groups suggested that ifn-l might be helpful for anti-sars-cov-2 treatment (andreakos and tsiodras, 2020; prokunina-olsson et al., 2020) .ribavirin is a prodrug and guanosine analog. it was metabolized into active metabolites, the deribosylated base, and its 5'phosphate derivatives, by host cell enzymes after absorption (wu et al., 2003) . the mechanisms of the antiviral effect of ribavirin including 1) inhibiting the shift from th2 to th1 immune response, 2) inhibiting host inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (impdh) and causing a decrease in gtp, 3) directly inhibiting the replication of the virus, and 4) inhibiting the mutagenesis of virus (te et al., 2007) . its triple combination with interferon-b-1b and lopinavir/ritonavir might be more helpful for anti-covid-19 treatment compared to lopinavir/ ritonavir alone (hung et al., 2020) .the host cell entry of sars-cov-2 depends on the ace2 receptor and protease tmprss2. hoffmann et al. demonstrated that tmprss2 inhibitors may block the entry of the virus and that a marketed drug, camostat, might be a potential antiviral treatment for covid-19 (hoffmann et al., 2020) . german guidelines mentioned the compassionate use of camostat (kluge et al., 2020) .both chinese and german guidelines recommended that blind or inappropriate use of antibacterial drugs, especially the combination of broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs, should be avoided in the clinic (the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020g) . enhancement of bacteriological surveillance should be performed, and appropriate antibacterial drugs should be given promptly when secondary bacterial infection occurs .glucocorticoids are commonly used for the treatment of sars owing to their anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects (loutfy et al., 2003) . since glucocorticoids induce severe sequelae, such as osteonecrosis of the femoral head (griffith et al., 2005) and mental disorder (hong et al., 2009) , and decelerate the clearance of virus, glucocorticoids were removed from the chinese guidelines and not recommended for treatment of mild covid-19 patients from the 4th edition onwards. for serious and critical patients with progressive deterioration of the oxygenation index, rapid progression as shown in imaging, and excessive activation of the body's inflammatory response or patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), short-term use of glucocorticoids is recommended by the chinese, italian, idsa, and ssc guidelines.tocilizumab is a recombinant, humanized, anti-il-6 receptor monoclonal antagonist (antibody). it is approved for the treatment of cytokine release syndrome (crs), active rheumatoid arthritis (ra), giant cell arteritis (gca), active polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pjia), and active systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sjia) (fda) (fda actemra, 2020). it has a significant therapeutic effect on life-threatening cytokine release (le et al., 2018) . the 7th edition of the chinese guidelines recommended tocilizumab as an immunotherapy for patients with extensive lung lesions or severely ill patients who have elevated il-6 levels. allergic reactions should be considered. xu et al. observed that tocilizumab improved the clinical outcome immediately in severe and critical covid-19 patients and that it was an effective treatment to reduce mortality . a systematic review showed benefits from tocilizumab to covid-19 (alzghari and acuña, 2020).due to the immune deficiency of some severe patients, it is necessary to strengthen their immune capability. the 2nd edition of the chinese guidelines recommended thymosin alpha-1 as an immunomodulatory drug (du et al., 2018) for severe patients with low lymphocyte counts and serious and critical cases with low cellular immunity (the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020i) . intravenous immunoglobulin gamma (ivig), a plasma-made mixture of igg1 and other antibodies (baerenwaldt et al., 2010) , was recommended for severely ill patients, especially children (the national commission of the people's republic of china, 2020i to date, there is still no effective drug to cure covid-19. moreover, covid-19 is still a pandemic as of may 2020, and it will probably become a periodic epidemic. the development of anti-covid-19 drugs is one of the most important tasks to be done. however, the duration of new drug discovery and development usually last years or even decades. the repurposed use and re-discovery of marketed drugs has become an expressway for anti-covid-19 drug development.when covid-19 broke out in china, clinicians and researchers lacked knowledge of sars-cov-2 and covid-19. at that time, saving lives was the most important thing to be considered. many un-approved treatments were therefore tested in the clinic based on the experience of sars and in vitro studies. as the evidence grew, many drugs were not proved to be effective treatments for covid-19. also, chloroquine lopinavir/ritonavir and other drugs have been reported to have toxic effects. this is why there have been seven editions of the chinese guidelines. when covid-19 broke out in europe and american in the second wave, clinicians had already gained more knowledge and could avoid unnecessary tests through evidence-based medicine. european and americans have also developed corresponding guidelines for covid-19. there is much to be learned from the self-renewal and self-improvement practices of medical staff under the covid-19 pandemic. the process of updating guidelines is not only helpful to global anti-covid-19 practice but is also valuable for mankind, as we are still facing the threat of pandemics of undiscovered pathogens in the future.z-rc drafted and revised the main body of this paper. yz modified the content of this paper, jl, h-wp, jz, h-lz, l-ll, m-fl, and x-hw helped with drafting and editing. j-hw revised and approved the final version. the pandemic of covid-19 (coronavirus disease-2019) is an extremely contagious respiratory illness (elmezayen et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020) . globally, scientists are attempting to study this novel virus, and to discover efficient management to control and prevent the illness (enayatkhani et al., 2020) . the common symptoms of covid-19 symptoms are malaise, fever, shortness of breath, dry cough, malaise, while decreased or loss of taste and olfactory perceptions have been reported (elfiky, 2020a) .the covid-19 virus spreads mainly through saliva, droplets, or discharges from the nose of an infected individual after coughing or sneezing (pant et al., 2020) . the incubation period can range from two to fourteen days (abdelli et al., 2020) . since reported in december 2019, it has infected 2, 160, 207 individuals, leading to 146,088 deaths globally (who, 2020a). the first reported death was on 11 january 2020 and the transmission from patients to healthcare workers was first documented on 20 january 2020 (enmozhi et al., 2020) . moreover, the lives of millions of people have been affected due to isolations, required lockdowns, and quarantines. thus the dreaded effect of the covid-19 pandemic has imposed main challenges for worldwide well-being, economy and society (joshi et al., 2020; umesh et al., 2020) .coronavirus is lavish in mammals and birds and institute a large family of non-segmented, enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded rna betacoronavirus of the family coronaviridae (schoeman & fielding, 2019) , and has a high frequency of genomic recombination and mutation (khan, zia, et al., 2020) . this genetic modification of cov can hinder the production of efficient vaccine (hasan et al., 2020) . bats are the main harbor to the ultimate variety of genotypes with spread via an unknown intermediate mammal host to humans . overall, human and animal coronavirus comprises of four genera namely a, b, c and d coronavirus genus (sinha et al., 2020) . the b coronavirus includes the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), and sars-cov-2 (khan, jha, et al., 2020; sahu et al., 2020) .the cov family has a sizable homogeneous "spike protein" (figure 1 ). the role of the spike (s) protein, which is composed of 1300 amino acids (elfiky, 2020b) , is to interact with the host cells, such as the pulmonary and parabronchial epithelial cell, and assists the coronavirus to enter through the epithelial cell membrane (boopathi et al., 2020; xia et al., 2020) .moreover, the alveolar epithelial cells have ample expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is an aim by the virus. the detection of ace2 by the s protein of the virus permits the invasion of the coronavirus into the human circulation system (belouzard et al., 2009 ).single-strand rna (22-26 kilobases) viruses such as the coronavirus family reproduce the virus genomes by capitalizing on host cells. for instance, after coronavirus comes near the ribosome of the epithelial cells or other host cells, it utilizes the ribosome of the host cell to replicate polyproteins. the replication and ensuing procedures of precursor polyproteins can arise in the epithelial cells (hoffmann et al., 2020; wahedi et al., 2020) .after the coronavirus polyproteins are exhibited, two enzymes, coronavirus main proteinase (3clpro) and the papain-like protease (plpro) are believed to be involved in cleaving the polyproteins into smaller products used for replicating new viruses. in order to produce the daughter rna genome, the coronavirus exhibits an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), which is an important replicase that catalyzes the synthesis of a complementary rna strand using the virus rna (wrapp et al., 2020) . covs gather together near intracellular membranes within the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate compartment (or ergic) after infection. here they bud within the lumen and eventually carried outside the cell through 'exocytosis' within vesicles (gupta et al., 2020) . replication of sars-cov-2 depends on the viral rnadependent rna polymerase (rdrp) (elfiky & azzam, 2020) which is the most probable target of the investigational nucleotide analogue remdesivir (rdv) (agostini et al., 2018; jordan et al., 2018; siegel et al.,2017; tchesnokov et al., 2019) .after the outbreak, many kinds of medications alone or as adjuvant have been used in many countries (islam et al., 2020) . the usage of already known viral treatments have many advantages as the pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and safety profiles of these medications have already been recognized (das et al., 2020) . certain drugs have several protein targets and many illnesses share overlapping molecular paths. in such cases, reusing drugs for more than one objective and finding their novice uses can considerably decrease the time in finding new cures for unforeseen diseases (muralidharan et al., 2020) .rdv exhibits broad-spectrum antiviral activity against rna viruses, and former studies with rdrps from ebola virus (ebov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) have shown that delayed chain-termination is rdv's conceivable mechanism of action ( figure 2 ) (agostini et al., 2018; jordan et al., 2018; siegel et al.,2017; tchesnokov et al., 2019) .recently, gordon, tchesnokov, woolner, et al. (2020) proved that rdrp effectively incorporates the active triphosphate form of rdv (rdv-tp) into rna, causing termination of rna synthesis.the investigators obtained almost identical results with sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 rdrps and concluded that the distinguished property of rdv-tp is its high discernment over incorporation of its natural nucleotide counterpart atp.rdv, formerly known as gs-5734, is a monophosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine analog that was developed in response to the ebola outbreak in west africa from 2014.rdv binds to rdrp and acts as rna chain terminator. it exhibits effective in vitro activity against sars-cov-2 with an ec 50 at 48 h of 0.77 mm in vero e6 cells . comparable activity has been shown against other zoonotic coronaviruses with ec 50 values of 0.07 mm demonstrated for both sars-cov-1 and mers-cov sheahan et al., 2017 sheahan et al., , 2020 wang et al., 2020) .rdv is very discerning for viral polymerases, hence a low propensity to cause human toxicity. in addition, it has shown to have a wide therapeutic index in a human airway epithelial cell model (sheahan et al., 2020) . the drug also exhibits a high genetic hurdle to resistance in coronaviruses and has an extended intracellular half-life that permits for once-daily dosing (agostini et al., 2018; sheahan et al., 2020) .the safety and pharmacokinetics of rdv were assessed in single-and multiple-dose phase intravenous infusions between 3 mg and 225 mg and were well-tolerated without any evidence of kidney or liver toxicity. rdv showed linear pharmacokinetics within this dose range and an intracellular half-life of more than 35 h. ensuing multiple-dose infusions, reversible aspartate aminotransferase and alanine transaminase elevations ensued (who, 2020b).the dose under investigation for treatment of covid-19 is 200 mg intravenously (iv) on day 1 followed by 100 mg iv daily for up to 10 days, infused over 30-60 min. the initial clinical use of rdv was conducted by jacob et al in 2016 to treat ebola (jacobs et al., 2016) , followed by case series (holshue et al., 2020; kujawski et al., 2020) . as of april 19, 2020, the following studies are being conducted in the united states using rdv to treat covid-19 (clinicaltrials.gov, 2020): nct04302766, nct04292899, nct04292730, nct04257656, nct04252664, nct04280705.in a recent study published by the new england journal of medicine, investigators have used rdv on a compassionateuse basis to patients hospitalized with covid-19. participants were patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection and who had an oxygen saturation of 94% or less in room air or who were receiving oxygen support. patients received a 10-day course of rdv, comprising of 200 mg administered intravenously on day 1, ensued by 100 mg daily for the remaining 9 days of management. overall, 61 patients were recruited but only data from 53 patients were analyzed. participants were from the united states, europe, canada, and japan. more than 50% of patients (n ¼ 30) were receiving mechanical ventilation and almost 10 % (n ¼ 4) were receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. on follow-up (median ¼18 days), 36 patients (68%) had an amelioration in oxygen-support, including 17 of 30 patients (57%) getting mechanical ventilation who were extubated. moreover, 25 patients (47%) were discharged, and 7 patients (13%) expired. the authors concluded that use rdv, led to clinical improvement in 36 of 53 patients (68%) infected with covid-19.in terms of safety, 32 patients (60%) reported adverse events during follow-up. the most common side events were renal impairment, rash, diarrhea, increased hepatic enzymes, and hypotension. overall, side effects were more common in patients on invasive ventilation. a total of 12 patients (23%) had grave adverse events, most commonly septic shock, multiple-organ-dysfunction syndrome, hypotension, and acute kidney injury. four patients (8%) terminated rdv treatment prematurely: one because of deteriorating of preexisting renal failure, one because of multiple organ failure, and two because of transaminitis, including one patient with a maculopapular rash (grein et al., 2020) .on april 29, 2020, the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid), published preliminary results on the effect rvd on covid-19 illness. the randomized, controlled trial that was initiated on february 21, 2020 involved 1063 patients. the mortality rate for the group of individuals who received rvd was 8 % as compared to 11.6% in the placebo group (p ¼ 0.059). for patients who survived the illness, the median time to recovery was 31% quicker for patients who received rvd compared with those who received placebo (11 vs 15 days) (p < 0.001) (nih, 2020).on april 29, 2020, gilead revealed results from the openlabel, phase 3 simple trial evaluating 5-day and 10-day dosing durations of the investigational antiviral remdesivir in hospitalized patients with severe manifestations of covid-19 disease. inclusion criteria was pneumonia and reduced oxygen levels that did not require mechanical ventilation at the time of study. the study showed that patients who received a 10-day treatment course of remdesivir attained comparable improvement in clinical status compared with those taking a 5-day treatment course (odds ratio: 0.75 [95% ci 0.51 -1.12] on day 14).the time to clinical improvement for 50 percent of patients was 10 days in the 5-day treatment group and 11 days in the 10-day treatment group. more than 50% of patients in both treatment groups were discharged from the hospital by day 14 (5-day: 60.0%, n ¼ 120/200 vs.10-day: 52.3% n ¼ 103/197; p ¼ 0.14). at day 14, 64.5 percent (n ¼ 129/200) of patients in the 5-day treatment group and 53.8 percent (n ¼ 106/197) of patients in the 10-day treatment group achieved clinical recovery. the overall mortality rate at day 14 was 7 percent (n ¼ 23/320) across both treatment groups, with 64 percent (n ¼ 205/320) of patients showing clinical improvement at day 14 and 61 percent (n ¼ 196/320) of patients discharged from the hospital.no unforeseen side effects were detected with the use of rdv across either treatment group (gilead, 2020) .on may 1, 2020, the food and drug administration (fda) issued an emergency use authorization (eua) for emergency use of rdv for the treatment of hospitalized 2019 coronavirus disease (covid-19) patients based on review of the topline data from the gilead-sponsored open-label trial that evaluated different durations of rdv (nct04292899), and from the randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial conducted by niaid (nct04280705) (fda, 2020).remdesivir might be crucial for ensuring an efficient treatment, decrease mortality and allow early discharge in relation to covid-19. ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled trials are critical in delineating its efficacy.the recent outbreak of infection by the novel betacoronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has spread to almost all countries and claimed more than 260,000 lives worldwide (who situation report 107, may 6, 2020) . alarming features of covid-19 include a high risk of clustered outbreak both in community and nosocomial settings, and up to one-fifth severe/critically ill proportion of symptomatic inpatients reported (1-4). furthermore, a significant proportion of infected individuals are asymptomatic, substantially delaying their diagnoses, hence facilitating the widespread dissemination of covid-19 (5) . with a dire need for effective therapeutics that can reduce both clinical severity and viral shedding, numerous antiviral candidates have been under clinical trials or in compassionate use for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection (6) .several antivirals under study are hypothesized or proven to target the key mediator of a specific step in the sars-cov-2 viral replication cycle. for instance, lopinavir/ritonavir (lpv/r) and danoprevir have been proposed to inhibit the sars-cov-2 main protease (m pro , also called 3cl pro ) needed for the maturation of multiple viral proteins; chloroquine (cq) / hydroxychloroquine (hcq) [alone or combined with azithromycin (az)] may abrogate viral replication by inhibiting endosomal acidification crucial for viral entry (7, 8) ; nucleoside analogues such as remdesivir, ribavirin, favipiravir and eidd-2801 likely inhibit the sars-cov-2 nsp12 rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and/or induce lethal mutations during viral rna replication (9) (10) (11) . unfortunately, on the clinical aspect, lpv/r failed to demonstrate clinical benefits in well-powered randomized controlled trials (rcts), while hcq and/or az also failed to demonstrate benefits in observational studies (12) (13) (14) . meanwhile, lpv/r, cq/hcq and az may even increase the incidence of adverse events (14) (15) (16) . although remdesivir is widely considered one of the most promising candidates, latest rcts only revealed marginal shortening of disease duration in patients treated (17) . therefore, further efforts are required to search for more potent, readily repurposable therapeutic agents for sars-cov-2 infection, either as sole therapy or im combination with other drugs to enhance their efficacy.ideally, the candidate drugs need to be readily available as intravenous and/or oral formulation(s), possess favourable pharmacokinetics properties as anti-infectives, and do not cause adverse events during the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection (e.g. non-specific immunosuppression, arrhythmia or respiratory side effects). two complementary approaches have been adopted to identify novel drugs or compounds that can suppress sars-cov-2 replication. one approach relies on in vitro profiling of the antiviral efficacy of up to thousands of compounds in early clinical development, or drugs already approved by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) . on the other hand, as the crystal structure of the m pro (23, 24) , papain-like protease (pl pro ) (25) and the cryo-em structure of the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 rdrp complex (11, 26) of the sars-cov-2 virus became available, the structurebased development of their specific inhibitors becomes feasible. structure-aided screening will enable the discovery of novel compounds as highly potent inhibitors (27) as well as the repurposing of readily available drugs as anti-cov agents for fast-track clinical trials.here we report our results regarding the discovery of fda-approved drugs potentially active against the sars-cov-2. in vitro and cellular results led to the identification of simeprevir, a hepatitis c virus (hcv) ns3a/4 protease inhibitor (28) , as a potent inhibitor of sars-cov-2 replication in a cellular model of infection. importantly, simeprevir acts synergistically with remdesivir, whereby the effective dose of remdesivr could be lowered by multiple-fold by simeprevir at physiologically feasible concentrations. interestingly, biochemical and molecular characterizations revealed that simeprevir only weakly inhibits m pro , while no inhibition of either the pl pro or the rdrp polymerase activity was found. the anti-sars-cov-2 mechanism of simeprevir thus awaits further investigations and may provide hints on novel antiviral strategies.given our goal of identifying immediately usable and practical drugs against sars-cov-2, we prioritized a list of repurposing drug candidates for in vitro testing based on joint considerations on safety, pharmacokinetics, drug formulation availability, and feasibility of rapidly conducting trials (table  s1) . we focused on fda-approved antivirals (including simeprevir, saquinavir, daclatasvir, ribavirin, sofosbuvir and zidovudine), and drugs whose primary indication was not antiviral but had reported antiviral activity (including bromocriptine and atovaquone). remdesivir was also tested for comparison of efficacy and as a positive control.in the vero e6 cellular infection model, we found simeprevir as the only drug among our prioritized candidates that showed potent suppression of sars-cov-2 replication in the ≤ 10 μm range (fig. 1a) . more detailed dose-response characterization found simeprevir has a potency comparable to remdesivir in our experiment (fig. 1b) . the half-maximal effective concentration (ec50) of simeprevir was determined to be 4.08 μm, while the 50% cytotoxicity concentration (cc50) was 19.33 μm, which the latter is consistent with previously reported values in other human cell lines (29) (fig. 1b) . these data suggest that a desirable therapeutic window exists for the suppression of sars-cov-2 replication with simeprevir. while simeprevir is a potential candidate for clinical use alone, we hypothesized that it may be used to create a synergistic effect with remdesivir, thereby mitigating its reported adverse effects (17), improving its efficacy and broadening its applicability. indeed, combining simeprevir and remdesivir at various concentrations apparently provided much greater suppression of sars-cov-2 replication than remdesivir alone, while they did not synergize to increase cytotoxicity ( fig. 2a) . importantly, such effects were not merely additive, as the excess over bliss score suggested synergism at 3.3 μm simeprevir and 1.1 -10 μm remdesivir in suppressing sars-cov-2 replication (fig. 2b ). the desirable anti-sars-cov-2 effect of simeprevir prompted us to determine its mechanism of action. given that simeprevir is an hcv ns3/4a protease inhibitor, we first investigated its inhibitory activity against sars-cov-2 m pro and pl pro using established in vitro assays (30, 31) (fig. 3a, c, e) . we found inhibition of m pro by simeprevir with half-maximal inhibitory concentration (ic50) of 9.6 ± 2.3 μm (fig. 3b) , two times higher than the ec50 determined from our cell-based assay. the substrate cleavage was further verified with sds-page (supplementary fig. 2) . docking simeprevir against the apo protein crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro (pdb id 6yb7; resolution: 1.25 å) suggested a putative binding mode with a score of -9.9 kcal mol -1 (supplementary fig. 3) . this binding mode is consistent with a recent docking study using a homology model of sars-cov-2 m pro (32) . on the other hand, no inhibition of pl pro activity was observed even at above 20 μm of simeprevir (fig. 3d) .we speculated that the weak inhibition of m pro protease activity by simeprevir could not fully account for its antiviral effect towards sars-cov-2. to search for further mechanistic explanations, we next docked simeprevir, alongside several other drug candidates, and nucleoside analogues (remdesivir, ribavirin and favipiravir) against the motif f active site of the cryo-em structure of the sars-cov-2 nsp12 rdrp (supplementary fig. 4a) . interestingly, the docking results revealed that simeprevir had a higher score than the nucleoside analogues (supplementary fig. 4b ). to test this experimentally, we adopted previously reported protocols and constructed an rdrp primer extension assay using recombinant sars-cov-2 nsp12, nsp7 and nsp8. intriguingly, simeprevir showed no inhibition of rdrp polymerase activity at concentrations as high as 500 μm (fig. 3f) . since simeprevir only weakly inhibits m pro and does not inhibit the enzyme activities of sars-cov-2 rdrp or pl pro in vitro, it may function by targeting other host or viral protein(s). the sars-cov-2 has gone from an emerging infection to a global pandemic as a novel pathogen with high transmissibility. it is essential to reduce the casualties by effective pharmacological management. our study has successfully identified the readily repurposable, clinically practical antiviral simeprevir that could target sars-cov-2. specifically, we found a fourth-order suppression of viral genome copies by simeprevir at ≤ 10 μm in a cell-based viral replication assay -a concentration that is expected to be attainable in human lung tissues with ≥ 150mg daily dosing based on available pharmacokinetic data (33, 34) .in addition, we discovered that simeprevir can synergize with remdesivir in inhibiting sars-cov-2 replication in a cellular model, potentially allowing lower doses of both drugs to be used to treat covid-19. in a global pandemic with patients having diverse clinical characteristics, providing an additional option to remdesivir and the flexibility of combined simeprevir-remdesivir use will be exceptionally important to treat those who are intolerant or not responding to the drug (17) , which can easily amount to tens of thousands of patients given the widespread disease. as there is only one confirmed and approved therapy for covid-19, a potentially repurposable drug can be rapidly tested in animal models before clinical trials to prepare for supply shortages or when remdesivir-resistant mutations arise.we note, however, there are also several disadvantages of simeprevir and the proposed simeprevir-remdesivir combination. simeprevir requires dose adjustments in patients with child-pugh class b or c cirrhosis, as well as in patients with east asian ancestry (33) . in addition, simeprevir has been taken off the market since 2018 due to the appearance of next-generation hcv protease inhibitors, hence its supply may not be ramped up easily. as simeprevir is only available in an oral capsule formulation, it cannot be easily administered in the most severe patients who may be intubated. finally, simeprevir is metabolized by the cyp3a4 enzyme with saturable kinetics (33) while remdesivir itself is not only a substrate of cyp3a4 and esterases but also a cyp3a4 inhibitor. whether such theoretical pharmacokinetic interaction will exacerbate liver toxicity or provide additional pharmacokinetic synergy (in addition to pharmacodynamic synergy) in vivo remains to be tested.mechanistically, we found unexpected complexity in the inhibition of sars-cov-2 replication by simeprevir -it does not inhibit the sars-cov-2 viral proteins pl pro or rdrp at physiologically feasible concentrations. simeprevir is a weak inhibitor of m pro at ~10 μm, in keeping with the ic50 at ~13.7 μm as determined in a parallel study (31) . this potency of m pro inhibition unlikely accounts for the strong suppression of sars-cov-2 viral replication observed. therefore, further investigation of the mechanism of action of simeprevir can uncover new druggable targets for inhibiting sars-cov-2 replication. sars-cov-2 virus (betacov/hong kong/vm20001061/2020, scov2) was isolated from the nasopharynx aspirate and throat swab of a covid-19 patient in hong kong using vero e6 cells (atcc crl-1586). vero e6 cells were infected with scov2 at a multiplicity of infection (moi) of 0.05 in the presence of varying concentrations and/or combinations of the test drugs. dmso as the vehicle was used as a negative control. antiviral activities were evaluated by quantification of sars-cov-2 orf1b copy number in the culture supernatant by using quantitative real-time rt-pcr (qpcr) at 48 h postinfection with specific primers targeting the sars-cov-2 orf1b (35) .three-dimensional representations of chemical structures were extracted from the zinc15 database (http://zinc15.docking.org) (36) , with the application of three selection filters --protomers, anodyne, and ref. zinc15 subset drugbank fda (http://zinc15.docking.org./catalogs/dbfda/) were downloaded as the mol2 file format. the molecular structures were then converted to the pdbqt format (the input file format for autodock vina) using mgltools2-1.1 rc1 (sub-program "prepare_ligand") (http://adfr.scripps.edu/versions/1.1/downloads.html). autodock vina v1.1.2 was employed to perform docking experiments (37) . docking of simeprevir on sars-cov-2 m pro was performed with the target structure based on an apo protein crystal structure (pdb id: 6yb7); the a:b dimer was generated by crystallographic symmetry. docking was run with the substrate-binding residues set to be flexible. docking of simeprevir and other active triphosphate forms of nucleotide analogues was performed against the nsp12 portion of the sars-cov-2 nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex cryo-em structure (pdb id: 6m71).the sequence of sars-cov-2 m pro was obtained from genbank (accession number: yp_009725301), codon-optimized, and ordered from genscript. a c-terminal hexahistidine-maltose binding protein (his6-mbp) tag with two in-between factor xa digestion sites were inserted. expression and purification of sars-cov-2 m pro was then performed as described for sars-cov m pro (30) . the protein substrate, where the cleavage sequence "tsavlqsgfrkm" of m pro was inserted between a cyan fluorescent protein and a yellow fluorescent protein, was expressed and purified as described (30) .the inhibition assay was based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer (fret) using a fluorescent-protein-based substrate previously developed for sars-cov m pro (30, 38) . 0.1 μm of purified sars-cov-2 m pro was pre-incubated with 0 -250 μm simeprevir in 20 mm hepes ph 6.5, 120 mm nacl, 0.4 mm edta, 4 mm dtt for 30 min before the reaction was initiated by addition of 10 μm protein substrate (31) . protease activity was followed at 25 °c by fret with excitation and emission wavelengths of 430 nm and 530 nm, respectively, using a multi-plate reader as described (30, 38) . reduction of fluorescence at 530 nm was fitted to a single exponential decay to obtain the observed rate constant (kobs). relative activity of m pro was defined as the ratio of kobs with inhibitors to that without. the relative ic50 value of simeprevir was determined by fitting the relative activity at different inhibitor concentration to a four-parameter logistics equation.the nsp7 and nsp8 genes were retrieved from genbank (accession number:yp_009725303.1 & yp_009725304.1) n-terminally hexahistidine-tagged, codon-optimized, and chemically synthesized and cloned into the vector pet-45b(+) (genescript). the plasmids were separately transformed into escherichia coli bl21 (de3) competent cells and grown in 2yt media supplemented with 100 µg/ml ampicillin at 37 °c. when the od600 of the cells reached 0.8, expression was induced with 1 mm isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (iptg) and the cells were grown at 16 °c overnight. the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6238 × g for 10 min at 4 °c. the cell pellets for nsp7 and nsp8 were resuspended in lysis buffer [20 mm tris (ph 7.5), 500 mm nacl, 10 mm imidazole, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 17.4 µg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (pmsf) and 5 mm β-mercaptoethanol (bme)]. the resuspended cells were lysed by sonication and the lysates were separated from the insoluble fractions by centrifugation at 24,000 rpm (69,673 x g) for 30 min at 4°c. the proteins were purified by nickel affinity using a his-trap column (ge healthcare) equilibrated with lysis buffer. the column was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer (20 mm tris (ph 7.5), 500 mm nacl, 40 mm imidazole, 5% glycerol and 5 mm bme) and the proteins were eluted with 3 -4 column volumes of elution buffer (20 mm tris (ph 7.5), 500 mm nacl, 500 mm imidazole, 5% glycerol and 5 mm bme). the eluted proteins were further purified by size exclusion chromatography using a superdex 200 16/600 column (ge healthcare) equilibrated with a buffer containing 25 mm tris (ph 7.5), 300 mm nacl, 0.1 mm mgcl2 and 1 mm dithiothreitol (dtt). the relevant protein fractions were pooled, concentrated to 7.93 mg/ml (nsp7) and 93 mg/ml (nsp8) respectively, and stored at -80 °c.the nsp12 protein was purchased from genscript. briefly, the gene sequence for sars-cov-2 nsp12 was retrieved from genbank [accession number: qhd43415.1(4393...5324)], codon-optimized for sf9 insect cells and chemically synthesized (genscript). the dna fragment was then subcloned into pfastbac1 using ecori/hindiii with a 5' kozak sequence, c-terminal thrombin site and hexahistidine tag, adding additional amino acids mglq to the n-terminus and lvprgsghhhhhh to the c-terminus of the protein. the plasmids were amplified in e. coli top10 cells and transformed into e. coli dh10bac cells (life technologies) for bacmid production. the nsp12 bacmids were transfected into sf9 cells (expression systems) using transfection reagent fugene® 6 (promega). the recombinant baculovirus was amplified twice in sf9 cells. 10 ml of the second amplification was used to infect 1 l of sf9 cells at 3 × 106 cells/ml and incubated at 27 °c for 48 h. cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1000 × g and resuspended in 70 ml of lysis buffer (25 mm hepes ph 7.4, 300 mm nacl, 1 mm mgcl2, 2 mm dtt). the resuspended cells were then mixed with an equal volume of lysis buffer containing 0.2% (v/v) igepal ca-630 (anatrace) and incubated with agitation for 10 min at 4 °c. the cell lysate was then sonicated before clarification by centrifugation at 15,000 × g at 4 °c for 30 min. cleared lysates were incubated with ni-nta beads for 2 h (genscript), washed with lysis buffer, and eluted with lysis buffer containing step gradients of 20 -500 mm imidazole. the eluted protein was dialysed against protein storage buffer (25 mm hepes ph 7.5, 300 mm nacl, 0.1 mm mgcl2, 2 mm tcep), concentrated with amicon ultra concentrator (millipore sigma), and stored at -80 °c.for nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex formation, 5 μm of purified sars-cov-2 nsp12 was mixed with separately purified nsp7 and nsp8 in 1:6:6 molar ratio in rdrp assay buffer (25 mm tris-hcl ph 7.5, 300 mm nacl, 0.1 mm mgcl2, 1 mm dtt) and incubated at 4 °c overnight. for the rna template (ordered from general biosystems), 5' fam labelled rna probe 1 (5'-gcuaugugagauuaaguuau-3') and unlabelled rna probe 6 (5'-ucucucucucucucucucucauaacuuaaucucacauagc-3') were mixed in 1:1 molar ratio to a final concentration of 40 μm each in rna annealing buffer (20 mm tris-hcl ph 8, 50 mm nacl, 5 mm edta), denatured at 95 °c for 5 min and cooled to 25 °c over the course of 10 min in a thermocycler. to test the activity of the recombinant nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex, 4 μm of the protein complex was incubated at 27 °c for 1 h in the presence of 1 μm rna template, 0.5 u/μl superasein (thermo fisher) and 50 μm ntp in rdrp assay buffer. for simeprevir inhibitory assay, different concentrations of simeprevir in dmso were added to the reaction mixture, comprising 5% of the reaction volume. reactions were terminated by addition of equal volume 2x rna loading buffer (0.5x gel loading dye purple (neb) in 90% formamide), denatured at 95 °c for 5 min and immediately transferred on ice. reaction products were analyzed on 8m urea, 15% polyacrylamide (acrylamide:bis-acrylamide = 19:1) minigel buffered with 1x tbe. after running at 250 v for 25 min, the gel was imaged with gel doc ez imager (bio-rad) using the ethidium bromide mode.the purification and assay of pl pro activity was adapted from as previously described (25) . briefly, a ubiquitin protein tagged with rhodamine-modified pl pro cleavage site was used as a substrate for the enzymatic assay. 5 ul of solution containing 0 -20 µm of simeprevir and 10 µm of ubiquitinrhodamine were aliquoted into a 384-well plate. reaction was initiated by addition of 5 µl of 30 nm pl pro to the well. initial velocities of rhodamine release were normalized against dmso control. reactions were conducted for 300 seconds with monitoring of fluorescence intensity at 485/520 nm using a microplate reader (pherastar fsx, bmg labtech).the novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) is a highly infectious acute respiratory disease that is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2). sars-cov-2 is closely related to other coronaviruses (covs), such as sars-cov, bat, and pangolin covs.however, evolutionary genomics indicates that the affinity of the spike protein (s-protein) of sars-cov-2 for its human receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is much higher than the s-protein of other covs, which results in a higher infectivity rate of sars-cov-2 (1, of covs. nsp12 forms a complex with two additional proteins, nsp7 and nsp8, and participates in the rna template-dependent synthesis of viral rna in the presence of divalent metal ions (5) (6) (7) . the binding of nsp12 to nsp7 and nsp8 enhances the template binding and processivity of nsp12 (5, 8) . the structure of sars-cov-2 nsp12 shares a high homology with nsp12 of sars-cov, which indicates that they have similar functions and mechanisms of action (9) .the structures of the rdrp (nsp12-nsp7-nsp8) in the apo-form (8, 10) and complex form with the template primer rna, remdesivir, and mg 2+ ions were determined recently (11) .the n-terminus of the nsp12 polymerase has a β-hairpin structure (residues 31-50) and an extended nidovirus rdrp-associated nucleotidyltransferase domain (niran, residues 115-250) that consists of seven α-helices and three β-strands (8, 10, 12) . the niran domain binds at the backside of the cupped right-handed c-terminal rdrp via an interface domain (residues 251 to 365) that links the niran domain to the finger subdomain of the c-terminal rdrp. the c-terminal rdrp (residues 366-920) is divided into three subdomains, finger (residues 398-581 and 621-679), palm (residues 582-627 and 688-815) and thumb subdomain (residues 816-919), which is a conserved architecture of all viral rdrps. the long finger extension of cov rdrp intersects with the thumb subdomain to form a closed ring structure. this conformation is in contrast to the smaller loop in the rdrp of other rna viruses, such as influenza virus, that has a relatively open conformation. two zinc ions also bind in the conserved metal-binding motif in all cov rdrps and play a crucial role in maintaining rdrp stability and structural integrity (8) . the overall structural architecture of the apo-rdrp (without remdesivir) and complex-rdrp (with remdesivir) is similar, except nsp12 is in the closed conformation in apo-rdrp. the binding of nsp7 and nsp8 stabilizes the closed conformation. remdesivir, in its monophosphate form (rmp), forms a covalent bond with the 3′ end of the rna primer strand at the +1 position (via base-stacking interactions) and with the uridine base from the template strand (via two hydrogen bonds). rmp also interacts with side chains from lys545 and arg555. two mg 2+ ions and one pyrophosphate are present near the bound rmp. the mg 2+ ions interact with the phosphodiester backbone and form part of the active site. the catalytic site of rdrp consists of seven conserved motifs (a-g) with crucial residues that are required for the activity of rdrp. the residues constituting the catalytic site and the residues involved in rna binding are highly conserved in covs. most rdrp inhibitors interact with the residues of these conserved motifs. remdesivir is a nucleotide analog antiviral prodrug. upon diffusion into a cell, it is converted to gs-441524 monophosphate, which is phosphorylated to the active nucleotide triphosphate form of remdesivir (rtp). binding of rtp leads to the inhibition of rdrp activity via nonobligate rna chain termination (13, 14) . rtp covalently binds to the +1 position and delays chain termination between positions +3 and +5. rtp inhibits the rdrp of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 with similar efficiency and mechanism of action (14) . another recent nucleoside analog inhibitor, eidd-2801, was effective against remdesivir-resistant sars-cov-2. eidd-2801 reduced the replication and pathogenesis of covs in a manner similar to remdesivir (15) .viruses tend to adapt under drug pressure and increase the mutation rate to increase the chance per mutation of creating a beneficial mutation. this strategy ultimately leads to the development of variations for natural selection to act and create an evolving virus that is resistant to drug effects. recent data revealed that several residues in nsp12 had mutated in sars-cov-2. mutations in the remdesivir-binding site in nsp12 may induce resistance against the drug. the present work used high-throughput computational approaches to design remdesivir-binding sites in nsp12 and identify novel affinity-attenuating mutations. the data provide crucial insights into the residues that showed a very high tendency to undergo positive selection leading to remdesivir resistance. the work is important to understand and manage remdesivir resistance and may guide scientists for rational structure-based drug discovery.the interacting residues between nsp12 and remdesivir were obtained from the cryo-em structure of the sars cov-2 rdrp. a total of 56 residues from nsp12 interacted with remdesivir (fig. 1a) . notably, certain nsp12 residues, such as ala558, gly559, ser682, gly683, asp684, ser759, asp760, asp761, cys813, and ser814, interacted with remdesivir and template-primer rna. a ligand-interaction diagram further revealed that the crucial residues of nsp12 were located within a 6-å distance of remdesivir and highlighted the metal coordination with mg 2+ , the hydrogen bond with asn691 and u10 of rna, and a pi-pi stacking interaction with u20 of the template-primer rna ( fig. 1b and 1c ).ligand-based interface design of the remdesivir-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-rna complex and associated physicochemical features of the complexwe performed a ligand-based interface design of the remdesivir binding site residues of the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-rna complex. remdesivir formed key contacts and interactions with 56 residues of nsp12. notably, 10 of these 56 residues also interacted with template-primer rna.therefore, the 56 interface residues of remdesivir that bound nsp12 were designed to allow the backbone flexibility of nsp12, and the residues of nsp12 other than the interface residues were repacked. a total of 50,000 designs from the interface design were computed for rosetta's total scores, rmsd, interface delta, and sequence identity and analyzed in detail.first, the 50,000 designs of remdesivir-bound nsp12 were sampled by computing the total scores versus the rmsd, and all of the designs exhibited rmsd <1.5 å ( fig. 2a) .notably, more than half of the top-scored designs showed deviations in their rmsds below 1 å, which suggests that the designs did not deviate significantly from the starting complex structure during repacking, backbone movements and packing, and maintained their structural integrity even after the introduction of mutations in the 56 interface residues of nsp12 ( fig.   2a ). to filter the affinity-attenuating designs from the affinity-enhancing designs, we performed a control experiment in which we only repacked (without designing) the same 56 residues of nsp12. we noted that there were designs that had poor total scores than the control and relatively higher rmsds even compared to the affinity-enhancing designs, which suggests that the affinity-attenuating designs exhibited slight deviation in their overall structure from the starting structure and reached unfavored energetic states upon mutation.second, the binding affinity of the designs, represented as the interface delta, was computed and plotted against the total scores (fig. 2b) . the affinity-attenuating designs had a significantly lower binding affinity than the affinity-enhancing designs, and the control in the design calculations (fig. 2b) .third, our computation of the rmsd versus the interface delta of the 50,000 designs revealed that the designs with lower binding affinities exhibited relatively higher rmsds (fig.   2c ). while a significant number of the designed structures had improved binding affinities, several designed structures had reduced binding affinities with rmsds above 1 å as compared to the control group structures without design, suggesting that the mutations destabilized the intermolecular interactions with remdesivir (fig. 2c ).finally, we evaluated the interface delta (binding affinity) of the designs to compare the affinities with the sequence identities from the native sequence. although remdesivir had contacts with many nsp12 residues, only a few of the nsp12 residues were more prone to mutations (fig. 2d) . the designs exhibited an overall sequence identity between 96-98%, and the lower affinity binders were less conserved than the higher affinity designs. this result suggests that although nsp12 may acquire fewer mutations at the remdesivir binding site, certain residues are highly prone to mutations and develop resistance against remdesivir.however, these residues can mutate whenever the virus experiences evolutionary and immune pressure during evolution.to validate the predictive quality and accuracy of our ligand-based interface design methodology, a previously reported remdesivir-resistant mutant of sars cov, v557l, was examined (15) . val557 of nsp12 is conserved in sars cov-2, and it may mutate to leu557 or any other remdesivir-resistant mutation. to examine whether our methodology would design and rank order leu557 as one of the low-scored designs, we scored and scanned residues in the 557 th position and found that v557l was ranked as a low-scored design in the design calculations (fig. s1 ). this result demonstrated that our methodology was capable of scoring, rank-ordering, and filtering the resistance-enhancing mutations from that of the possible resistance-attenuating mutations.the 50,000 designs that were generated surrounding the remdesivir-binding site of nsp12 were classified into affinity-attenuating and affinity-enhancing designs. the 56 interacting amino acid residues of the 100 top-scored affinity-attenuating designs were analyzed and compared with the 100 top-scored affinity-enhancing designs with a higher total score and binding affinities. a mutational landscape analysis revealed that residues tyr456, asn543-ser549, lys551, ala554-thr556, gly559, val560, asp618-lys621, ala625, gly679, ser681, ser682-thr686, tyr689, ser692, asn695, ser759, asp761, ala762, asn790, glu811, phe812, and ser814 were sampled to almost identical residues in both groups, and they varied most at the remaining residues (fig. 3) . notably, some residues, such as arg553, val557, ala558, trp617, arg631, val662, and phe694, exhibited diverse mutations between the two groups but with a smaller number of amino acids sampled in these positions, other residues, including ile589, cys622, asp623, arg624, met626, thr680, ser682, thr687, ala688, ala690, asn691, leu758, asp760, and cys813, experienced more diverse sequence variations between the two groups with a relatively higher number of amino acids sampled (fig. 3) . notably, motif a (residues 613-626) and motif b (residues 675-710) were more prone and highly susceptible to mutations, and the catalytic residues ser759 and asp761 (which also interact with primer rna) were completely conserved (fig. 3 ). twenty-one residue positions of nsp12 varied between the affinity-attenuating and affinity-enhancing designs. this mutational landscape data between the affinity-attenuating and affinity-enhancing designs showed that certain amino acids and positions in the nsp12 were highly prone to mutations and even accommodated a higher number of variations. for example, the r553s, a558s, and a690d mutations that were sampled in the affinity-attenuating designs were already identified in the sars-cov-2 genomes, as reported in the cov-glue database, which contains replacements, insertions, and deletions and were observed in the gisaid hcov-19 sequences sampled from the pandemic (http://cov-glue.cvr.gla.ac.uk/#/replacement), which suggests that these viruses are probably resistant to remdesivir (fig. 3 ). this sequence-specific conservation and diversity of the remdesivir-bound nsp12 designs show the design accuracy and predictive capability of our design methodology, which suggests that these hotspot residues will likely undergo selective mutations in the near future to develop remdesivir and related drug-based resistance for the propagation of infection and survival of sars-cov-2.after the rosetta ligand-based interface design calculations, we computed the binding affinities between remdesivir and all of the rosetta-generated designs using prodigy-lig. we found that the binding affinities of remdesivir-bound designs ranged from -5.01 kcal/mol to -6.35 kcal/mol (fig. s2) . several affinity-attenuating designs generated from rosetta also had lower binding affinities in prodigy-lig scoring. for the wild-type remdesivir-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-rna complex, the binding affinity between nsp12 and remdesivir was -6.02 kcal/mol, with a total of 2862 atomic contacts. interestingly, while many of the top designs had a substantial increase in binding affinity, there were several affinity-attenuating designs with reduced binding affinity with remdesivir (fig. s2 ).to compare how the top-scored affinity-attenuating remdesivir-bound designs differ from the top-scored affinity-enhancing designs, we were interested in visualizing the various types of intermolecular interactions between them. the number of intermolecular interactions that determine these variations were also computed. the affinity-enhancing design formed 349 interactions, and the affinity-attenuating design formed only 260 interactions in total (table 1) .proximal interactions, polar contacts, hydrogen bonds, and aromatic contacts were the major interactions that governed the increased or decreased affinity between remdesivir and nsp12 ( fig. 4a and 4b) . a ligand interaction diagram between remdesivir and nsp12 for the affinityenhancing and affinity-attenuating designs shows that the lack of a pi-pi stacking interaction between remdesivir and his682 of nsp12 was one of the major contributors to lower binding affinity in the affinity-attenuating design ( fig. 4c and 4d ).the antiviral drug eidd-2801 was docked into the remdesivir binding site of sars-cov-2rdrp, and eid-2801 and remdesivir shared several common interactions with nsp12, including hydrogen bonds with asn691 and the u10 and u20 of the primer rna. eidd-2801 also established a unique hydrogen bond with ser159 ( fig. 5a and 5b ). because eidd-2801 shared a significant number of similar interactions with remdesivir (fig. 5c ), we performed a ligand-based interface design of eidd-2801 binding site residues of nsp12 and found 65 contacts and interactions with nsp12. the identical design condition and methodology used in the remdesivir-based nsp12 design was performed, and 50,000 designs from the interface designs were computed for rosetta total score, rmsd, interface delta, and sequence identity.similar to the remdesivir-bound nsp12 designs, we first sampled the 50,000 designs of eidd-2801-bound nsp12 by computing the total scores versus the rmsd (fig. s3a) . we also performed a control experiment in which we only repacked the same 65 residues of nsp12 and considered the designs that were poorer in total score and binding affinity. we found that the designs with higher-energy also exhibited rmsds far from the native (>1.0 å). our subsequent calculations of total score versus interface delta, which showed the binding affinity, demonstrated that the lower binding affinity designs retained relatively higher energies, and a substantial number of designs had lower binding affinity compared to the control group structures (fig. s3b) . we analyzed and plotted the rmsd versus the interface delta of the designs and observed that the designs with significantly lower binding affinities for eidd-2801 were structurally a bit far from the native structures (fig. s3c ). more than half of the designs scored poorer than the control group, which showed the effect of mutations in the eidd-2801 binding site of nsp12. the final evaluation of the binding affinities compared to the sequence identity of the designs revealed similar characteristics to the remdesivir-binding nsp12 designs, in which only four residues were more prone to mutations (fig. s3d ). this result suggests that a few residues of nsp12 from sars-cov-2 are more susceptible to mutations at the eidd-2801 binding site and may develop resistance via beneficial mutations to avoid evolutionary and external pressure.the 50,000 designs that were generated surrounding the eidd-2801 binding site of nsp12 were classified into affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating designs, similar to remdesivir. the 65 interacting amino acid residues of the 100 top-scored affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating designs from each group were analyzed. a mutational landscape analysis revealed that residues arg555, val557, val560, tyr619, met626, ser682, thr687, ala688, asn691, phe694, and asn695 exhibited diverse mutations between the two groups but with a fewer number of amino acids sampled in these positions (fig. s4) . notably, some other residues, including lys545 and cys622, exhibited more diverse sequence variations between the two groups and with a relatively higher number of amino acids sampled (fig. s4) . thirteen residue positions of nsp12 varied between the affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating designs compared to 21 residues in the remdesivir-bound nsp12 designs. this mutational landscape data between the affinity-attenuating and affinity-enhancing designs shows that remdesivir binding sites of nsp12 had a higher number of mutations, and the eidd-2801 binding site residues of nsp12 were relatively immune to mutations.our binding affinity calculations using prodigy-lig for the eidd-2801-bound designs showed that the designs exhibited binding affinities that ranged from -6.26 kcal/mol to -7.27 kcal/mol (fig. s5) . with the decrease in the number of total contacts, the binding affinities were decreased. however, the difference in the binding affinity of the remdesivirbound designs was higher (-1.34 kcal/mol) compared to the eidd-2801-bound designs (-1.01 kcal/mol).we visualized the various types of intermolecular interactions between the top-scored affinity-enhancing designs of eidd-2801 and the top-scored affinity-attenuating designs of eidd-2801. we found that the affinity-enhancing design formed 296 interactions, but the affinity-attenuating design formed only 245 interactions in total (table 1) . proximal interactions, polar contacts, and hydrogen bonds were the major interactions that governed the increased or decreased affinity between eidd-2801-nsp12. a ligand interaction diagram between eidd-2801 and nsp12 for the affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating designs clearly shows that the absence of a higher number of hydrogen bonds with asn691 and arg682 formed between nsp12 and eidd-2801 contributed to the lower binding affinity (fig. s6) .we further computed the normal modes of nsp12 of sars-cov-2 rdrp to understand which portions and sites of nsp12 undergo large amplitude movements. comparisons of these modes to our remdesivir-binding site designs of nsp12 is crucial to understand the dynamics and flexibility of crucial nsp12 sites. first, our analysis of the displacement of each c⍺ atom for modes 7 to 12 revealed that residues 400-750 were mostly stable across all modes (fig. s7) .second, our calculation of the square of the fluctuation of each c⍺ atom calculated from the 200 lowest nontrivial modes and normalized highlighted that nsp12 residues from 400-800 exhibited fewer fluctuations compared to other sites (fig. 6a) . finally, our residue correlation analysis, which represented the correlated movement of the c⍺ atom in the nsp12 protein, showed that residues 450-780 of nsp12 undergo a highly correlated coupled motion (fig. 6b ).all of these data suggest that nsp12 residues 450-780 are highly stable and do not exhibit much fluctuation. these data correlated well with our design results, which showed that the remdesivir-bound nsp12 designs exhibited lower rmsds and did not undergo large conformational changes even after mutations.rna viruses have a remarkable ability to adapt to new hosts, environments, and drugs via the development of genetic variations in a short time (16) . the rna viruses tended to mutate faster than dna viruses, and single-strand viruses exhibit higher mutation rates than double-strand viruses. mutation rates are not fixed and evolve in response to drug pressures. there are many examples of virus mutations that alter virulence or cause drug resistance. the resistance against the nucleoside analog azidothymidine (azt) is a classic example of the importance of viral mutation. azt was the first approved drug for human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) treatment, but hiv rapidly developed azt-resistance mutations that led to the failure of azt monotherapy. sars-cov-2 has maintained a low mutation rate, which is attributed to the 3'to-5' exoribonuclease activity of the nsp14 protein, which helps maintain its replication fidelity (17) . the low mutation rate of sars-cov-2 suggests that it may evolve relatively slowly compared to other viruses, but the comparative rates of evolution also depend on how many sites are targeted by selection. however, sars-cov-2 often fails to infect close contacts, which suggests that there is an abundant scope to increase transmission ability in the future (18) . the viral load in a patient is very high (~100,000 viral copies per ml of saliva), which suggests that every possible mutation may develop over the course of the infection (19) . the occurrence of extremely high viral loads may also account for the fast-spreading nature of the covid-19 pandemic.rdrps catalyze the rna template-dependent formation of phosphodiester bonds and facilitate virus replication and transcription. the nsp12 subunit of the rdrp of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov share a high homology, which suggests that its function and mechanism of action are well conserved (10, 20) . rdrps are the primary targets for antiviral drug development against sars-cov-2, and several rdrp-targeting drugs, such as remdesivir, favipiravir galidesivir, ribavirin, and penciclovir, are in testing stages (21) (22) (23) . remdesivir is an investigational, broad-spectrum antiviral drug that demonstrated activity against covs and other rna viruses. it is being tested as a potential treatment for covid-19 in multisite clinicalrdrp that led to drug-resistance were observed previously (22, 25, 26) . since its emergence in november 2019, several mutations in the rdrp of sars-cov-2 were reported. a total of 783 nsp12 mutations have been reported and are listed in the cov-glue database, and 15 residues are in the remdesivir-binding site. a recent study identified mutation hotspots in sars-cov-2 (27) . they showed that viral strains with rdrp mutation had a median of 3-point mutations, and viral strains with no rdrp mutation had a median of 1 mutation. a mutation in position 14408 of sars-cov-2 rdrp was associated with an increased mutation rate (27) . two nsp12 mutations (f480l and v557l) conferred an up to 5.6-fold resistance to sars-cov (22) , and these residues are conserved across all covs.a detailed atomic-level understanding of rdrp interaction with remdesivir using robust molecular technologies could revolutionize the development of new therapies to fight covid-19 in a highly specific and efficient manner. we designed 50,000 remdesivirinteracting nsp12 residues using high-throughput ligand-based interface designing. we also docked the oral nhc prodrug (β-d-n 4 -hydroxycytidine-5′-isopropyl ester) eidd-2801, which is similar to remdesivir because both drugs work by mimicking ribonucleosides, into the remdesivir binding site of sars-cov-2 rdrp and designed 50,000 eidd-2801-interacting nsp12 residues. therefore, a total of 100,000 designs were made and analyzed in detail. the most striking result was that even after designing 56 residues in remdesivir binding site of nsp12 and 65 residues in the eidd-2801 binding site of nsp12, the designs retained 96-98% sequence identity, which suggests that sars-cov-2 attained resistance with very few mutations in nsp12. these highly mutation-prone residues/sites should be critically considered in the development of future therapeutics and during analyses of pandemic evolution. the affinity-attenuating designs showed lower remdesivir binding, which indicates that the sars-cov-2 could develop remdesivir resistance via mutations at these residues. these hotspot residues would likely undergo selective mutations in the future to establish remdesivir and related drug resistance. our design methodology mutated and rank-ordered specific remdesivir-resistance mutations of sars-cov, which highlights its accuracy and predicting ability. the normal mode analysis and residue correlation analysis suggest that residues 400-750 are mostly stable across all modes and undergo a highly correlated coupled motion, which suggests that this region does not exhibit much fluctuation. these results correlate well with our design results, in which remdesivir-bound nsp12 designs did not undergo large conformational changes, and retained 96-98% sequence identity even after mutations modulated the binding affinities with remdesivir and eidd-2801. compared to the 21 nsp12 residues in the remdesivir-bound designs, only 13 nsp12 residues varied in the eidd-2801bound designs. this result suggests that eidd-2801 is more effective in preventing the emergence of resistance mutations due to the restricted mutational landscape and explains why eidd-2801 is effective against remdesivir-resistance mutations. our cohesive and comprehensive work highlights the hotspot residues of nsp12 that have the potential to undergo mutation to develop remdesivir resistance. information on potential mutants could help clinicians adjust drug regimens to administer treatments earlier and more aggressively in higher-risk conditions.we acknowledge certain limitations in the current study. our rosetta ligand-based interface design method (and scoring function) is set to design mutants with improved interface delta and therefore increased binding affinity to remdesivir. however, ideally, the remdesivirresistance mutations are affinity-attenuating designs. to the best of our knowledge, at present, neither rosetta nor any other programs have protocols to accurately score and predict affinityattenuating designs to correlate with a drug resistance mutation. nonetheless, rosetta methodology remains the only useful design-based tool for mutational mapping and prediction of specific residues involved in enhancing or attenuating protein-ligand interaction. therefore, to make sure that our rosetta protocol captures the correct affinity-attenuating designs to correlate with remdesivir-resistance mutations, we carried out control experiments by taking the wild-type and a previously known remdesivir-resistance sars-cov mutation as control.we argue that the affinity-attenuating designs representing the potential hotspot residues have a higher probability of undergoing selective mutations in the future to develop remdesivir and related drug-based resistance. finally, owing to a lack of the structure of the rdrp-eidd-2801 complex, the exact structural information predicted from the docked complex of rdrp-eidd-2801 might not be precise; however, since remdesivir and eidd-2801 bind at the same position, the error might not be significant enough to impact our design results.we conclude that, in the absence of detailed information on the evolutionary forces and the role of selection pressures, predicting how a virus may evolve is a challenging task, particularly during a nascent outbreak. the rapid availability of more sars-cov-2 genomes, most of which differ by one or few mutations, is enabling accurate investigations into spread patterns. genomic epidemiology-based analysis is being used to control the fast-growing sars-cov-2 outbreak. our prediction on the mutation repertoires complements research to understand and manage drug resistance and pathogenesis and guides development strategies to deter future cross-species transmissions.the cryo-em structure of the rna-dependent rna polymerase from sars cov-2 (pdb id: 7bv2) consists of an nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex bound to the template-primer rna and triphosphate form of rtp (11) . these data were retrieved from the rcsb protein data bank and subsequently used to obtain the key interactions and contacts between nsp12 and remdesivir. a total of 56 residues from nsp12 interacted with remdesivir.eidd-2801 is an orally bioavailable nhc prodrug (β-d-n 4 -hydroxycytidine-5′-isopropyl ester) that is similar to remdesivir, and both drugs work by mimicking ribonucleosides. therefore, eidd-2801 was docked into the remdesivir binding site of the rna-dependent rna polymerase of sars-cov-2 (15). molecular docking was performed using the autodock tools to dock the eidd-2801 into the nsp12 binding cavity, in which it exerts its antiviral action via the introduction of copying errors during viral rna replication (28, 29) .the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex included the rna and mg 2+ catalytic ions. pdb id: 7bv2 is cocrystallized with the remdesivir. the same binding grid was selected for the eidd-2801 docking studies. the protein and ligands were prepared using the mgl tools. hydrogens and kollman charges were added to the protein, and hydrogen and gaisteger charges were added to eidd-2801 for preparation. the grid was set as x=42, y=46, and z=52 with 0.375-å grid spacing. the protein and ligand were docked, and 100 binding poses were generated for the analysis. the best binding pose that laid well in the binding cavity and showed interactions with the key catalytic residues were selected for further analysis. the interactions between the complex and ligands were identified. a total of 65 residues from nsp12 interacted with eidd-2801.the crystal structure of remdesivir-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 and the eidd-2801-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 in complex with template-primer rna were first optimized using schrödinger maestro (schrödinger release 2016-4: maestro, schrödinger, new york). the parameters for remdesivir and eidd-2801 were not available a priori for rosetta-compatible forcefield.therefore, the appropriate charges were added, and parameters for remdesivir and eidd-2801 were generated. the resulting complexes with remdesivir and eidd-2801 were used for structural refinement by rosetta relax, which is the main protocol for all-atom refinement of structures in the rosetta forcefield (30) . ten models were generated for each design group in this step, namely the remdesivir-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-template-primer rna and eidd-2801-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-template-primer rna. the full atom-relaxed structures from each group with the lowest energy were used for subsequent ligand-based interface design experiments. the catalytically critical mg 2+ ions were retained in all of the refinement and subsequent design steps.rosetta macromolecular modeling suite was used to perform the ligand-based interface design experiments (31) . the nsp12 was redesigned with allowed backbone flexibility using rosetta's full-atom scoring function in the remdesivir-and eidd-2801-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8template-primer rna-bound structures. for the remdesivir-wrapped nsp12-nsp7-nsp8template-primer rna-bound structure, 56 residues of nsp12 that are known to interact with remdesivir were designed with 19 other amino acids, and 65 residues of nsp12 were designed to have intermolecular contacts with eidd-2801 for the eidd-2801-bound nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-template-primer rna-bound structure. during these design experiments, all of the other residues of nsp12, nsp7, and nsp8 were allowed to repack without design. a total of 100,000 designs comprised of remdesivir-and eidd-2801-bound complexes were generated. a modified rosettascripts was used to design the interface residues of nsp12 in complex with remdesivir and eidd-2801 that considered small movement of the backbone of nsp12 to avoid steric clashes with ligands upon the introduction of mutations (32) . the designs were sampled using monte-carlo simulated annealing in the rosetta all-atom force field. for a comprehensive understanding of the structural and residue-specific changes of nsp12 upon interaction with remdesivir and eidd-2801, the rosetta total score, root mean square deviation (rmsd) from the starting structure, rosetta interface delta (representing the binding affinity between the designed nsp12 with remdesivir and eidd-2801), and the percentage sequence identity from the starting sequence were obtained.to test the accuracy and reliability of our ligand-based rosetta interface design protocol, we considered a previously reported remdesivir-resistant mutant of sars cov, v557l, in which val557 is a remdesivir-interacting residue of nsp12 (15) . during this step, the val557 residue was designed with the 19 other amino acids, but the remaining nsp12 residues were allowed to repack without further design. a total of 5000 designs were generated at 557 th position and analyzed to monitor the highly prevalent designed residues with their corresponding scores and rankings.the type and frequency of designed amino acids in the 56 and 65 nsp12-interacting residues of remdesivir and eidd-2801, respectively, from the top-ranked affinity-enhanced and affinityattenuated designs were obtained and plotted using weblogo, which graphically represents the multiple sequence alignment of an amino acid profile (33) . the residue index is shown in the x-axis of these plots, and the sequence conservation of an amino acid at that position is shown in the y-axis. the height of symbols within the stack in each plot indicates the relative frequency of a specific amino acid at that position.the 100,000 remdesivir-and eidd-2801-bound nsp12 structures generated using rosetta ligand-based interface designs were subjected to the calculation of the binding affinities using prodigy-li (protein binding energy prediction -ligands), which is a structure-based method for the prediction of binding affinity in protein-ligand complexes (34, 35) . a 3d model of the design with the bound ligand was supplied, and the binding affinity was computed. from the rosetta-designed structures, the binding affinity (δg) and the contact counts were obtained for analysis. a detailed decomposition of intermolecular contacts was obtained for the top five affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating designs for the remdesivir-and eidd-2801-bound nsp12 structures.the intermolecular interactions between top-ranked affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating remdesivir-nsp12 and eidd-2801-nsp12 designs were obtained using the arpeggio webserver (36) . the total number of interactions obtained represents the sum of the number of van der waals, proximal, polar contacts, hydrogen bonds, aromatic contacts, hydrophobic contacts, and carbonyl interactions.the 2d-ligand interaction diagrams showing the various types of intermolecular interactions between remdesivir-nsp12 and eidd-2801-nsp12 top-ranked affinity-enhancing and affinityattenuating designs were obtained using top-ranked affinity-enhancing and affinity-attenuating remdesivir-nsp12 and eidd-2801-nsp12 designs were obtained using schrödinger maestro (schrödinger release 2016-4: maestro, schrödinger, new york). a distance up to 6 å from the ligand molecule was considered while constructing the interaction diagrams.the normal mode analysis, deformation energies of each mode, calculation of normalized squared atomic displacements, normalized squared fluctuations, and the correlation matrix of nsp12 were calculated using webnm@ server (37, 38) . shows residues that exhibited diverse mutations between the two groups but with a fewer number of amino acids sampled, and the red arrow shows residues that experienced more diverse sequence variations between the two groups with a relatively higher number of sampled amino acids. w hile children are at lower risk for severe disease, they can experience morbidity and mortality due to coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) (1) . models project between 3.7 and 37 million children could develop covid-19 by the end of 2020 (2) . there are limited pediatric clinical data. the objective of this observational study is to describe the demographics, clinical presentation, and outcomes to date of hospitalized pediatric covid-19 patients in the earliest weeks of the pandemic. the hospital courses of those mechanically ventilated are described in detail. we then sought to compare demographics and clinical presentation of critically ill children to children who were hospitalized but not critically ill.this report includes all patients with confirmed covid-19 hospitalized at riley hospital for children at indiana university health in indianapolis, as of may 4, 2020. testing for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in indiana began february 26, and the first confirmed case was march 6 (3). critical illness was defined as requiring admission to the picu. all covid-19 patients had an infectious disease consultation. institutional treatment guidelines at the time considered hydroxychloroquine, and remdesivir if available via compassionate use. tocilizumab was available for patients with cytokine storm. convalescent serum was available for some. standardized laboratories were obtained. oxygenation saturation index (osi) was calculated with the following formula (4): at the time of writing, 24 out of 407 children tested positive for sars-cov-2 at our hospital. nineteen pediatric covid-19 patients required hospitalization. seven were critically ill, with four requiring intubation (fig. 1) . demographics, comorbidities, and presenting symptoms stratified by critical illness are presented ( table 1) . comorbidities were present in two intubated patients: one had cerebral palsy and restrictive lung disease and the other had an elevated body mass index and new-onset diabetic ketoacidosis.as compared to other hospitalized patients with pediatric covid-19, those who developed critical illness had longer duration of symptoms (p = 0.036) and significantly lower oxygen saturation on room air (p = 0.016) on presentation. the critically ill also had significantly more thrombocytopenia (p = 0.015), and higher c-reactive protein (crp) (p = 0.031). wbc was significantly lower in critically ill patients (p = 0.039), although interquartile ranges (iqrs) were within normal range for both groups. five patients had coinfections with other respiratory viruses, including rhinovirus/enterovirus (n = 2), human coronavirus nl63 (n = 1), respiratory syncytial virus (n = 1), and parainfluenza virus (n = 1). these included three critically ill (3/6, 50%) and two noncritical patients (2/9, 22%; p = 0.33). all critically ill patients had abnormal chest radiograph findings compared with 56% of noncritical patients; however, there was no statistical significance.of the critically ill, three patients were treated with high flow nasal cannula and had an uneventful picu course. four patients required intubation (fig. 1) , with three intubated within 24 hours of presentation due to hypoxia. the fourth presented in new-onset diabetic ketoacidosis/hyperosmolar hyperglycemia. he initially tested negative for sars-cov-2, was intubated on hospital day 4, and tested positive for sars-cov-2 at that time. duration of mechanical ventilation averaged 14.1 days. all critically ill patients were initially treated initial interleukin (il)-6 level 9 pg/ml (normal < 5 pg/ml). b, adolescent white male with history of cerebral palsy and restrictive lung disease. required mechanical ventilation for 24 d and hospitalized for a total of 36 d. initial il-6 level 32 pg/ml. c, infant african-american male with no past medical history. required mechanical ventilation for 11 d and hospitalized for a total of 20 d. initial il-6 level 11 pg/ml. d, adolescent african-american male with elevated body mass index presenting with new-onset diabetic ketoacidosis. required mechanical ventilation for 7 d and hospitalized for a total of 11 d. initial il-6 level less than 5 pg/ml. this patient died after sudden cardiac arrest. crp = c-reactive protein, osi = oxygenation saturation index. with broad-spectrum antibiotics until diagnosis of covid-19 was confirmed. cultures from blood and other specimens were obtained at admission to rule out bacterial infection as appropriate. therapies, including pharmacologic and supportive care, are outlined in figure 1 . remdesivir was considered for all mechanically ventilated patients; two received it. one patient did not qualify, and the other was not given remdesivir due to acute kidney injury and mild rhabdomyolysis from hyperosmolar hyperglycemia.these critically ill patients had complicated courses. one patient, treated with remdesivir, developed transaminitis (alanine transaminase 290 u/l and aspartate transaminase 1,271 u/l) and significant rhabdomyolysis (creatine kinase 55,360 u/l) with peak values the day after completing remdesivir. two patients developed secondary bacterial infections. one patient developed increased hypoxia and hypothermia after 14 days of ventilation; respiratory culture demonstrated pseudomonas aeruginosa. he was treated with cefepime and nebulized tobramycin. another patient failed extubation after 8 days of ventilation; respiratory culture demonstrated haemophilus influenzae and moraxella catarrhalis. he was treated with amoxicillin-clavulanate. one patient died after sudden cardiac arrest. his crp and ferritin improved after receiving tocilizumab and convalescent sera, however, on day 6 of mechanical ventilation (hospital day 11), he developed a nonperfusing junctional rhythm, then ventricular tachycardia, and was unable to be resuscitated. cause of death remains unclear and a postmortem examination was not performed.we describe characteristics, critical care courses, and comparisons among hospitalized pediatric covid-19 patients, including seven with critical illness, during the early weeks of the pandemic at a u.s. children's hospital. these initial findings deserve further exploration in larger studies. we noted severe covid-19 disease for some patients, with a greater proportion of hospitalized children requiring mechanical ventilation (21.5%) than has been reported to date. these included patients without comorbidities. we also experienced a pediatric death related to covid-19.at the time of diagnosis with sars-cov-2, critically ill patients had symptoms for a longer period of time and were significantly more hypoxic, thrombocytopenic, and inflamed. per international reports, mechanical ventilation for children with covid-19 is rare with only one in the coronavirus infection in pediatric emergency departments (confidence) study (1%), two in lombardy, italy (0.1%), and 13 out of 2,141 in china (5-7). u.s. hospitals have reported lower proportions of intubated critically ill pediatric covid-19 patients and fewer ventilated days (8, 9) . thrombocytopenia was associated with critical illness and has been described as an early finding in patients with covid-19 (10) . thrombocytopenia is suspected to be multifactorial and could be due to cytokine storm or direct effects of sars-cov-2 on bone marrow, host immunity, or lung parenchyma (11) . consistent with a chinese study, crp was elevated in 10 of 13 children (12) , and in our cohort, higher crp was associated with critical illness. wbc was lower in critically ill patients, although the iqrs for both groups were within normal. our center appears to have a greater proportion of pediatric cases requiring mechanical ventilation than is reported elsewhere (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) . further research is needed to understand factors associated with critical illness and mechanical ventilation for pediatric covid-19.we note that the clinical and laboratory findings in critically ill children with covid-19 in this study (decreased oxygen saturation, thrombocytopenia, and elevated crp) are also seen in children with bacterial sepsis (13, 14) . thus, the present study does not provide clinical findings or biomarkers c that might distinguish critical covid-19 from sepsis. typical management for these critical cases includes broad-spectrum antimicrobials while sars-cov-2 testing and bacterial cultures are pending. the crp and osi of the four intubated patients improved with various therapies. the most striking improvements were noted in patients 2 and 4 following tocilizumab, convalescent sera, and prone positioning. the osi for patients 1 and 3 did improve after starting remdesivir, although crp did not. this difference, of unclear clinical significance, could be due to the tocilizumab targeting the il-6 receptor and causing mitigation of the cytokine cascade, while remdesivir and convalescent plasma target sars-cov-2. with a small number of ventilated patients and three of four having received a combination of therapies, it is challenging to investigate the role of any single therapy.the death of patient 4 occurred unexpectedly. his crp and ferritin improved after receiving tocilizumab and convalescent sera, however, his d-dimer gradually rose compared with the other three patients. although there has been a concern for thrombotic events in patients with covid-19, this patient was on anticoagulation at the time with a therapeutic anti-xa of 0.5 international units/ml.certain demographics appear to be associated with critical illness in pediatric covid-19. although there was one critically ill infant in our cohort, older children appear more likely to have critical illness. most patients in our report were male (73.7%), and all critically ill patients were male. a slight male predominance among children with covid-19 has been reported out of italy (57%, confidence study), the united states (52-57%), and china (56.6%) (6-9, 15). by contrast, eight of 10 infants with covid-19 were female in another chinese report (16) . larger pediatric studies could better define whether risk of severe covid-19 in the united states is increased in male children.limited data currently exist on racial/ethnic disparities among hospitalized pediatric covid-19 patients. in this report, 74% of hospitalized pediatric covid-19 patients and five of seven critically ill children (71%) were african-american or hispanic. indiana's population is 85.1% caucasian, 9.8% african-american, and 7.1% hispanic (17) . thus, both moderate and severe covid-19 disproportionately affected african-american and hispanic children. given the few significant comorbidities in our report, disparities may point to greater risks for acquiring sars-cov-2 among african-american and hispanic children. structural racism underlies wide health inequities in the united states (18) and must be addressed in the covid-19 pandemic, including impacts of the pandemic on children of color.limitations of this report include the small number of patients, which limits the conclusions that may be drawn. additionally, some mild cases did not have laboratories completed due to a combination of an average 12-hour turnaround in sars-cov-2 testing and rapid clinical improvement, leading to same-day discharges from the hospital. we note, however, key observations that may inform other pediatric centers and should prompt investigation in larger studies. although these data come from review of medical records, an institutional algorithm and infectious disease consultation on each case supported consistent documentation.severe, protracted covid-19 disease is seen in pediatric patients, including those without significant comorbidities. older children, african-american or hispanic children, and males may be at risk for severe covid-19 requiring hospitalization. hypoxia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated crp may be useful markers of critical illness. larger studies are needed to examine associations with severe covid-19 in pediatrics. data regarding optimal management and therapies for pediatric covid-19 are urgently needed.on 23 feb 2020, the lock-down of wuhan, a central city in china, has alarmed people all over the world of an emerging novel coronavirus that is posing a major public health and governance challenges. the novel virus, previously called the 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), is currently designated as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2). as of 27 feb, this emerging infection has been reported in 47 countries, causing over 82,294 infections with 2,804 deaths ( fig. 1 ) [1] . this novel virus is also becoming a mounting threat to chinese and global economies.coronaviruses (covs) are members of the family coronaviridae, the enveloped viruses that possess extraordinarily large single-stranded rna genomes ranging from 26 to 32 kilobases in length [2] . covs have been identified in both avian hosts and various mammals, including bat, camels, dogs and masked palm civets, and are previously regarded as pathogens that only cause mild diseases in the immunocompetent people until the emergence of the coronavirus causing severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov) in late of 2002 [3] [4] [5] [6] . currently, at least seven coronavirus species are known to cause diseases in humans. the viruses of 229e, oc43, nl63 and hku1 only cause common cold symptoms, which are mild. severe illness can be caused by the remaining three viruses, namely sars-cov, which resulted in the outbreak of sars in 2002 and 2003 [3, 4] ; the coronaviruses that are responsible the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov), which emerged in 2012 and remains in the circulation in camels [7] ; and sars-cov-2, the viruses emerged in december 2019 in wuhan of china and a great effort is being undertaken to contain its spreading [8] .in this review, we will briefly introduce the outbreak history of sars-cov-2, the signs and symptoms of the infected patients, its transmission dynamics, the advances in the understanding on its evolutional origin and the chemotherapeutic options being developed for the treatment of its infection. the key events of sars-cov-2 outbreak and the pathogen characteristics since december 2019, an increasing number of patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology in wuhan, a city with 11 million people, have alarmed the local hospital. on 29 december 4 cases were linked to huanan seafood wholesale market [9] , where non-aquatic live animals, including several kinds of wild animals, were also on the sales. the local center for disease control (cdc) then found additional patients linked to the same market after investigation, and reported to china cdc on 30 dec 2019 [9] . the second day, world health organization (who) was informed of the cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology by china cdc [10]. on 6 jan 2020, a level 2 emergency response was launched by china cdc [11] .the causal agent was not identified until 7 jan 2020; a new type of coronavirus was isolated by chinese authority [10] . the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 (wh-human_1) was first released and shared by china on 10 jan [12] . the isolation and identification of sars-cov-2 apparently facilitated the development of molecular diagnostic methods and the confirmation of the infected patients. as of 21 jan, there are 270 cases were confirmed from wuhan [13]. on 23 jan, wuhan city was locked down by local government. on 30 jan, who declared a "public health emergency of international concern" (fig. 1) .subsequently, the viruses were successfully isolated from several laboratories [8, 14, 15] . the virion of sars-cov-2 looks like a solar corona by transmission electron microscopy imaging: the virus particle is in a spherical shape with some pleomorphism; the diameter of the virus particles range from 60 to 140 nm with distinctive spikes about 8 to 12 nm in length [8] . the observed morphology of sars-cov-2 is consistent with the typical characteristics of the coronaviridae family. the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 from clinical samples has been obtained by several laboratories with deep sequencing [8, [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . the viral genome of sars-cov-2 is around 29.8 kilobase, with a g+c content of 38%, in total consisting of six major open reading frames (orfs) common to coronaviruses and a number of other accessory genes [14, 16] . the sequences analysis showed that the genome sequences of viruses from different patients are very conserved [14, 15, 19] , implying that the human virus evolves recently.a typical characteristic of the sars-cov-2 infected patient is pneumonia, now termed as coronavirus disease 2019 , demonstrated by computer tomographic (ct) scan or chest x -ray [3, 8, 18] . in the early stages, the patients showed the acute respiratory infection symptoms, with some that quickly developed acute respiratory failure and other serious complications [20] . the first three patients reported by the china novel coronavirus investigating and research team all developed severe pneumonia and two of these three patients with available clinical profiles showed a common feature of fever and cough [8] . a subsequent investigation of a family of six patients in the university of hong kong-shenzhen hospital demonstrated that all of them had pulmonary infiltrates, with a variety of other symptoms [18] . the chest x-ray and ct imaging in a study showed that 75% of 99 patients demonstrated bilateral pneumonia and the remaining 25% unilateral pneumonia [21] . overall, 14% of the patients showed multiple mottling and ground-glass opacity [21] . the first cases of coronavirus infection in the united states also showed basilar streaky opacities in both lungs by chest radiography. however, the pneumonia for this patient was only detected on the day 10 of his illness [22] . it is also of note that one of patients among the family of six patients did not present any other symptoms and signs, but had ground-glass lung opacities identified by ct scan [18] . at least four comprehensive studies on the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of sars-cov-2 infected patients have been performed [21, [23] [24] [25] . the most common signs and symptoms of patients are fever and cough [21, [23] [24] [25] . fatigue was complained by 96% of patients (n=138) in one study [24] , but was less outstanding (18%, n=44) in another report [23] . a combinational analysis of the common recorded signs or symptoms of the reported cases found that fever was observed in around 90% of the sars-cov-2 infected patients; the number of patients with cough is relatively less (68%) compared to fever (table 1 ). in addition, shortness of breath or dyspnea, muscle ache, headache, chest pain, diarrhea, haemoptysis, sputum production, rhinorrhoea, nausea and vomiting, sore throat, confusion, and anorexia were also observed in a proportion of the patients [21, [23] [24] [25] (table 1) .a common feature of patients of sars, mers or covid-19 is the presence of severe acute respiratory syndrome; however, the estimated fatality rate of covid-19 (2.3%) is much lower than sars (~10%) and mers (~36%) [26, 27] . furthermore, the viruses responsible for above three diseases are evolutionary distinct (see below for details) [19] .it is clear now that sars-cov-2 can be transmitted by human-to-human despite the majority of the early cases had contact history with the huanan seafood market [11, 18, 28] . analysis of 425 patients with confirmed covid-19 showed that the incubation period is 3 to 7 days. the mean was 5.2 days (95% ci: 4.1 to 7.0), and the 95 th percentile of the distribution is 12.5 days (95% ci: 9.2 to 18) [11] . notably, it was reported that the incubation period could be as long as 24 days in a rare case [25] . the basic reproductive number (r 0 ) up to the period of 4 jan 2020 was estimated based on the study of 425 patients to be 2.2 (meaning that one patient has been spreading infection to 2.2 other people) [11] , slightly smaller than the value of 2.68 by a modelling in another [29] . the r 0 of sars-cov-2 from both of these two studies is smaller than that of sras, which are 3 before public health measures were implemented [30] . however, subsequent investigation based on the analysis of high-resolution real-time human travel and infection data estimated that the r 0 is much larger, ranging from 4.7 to 6.6 before the control measures [31] , implying that sars-cov-2 is highly contagious and more infectious than initially estimated. this conclusion is consistent with the wide spread of sars-cov-2 within a short period time and was also echoed by the finding that sars-cov-2 spike (s) protein had 10-to 20-fold higher affinity to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor than that of sars-cov based on the cryo-em structure analysis of s proteins [32] . similar to sars-cov, the entry of sars-cov-2 into host cells depends on the recognition and binding of s protein to ace2 receptor of the host cells [14, 33] . the high affinity of s protein to ace2 receptor likely contributes to the quick spreading of virus. the finding of ace2 as the receptor of sars-cov-2 also indicates that human organs with high ace2 expression level, such as lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes of the small intestine, are potentially the target of sars-cov-2 [34] .as a new coronavirus, it is not known yet about how sars-cov-2 spreads. current knowledge for sars-cov-2 transmission is largely based on what is known from the similar coronaviruses, particularly sars-cov and mers-cov, in which human-tohuman transmission occurs through droplets, contact and fomites. sars-cov is predominantly transmitted through indirect or direct contact with mucous membranes in the mouth, eyes, or nose [35] . it has been shown that unprotected eyes and exposed mucous membranes are vulnerable to sars-cov transmission [36] . a member of the national expert panel on pneumonia was infected by sars-cov-2 after the inspection in wuhan [37] . as he wore a n95 mask but not any eye protector, and experienced eye redness before the onset of pneumonia, it was thus suspected that unprotected exposure of the eyes to sars-cov-2 might be another transmission pathway [37] . however, sars-cov-2 was not detected from the conjunctival swab sample in a confirmed covid-19 patent with conjunctivitis [38] , suggesting that more evidences are needed before concluding the conjunctival route as the transmission pathway of sars-cov-2. the mode of transmission by mers-cov is not well understood but is believed to spread largely via the respiratory close contact route [39, 40] .based on the transmission mode of sars-cov and mers-cov, a serial of preventive measures have been recommended, including avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections and frequent hand-washing [41] . the viruses of sars-cov-2 were also detected in the stool samples in some patients but not all [18, 22] , suggesting that a possible fecal-oral transmission occurs [42] . a systematic study showed that viruses could be detected in oral swabs, anal swabs and blood samples of the patients, and the anal swabs and blood could test positive when oral swab tested negative [43] . furthermore, a trend of shift from more oral positive in the collected samples during the early period of patient infection to more anal positive during later period of infection was also found [43] . therefore, a multiple shedding routes of sars-cov-2 might exist.one of the challenges for preventive control of sars-cov-2 spreading is that the viruses are likely transmitted by asymptomatic contact. a german businessman was found infected by sars-cov-2 after attending a conference together with a colleague, who had no signs or symptoms of infection but had become ill due to the sars-cov-2 infection later [44] . this observation suggests that infected patients likely start to shed viruses before the onset of any symptom, which undoubtedly will bring great challenge to the current practice of preventive control by measuring body temperature. despite the claim of the transmission by asymptomatic contact has been challenged [45] , other asymptomatic carriers were also observed to transmit the viruses of sars-cov-2 [46, 47] . consistently, a study found that an asymptomatic patient had a similar vial loads in the samples of nasal and throat swabs to that of the symptomatic patients [48] .it is critical to identify the origin, native host(s) and evolution pathway of the virus that causes an outbreak of a pandemic. this information can help understand the molecular mechanism of its cross-species spread and implement a proper control measure to prevent it from further spreading. the association of initially confirmed sars-cov-2 cases with huanan seafood market suggested that the marketplace has played a role in the early spreading [11, 23] , however, whether it is the origin of the outbreak and what is the native host(s) of sars-cov-2 remain uncertain. in fact, the firstly documented patient was not linked to huanan seafood market [23] .the analysis of sars-cov-2 origin was firstly performed based on the genome sequence of virus isolates from six patients [19] . when compared with sars-cov and mers-cov, the nucleotide sequences of sars-cov-2 showed a higher homology with that of sars-cov while was relatively poor with that of mers-cov [19] . despite some of the six major ofrs of sars-cov-2 genes share less than 80% identity in nucleotide acids to sars-cov, the seven conserved replicase domains in orf1ab has 94.6% sequence identity in amino acids between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov [14] , suggesting that these two viruses might belong to the same species. the origin of sars-cov has been extensively investigated. masked palm civets were initially considered to transmit sars-cov to humans as a close variant of sars-cov was detected from palm civets [49] . this conclusion was supported by the fact that three of the four patients had the record of contact with palm civets during the two small-scale of sars outbreaks occurred in late 2003 and early 2004 [50, 51] . however, a deep investigation based on the genome sequence of isolated viruses showed that sars-cov-like virus in civet had not been circulating for long [52] . subsequently, coronaviruses with high similarity to the human sars-cov or civet sars-cov-like virus were isolated from horseshoe bats, concluding the bats as the potential natural reservoir of sars-cov whereas masked palm civets are the intermediate host [53] [54] [55] [56] .it is thus reasonable to suspect that bat is the natural host of sars-cov-2 considering its similarity with sars-cov. the phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 against a collection of coronavirus sequences from various sources found that sars-cov-2 belonged to the betacoronavirus genera and was closer to sars-like coronavirus in bat [19] . by analyzing genome sequence of sars-cov-2, it was found that sars-cov-2 felled within the subgenus sarbecovirus of the genus betacoronavirus and was closely related to two bat-derived sars-like coronaviruses, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, but were relatively distant from sars-cov [15, 18, [57] [58] [59] . meanwhile, zhou and colleagues showed that sars-cov-2 had 96.2% overall genome sequence identity throughout the genome to batcov ratg13, a bat coronavirus detected in rhinolophus affinis from yunnan province [14] . furthermore, the phylogenetic analysis of full-length genome, the receptor binding protein spike (s) gene, and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene respectively all demonstrated that ratg13 was the closest relative of the sars-cov-2 [14] . however, despite sars-cov-2 showed high similarity to coronavirus from bat, sars-cov-2 changed topological position within the subgenus sarbecovirus when different gene was used for phylogenetic analysis: sars-cov-2 was closer to bat-sl-covzc45 in the s gene phylogeny but felled in a basal position within the subgenus sarbecovirus in the orf1b tree [57] . this finding implies a possible recombination event in this group of viruses. of note, the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov-2 demonstrates a similar structure to that of sars-cov by homology modelling but a few variations in the key residues exist at amino acid level [15, 19] .despite current evidences are pointing to the evolutional origin of sars-cov-2 from bat virus [15, 57] , an intermediate host between bats and human might exist. lu et. al. raised four reasons for such speculation [15] : first, most bat species in wuhan are hibernating in late december; second, no bats in huanan seafood market were sold or found; third, the sequence identity between sars-cov-2 and bat-sl-covzc45 or bat-sl-covzxc21, the closest relatives in their analyses, is lower than 90%; fourth, there is an intermediate host for other humaninfecting coronaviruses that origin from bat. for example, masked palm civet and dromedary camels are the intermediate hosts for sars-cov [49] and mers-cov respectively [60] . a study of the relative synonymous codon usage (rscu) found that sars-cov-2, bat-sl-covzc45, and snakes had similar synonymous codon usage bias, and speculated that snake might be the intermediate host [61] . however, no sars-cov-2 has been isolated from snake yet.pangolin was later found to be a potential intermediate host for sars-cov-2. the analysis of samples from malytan pangolins obtained during anti-smuggling operations from guangdong and guangxi customs of china respectively found novel coronaviruses representing two sub-lineages related to sars-cov-2 [62] . the similarity of sars-cov-2 to these identified coronaviruses from pangolins is approximately 85.5% to 92.4% in genomes, lower than that to the bat coronavirus ratg13 (96.2%) [14, 62] . however, the receptor-binding domain of s protein from one sub-lineage of the pangolin coronaviruses shows 97.4% similarity in amino acid sequences to that of sars-cov-2, even higher than that to ratg13 (89.2%) [62] . interestingly, the pangolin coronavirus and sars-cov-2 share identical amino acids at the five critical residues of rbd of s protein, while ratg13 only possesses one [62] . the discovery of coronavirus close to sars-cov-2 from pangolin suggests that pangolin is a potential intermediate host. however, the roles of bat and pangolin as respective natural reservoir and intermediate host still need further investigation.as an emerging virus, there is no effective drug or vaccine approved for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection yet. currently, supportive care is provided to the patients, including oxygen therapy, antibiotic treatment, and antifungal treatment, extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) etc. [21, 22] . to search for an antiviral drug effective in treating sars-cov-2 infection, wang and colleagues evaluated seven drugs, namely, ribavirin, penciclovir, nitazoxanide, nafamostat, chloroquine, remdesivir (gs-5734) and favipiravir (t-750) against the infection of sars-cov-2 on vero e6 cells in vitro [63] . among these seven drugs, chloroquine and remdesivir demonstrated the most powerful antiviral activities with low cytotoxicity. the effective concentration (ec 50 ) for chloroquine and remdesivir were 0.77µm and 1.13µm respectively. chloroquine functions at both viral entry and post-entry stages of the sars-cov-2 infection in vero e6 cells whereas remdesivir does at post-entry stage only. chloroquine is a drug used for an autoimmune disease and malarial infection with potential broad-spectrum antiviral activities [64, 65] . an ec90 (6.90 µm) against the sars-cov-2 in vero e6 cells is clinically achievable in vivo according to a previous clinical trial [66] . remdesivir is a drug currently under the development for ebola virus infection and is effective to a broad range of viruses including sars-cov and mers-cov [67, 68] . functioning as an adenosine analogue targeting rdrp, remdesivir can result in premature termination during the virus transcription [69, 70] . the ec90 of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 in vero e6 cells is 1.76 µm, which is achievable in vivo based on a trial in nonhuman primate experiment [63, 69] . encouragingly, in the first case of sars-cov-2 infection in the united states, treatment with remdesivir was provided intravenously to the patient on the day 7 without any adverse events observed. the patient's clinical condition was improved on day 8 and the previous bilateral lower-lobe rales disappeared, implying the remdesivir might be effective to the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection [22] . this result, however, should be interpreted with caution as this is only single case study and a proper trial control was lacking. in addition, baricitinib, a janus kinase inhibitor, was also predicted to reduce the ability of virus to infect lung cell by an analysis of benevolentai [71] .currently, chloroquine and remdesivir are under phase 3 clinical trial and open-label trial for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection respectively (table 2 ) [72] . preliminary results showed that chloroquine phosphate had apparent efficacy in treatment of covid-19 [73] . however, caution must be taken during clinical use of chloroquine as its overdose is highly fatal without known antidote [74] . despite the lack of documented in vitro data supporting the antiviral efficacy on sars-cov-2, several antiviral chemotherapeutic agents have been registered for the clinical trials for the treatment of covid-19 (table 2 ) [72] .sars-cov-2 is an emerging pathogen, without any effective drug available for treatment at the moment. it spreads quickly and can result in death of the infected patients. despite the current mortality rate is 2.3% [26] , the emergence of large number of infected patients within short period of time could result in the collapse of health care system, and thus the mortality rate might be elevated. effective preventive measures must be implemented to control it from global spreading. in addition, great effort should be made on the development of vaccine and antiviral drugs. meanwhile, the intermediate host and the molecular mechanism of its cross-species spread should be further investigated. legislation should be employed to prohibit the trade of wild animals, the potential intermediate host(s) of various viruses, to prevent the outbreak of this and other novel viruses in future. patients with sars-cov-1 and mers-cov, remain unvalidated for the newly emerged sars-cov-2 3 . remdesivir, a nucleotide analog prodrug with broad antiviral activity that works as an rna-dependent rna polymerase inhibitor, has been reported to be effective against mers-cov and sars-cov-1 infections in animal models [4] [5] [6] . repositioning of remdesivir as a treatment against sars-cov-2 infection has recently demonstrated positive clinical endpoints in a phase 3 adaptive covid-19 treatment trial (median time to recovery shortened from 15 to 11 days) 7 that justified emergency use authorization of remdesivir by the us food & drug administration for treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients 8 . the effectiveness of the repurposed drug remdesivir, with the current formulation requiring administration by iv infusion, both highlights the importance of investigating pre-existing drugs to combat sars-cov-2 infections, and the need for discovery of new or supplemental therapies that result in greater clinical improvements and can be administered outside of a hospital setting (i.e. orally). the reframe (repurposing, focused rescue, and accelerated medchem) drug collection is an extensive drug repurposing library containing nearly 12,000 small-molecule drugs shown to be appropriate for direct use in humans 9 and provides a rich resource to discover new treatments that may be used as additional monotherapies or even in combination with remdesivir to further enhance efficacy and reduce drug resistance potential.to identify compounds that could inhibit entry or replication of sars-cov-2 in human cells, we developed a high-content imaging (hci) 384-well format assay using hela cells expressing the human sars-cov-2 receptor, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, or ace2 (hela-ace2). in this assay hela-ace2 cells are infected with sars-cov-2 virus in the presence of compounds of interest, and viral infection is quantified 24 hours later (fig. 1a) . the assay relies on immunofluorescent detection of sars-cov-2 proteins with sera purified from patients exposed to the virus, which together with host cell nuclear staining allows for quantification of the percent infected cells in each well (fig. 1b) .we validated the assay using compounds with reported activity against ebola and suspected or previously verified activity against sars-cov-2: remdesivir (gs-5734) 10 (ec 50 = 194 ± 20 nm; average ± sem of 5 independent experiments) and the pikfyve inhibitor apilimod (ec 50 = 50 ± 11 nm, average ± sem of 4 independent experiments) (fig. 1b) . remdesivir at elevated concentrations was able to eliminate infected cells almost completely (fig. 1c ) and we used it at a concentration of 2.5 µm as a positive control, with data normalized to it and neutral dmso control wells. while apilimod was more potent than remdesivir, it had a fractionally lower maximal efficacy (85-90% of uninfected cells at the highest effective concentrations) compared to remdesivir. additionally, we assessed compound toxicity in the context of infection by quantifying the total cell numbers per well, with cytotoxic protein synthesis inhibitor puromycin as a positive control (average ec 50 = 547 ± 27 nm, average ± sem of 5 independent experiments; hela-ace2 cc 50 = 2.45 ± 0.23 µm, average ± sem of 5 independent experiments). notably, a concomitant increase in cell numbers coincided with the antiviral activity of remdesivir and apilimod, likely due to reduction in proliferation of infected cells (fig. 1b-e) . altering the multiplicity of infection had modest effects on the potency of control compounds in the same experiment, with a 2.7-fold increase in remdesivir's ec 50 from moi=1 to moi=26, and a 3.7-fold increase in apilimod's ec 50 , but not that of puromycin (fig. s1 ).using the developed assay, we ran a pilot screen to assess the activity of 148 small molecules with suspected therapeutic potential against coronavirus infections mined from the available literature 11 (rz' = 0.84). we identified 19 compounds with an ec 50 < 9.6 µm and, based on data obtained from an uninfected hela-ace2 24-hour live/dead assay, 10 of these were selective (uninfected hela-ace2 cc 50 /sars-cov-2 ec 50 > 10 or uninfected hela-ace2 cc 50 > 40 µm) (table s1 ). this included library/screening lots of apilimod (ec 50 = 184 nm, cc 50 > 40 µm) and remdesivir (ec 50 = 300 nm cc 50 > 40 µm) that were "rediscovered" in the assay. the higher ec 50 of apilimod and remdesivir are likely due to slight degradation over time in the screening deck compared to freshly prepared control powder stock.screening reframe, a best-in-class drug repurposing library next, we screened the 12,000-compound reframe repurposing library at a final concentration of 1.9 µm and 9.6 µm. assay quality was maintained throughout both screens (rz' of 0.87 and 0.72, respectively) (table 1 ) and a clear distinction was apparent in the activity profiles of dmso vehicle-(neutral control), remdesivir-(positive control), apilimod-, and puromycin-(toxicity control)-treated wells (fig. 1d, 1e ). hits were selected based on demonstration of >50% reduction in the number of infected cells per well (<-50% activity normalized to neutral controls minus inhibitors) and <40% toxicity based on the total cell number per well (>-40% activity normalized to compound activities, including 10 µm puromycin) (fig, 1e, 1f ) identifying 61 primary hits at 1.9 µm and 266 primary hits at 9.6 µm screening concentrations (hit rates of 0.51 and 2.24%, respectively), with a total of 311 hits.the hit rate for the primary screen of the reframe library was high (2.75%), but not unexpected for this collection of bioactive small molecules, many of which are approved drugs or in clinical phases of development and used for a wide assortment of indications ( fig. 2a) . to reconfirm and assess potency and selectivity of the primary hits we tested 310 of the available compounds in a 10point 1:3 dilution dose response format with a top concentration of 9.6 µm. of these, 225 (72.6%) demonstrated activity with ec 50 < 9.6 µm against sars-cov-2. however, many of the primary screen hits were also cytotoxic, with an unacceptably low selectivity ratio as determined in uninfected hela-ace2 cells (uninfected cc 50 /ec 50 < 10) ( table 2 , fig. 2b ). because viruses rely on host machinery for replication, it was not unexpected that many of the compounds with antiviral activity also affected vital host processes. interestingly, this toxicity was sometimes masked in infected cells, as reduction of viral infection by compounds like the protein synthesis inhibitor puromycin and even hydroxychloroquine provided a benefit to cell health in the context of infection but not in uninfected cells (fig. 2c , table  s1 ).between the small pilot and the reframe screen, and not including remdesivir, we identified 67 (66 unique as two different lots of gw-803430 were identified) potent (ec 50 < 9.6 µm) and selective (cc 50 /ec 50 >10 or cc 50 > 39.8 µm) compounds ( fig. 2b , d, table s1 ). the top four classes of potent and selective compounds were oncolytic compounds, ion channel modulators, anti-psychotics and receptor binding compounds (fig. 2d) . a fifth of potent and selective hits could be classified as oncolytic drugs, further reflecting the reliance of the virus on host cell processes present in rapidly proliferating cells. the identification of compounds belonging to anti-psychotic, cardiovascular, and even anti-parasitic (neglected tropical diseases) classes may reflect the cationic amphiphilic nature of some of these molecules and their ability to accumulate in and impact acidic intracellular compartments (e.g. late endosomes/lysosomes). resultant dysregulation of the endo-lysosomal pathway and lipid homeostasis has been suggested to impair viral entry and/or replication 12 and this mode of action has been speculated for amiodarone and hydroxychloroquine, both identified here as potent and selective hits against sars-cov-2 in our screen ( table 2, table s1 ). we also identified two selective estrogen receptor modulators (bazedoxifene, ec 50 = 3.47 µm and raloxifene ec 50 = 4.13 µm); a class of compounds previously found to inhibit ebola virus infection 13 .out of the identified hits, of highest interest were the newly identified approved oral drugs halofantrine hcl, amiodarone, nelfinavir mesylate, simperevir, manidipine, ozanimod andosimertinib, due to their relatively high exposures or a long history of use as therapeutic agents and therefore potential to be quickly repurposed as covid-19 treatments following further efficacy vetting in animal models. the viral protease inhibitors nelfinavir and simeprevir have good exposures and based on their described mode of action we speculate that they inhibit sars-cov-2 directly. the selective sphingosine-1-phosphate (s1p1) receptor modulator ozanimod is also intriguing as a potential covid-19 therapy. selective s1p1 agonists have been shown to provide significant protection against influenza virus infection in murine models by reducing inflammation at the site of infection (reducing release of cytokines by pulmonary endothelial cells and infiltration of lymphocytes into the lungs) 14 , and thus ozanimod may serve as a good combination partner for a direct-acting antiviral drug. the approved calcium-channel blocker manidipine has low exposure but may have the potential to improve covid-19 disease outcomes for patients. interestingly, amiodarone has previously been identified as having broad-spectrum antiviral activity in an in vitro screen 15 . nineteen other compounds in various stages of development such as apilimod (assay control that may inhibit viral entry through disruption of endolysosomal trafficking, as found for filoviruses 16 ), the protease inhibitors nco 700 (cathepsin b) and dutacatib (cathepsin k), which may also impact viral entry, all have the potential to show efficacy due to their potency or pharmacokinetic profiles ( table 2) . most of these, except for the very potent apilimod, had modest ec 50 s > 1 µm that did not surpass the potency of remdesivir. however, remdesivir's requirement for intravenous administration and potentially limited efficacy warrants further investigation into alternative or supplemental therapies. therefore, we investigated whether the hits identified in our screen would be suitable as partners for a combination therapy with remdesivir.combination therapies have the potential to increase efficacy of treatment while reducing drug dose of either or both combinations partners, and thus prevent side effects that may be associated with administration of higher doses. drug combinations can also slow the acquisition of drug resistance. drug synergy, the increase in activity of the combination therapy beyond what is expected of an additive interaction is rare, yet additive effects themselves have the potential to improve therapy regimens. conversely, antagonism, the inhibition of activity of the overall combination beyond what would be expected if the compounds acted independently, is an undesirable property. to identify synergistic, additive, and antagonistic interactions between remdesivir and reframe hits, we performed synergy interactions studies in a checkerboard experiment, comparing full dose response of remdesivir against the dose responses of 24 hits with attractive safety and pharmacokinetic profiles in a 10 × 10 matrix (fig. 2e) . we used the synergyfinder package 17 in r to assess the interactions between the tested compounds using the zero interaction potency model (zip) 18 , where a δ score > 10 indicates likely synergy, δ < -10 indicates antagonism, and δ between -10 and 10 suggests an additive interaction. we found no genuine synergy between remdesivir and the compounds tested; however, the combinations were additive, including that of nelfinavir with remdesivir (fig. 3a , table 1, table s1 ), suggesting these drugs, if they were to prove efficacious in vivo, could potentially be co-administered with remdesivir to increase the overall safety and efficacy of treatment, while limiting the evolution of drug resistance.to identify compounds that interact synergistically with remdesivir we carried out a second unbiased reframe screen in the presence of low concentrations (80 nm) of remdesivir. the activity of novel hits from this screen were assessed in the presence and absence of remdesivir. based on a perceived shift in activity in the presence of remdesivir, compounds were tested in a checkerboard synergy matrix and we identified the nucleoside analog riboprine (n6-isopentenyladenosine, previously investigated as an antineoplastic agent, for treatment of nausea and surgical site infections, and a component of citranatal 90 dha, a prescription prenatal/postnatal multivitamin/mineral tablet) and a folate antagonist 10-deazaaminopterin (an antineoplastic compound currently in phase ii stage of development) as having activities that synergized with those of remdesivir. the synergistic effects for both compounds were observed across specific concentrations, signified as peaks within the 3dimensional synergy score landscape ( figure 3b, 3c) , prompting closer scrutiny of activity of each compound. riboprine achieved maximal (100%) efficacy over the range of concentrations tested, but addition of ec 2 of remdesivir shifted its ec 50 from 12 µm to 3.6 µm, and addition of ec 24 of remdesivir increased its potency further to ec 50 = 1.6 µm ( figure 3b ). 10-deazaaminopterin showed only 40% maximal efficacy over the range of concentrations tested, but the addition of ec 2 of remdesivir caused an increase of maximal efficacy from 40% to nearly 65% (where a shift of 2% would be expected) and addition of ec 24 of remdesivir increased maximal efficacy of the combination from 40% to >80% ( figure 3c ). the mechanism of action behind the observed synergies remains to be determined. riboprine has been reported to block uridine and cytidine import 19 and through inhibition of protein prenylation to inhibit autophagy 20 which could impact rna catabolism 21 whereas 10-deazaaminopterin has been suggested to inhibit folate dependent enzymes of the purine biosynthesis pathway [19] [20] [21] [22] . therefore, treatment with either riboprine or 10-deazaminopterin may result in reduced intracellular nucleoside pools and in this way synergize with rdrp inhibition by the adenosine nucleoside analog remdesivir. however, another or more direct and specific interaction cannot be excluded and remains to be elucidated. while these findings indicate a promising avenue for further investigation of combination therapies for treatment of covid-19, the adverse effects of these agents (e.g. inhibition of immunity by 10-deazaaminopterin) would need to be carefully considered in the design and dose selection of in vivo validation experiments.in summary, by screening the high-value repurposing reframe library we identified 75 unique known drugs or preclinical molecules with activity against sars-cov-2 in human cells, 24 of which were tested and showed an additive interaction in combination with the antiviral compound remdesivir recently granted emergency approval for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. we also identified a synergistic interaction between remdesivir and both 10-deazaaminopterin and riboprine. our data support the advancement of the identified compounds for further profiling in in vivo models to assess their utility (alone or in combination with remdesivir) in combating the covid-19 pandemic.vero e6 cells (atcc crl-1586) were plated in a t225 flask with complete dmem (corning 15-013-cv) containing 10% fbs, 1×penstrep (corning 20-002-cl), 2 mm l-glutamine (corning 25-005-cl) overnight at 37 5% co 2 . the media in the flask was removed and 2 ml of sars-cov-2 strain usa-wa1/2020 (bei resources nr-52281) in complete dmem was added to the flask at an moi of 0.5 and was allowed to incubate for 30 minutes at 34 5% co 2 . after incubation, 30 ml of complete dmem was added to the flask. the flask was then placed in a 34 incubator at 5% co 2 for 5 days. on day 5 post infection the supernatant was harvested and centrifuged at 1,000×g for 5 minutes. the supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 µm filter and stored at -80 .the reframe library collection consists of nearly 12,000 high-purity compounds (>95%) dissolved in high-quality dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso). compound quality control was performed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and/or 1 h-nmr when required. the library was prepared at two concentrations, 2 and 10 mm, to support low-concentration (2-10 µm) and high-concentration (10-50 µm) screening formats. echo-qualified 384-well low dead volume plus microplates (lp-0200-bc; labcyte inc.) were used as the library source plates to support acoustic transfer with an echo 555 liquid handler (labcyte inc.). compounds not soluble in dmso were plated in water (129 compounds); compounds lacking long-term solubility in dmso were suspended just before dispensing to avoid precipitation (71 compounds). additional details available at https://reframedb.org/about. associated compound annotation are supported by three widely used commercial drug competitive intelligence databases: clarivate integrity, gvk excelra gostar, and citeline pharmaprojects. as available, annotation data may include status of clinical development and highest stage of development achieved, mechanism of action, drug indication(s), and route of administration.in accordance with reframe data policies, open access to these data are assured and have been expedited for immediate disclosure at https://reframedb.org/.hela-ace2 cells were generated through transduction of human ace2 lentivirus. the lentivirus was created by co-transfection of hek293t cells with pbob-hace2 construct and lentiviral packaging plasmids pmdl, prev, and pvsv-g (addgene) using lipofectamine 2000 (thermo fisher scientific, 11668019). supernatant was collected 48 h after transfection then used to transduce pre-seeded hela cells. 12 h after transduction stable cell lines were collected, scaled up and stored. cells were maintained in dmem (gibco, 11965-092) with 10% fbs (gibco, 10438026) and 1× sodium pyruvate (gibco, 11360070) at 37 5% co 2 .compounds were acoustically transferred into 384-well µclear-bottom plates (greiner, part. no. 781090-2b). hela-ace2 cells were seeded in 13 µl dmem with 2% fbs at a density of 1.0×10 3 cells per well. plated cells were transported to the bsl3 facility where 13 µl of sars-cov-2 diluted in assay media was added per well at a concentration of 2.0×10 6 pfu/ml (assay multiplicity of infection (moi) = 2.2). plates were incubated for 24 h at 34 5% co 2 , and then fixed with 25 µl of 8% formaldehyde for 1 h at 34 5% co 2. plates were washed with 1xpbs 0.05% tween 20 in between fixation and subsequent primary and secondary antibody staining. human polyclonal sera diluted 1:500 in perm/wash buffer (bd biosciences 554723) was added to the plate and incubated at rt for 2 h. six µg/ml of goat anti-human h+l conjugated alexa 488 (thermo fisher scientific a11013) together with 8 µm of antifade-46-diamidino-2-phenylindole (dapi; thermo fisher scientific d1306) in superblock t20 (pbs) buffer (thermo fisher scientific 37515) was added to the plate and incubated at rt for 1 h in the dark. plates were imaged using the imagexpress micro confocal high-content imaging system (molecular devices) with a 10× objective, with 4 fields imaged per well. images were analyzed using the multi-wavelength cell scoring application module (metaxpress), with dapi staining identifying the host-cell nuclei (the total number of cells in the images) and the sars-cov-2 immunofluorescence signal leading to identification of infected cells.compounds were acoustically transferred into 1,536-well µclear plates (greiner part. no. 789091). hela-ace2 cells were maintained as described for the infection assay and seeded in the assay-ready plates at 400 cells/well in dmem with 2% fbs and plates were incubated for 24 hours at 37 5% co 2 . to assess cell viability, the image-it dead green reagent (thermo fisher) was used according to manufacturer instructions. cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and counterstained with dapi. fixed cells were imaged using the imagexpress micro confocal high-content imaging system (molecular devices) with a 10× objective, and total live cells per well quantified in the acquired images using the live dead application module (metaxpress).image analysis was carried out with metaxpress (version 6.5.4.532). primary in vitro screen and the host cell cytotoxicity counter screen data were uploaded to genedata screener, version 16.0.3-standard. data were normalized to neutral (dmso) minus inhibitor controls (2.5 µm remdesivir for antiviral effect and 10 µm puromycin for infected host cell toxicity). for the uninfected host cell cytotoxicity counter screen 40 µm puromycin (sigma) was used as the positive control. for dose response experiments compounds were tested in technical triplicates on different assay plates and dose curves were fitted with the four parameter hill equation. technical replicate data were analyzed using median condensing. the synergyfinder package 17 in r (version 3.6.3) was used for synergy analysis.all data are available in the main text or the supplementary materials. results from the screen of the reframe library have been deposited to the reframedb.org data portal. tables s1: anti-sars-cov-2 activities of known drugs and bioactive molecules identified as potent and selective hits in the pilot and reframe screens. fig. 1 . a primary cell-based hci assay identifies compounds active against sars-cov-2 infection. a) simplified assay workflow. b) representative images from dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso)-, remdesivir-or apilimod-treated wells. the entire imaged area per well (4 fields of view taken with a 10× objective and stitched together) is shown for each treatment, as well as an 8-fold magnified segment demarcated with a white box. dna signal [4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (dapi)] is colored green, and the virus visualized with immunofluorescence is colored magenta. infected (arrow) and uninfected (arrowhead) cells are indicated; 500 µm and 50 µm scale bars are shown in the composite and magnified images, respectively. raw and normalized (norm.) values calculated from the images is shown. c) box and whiskers plot of sars-cov-2 assay control ec 50 s obtained from independent biological experiments with mean indicated with a bar and all data points shown. whiskers indicate minimums and maximums. d) heat map images of normalized data from 1.9 µm reframe screening plates. normalized activity values for % infected cells and total cell numbers are indicated according to the scale bar and density plot for compound and control wells is shown. dmso-treated wells are in column 24 and positive control-treated wells (blocks of wells with 2.5 µm remdesivir, 2.5 µm apilimod, or 9.6 µm puromycin) in column 23. density plots representing the frequency of values associated with each well type are shown on the right. e) distribution of 1.9 µm reframe screen data for compound and control wells. f) screen hit selection thresholds.a) the composition of the reframe repurposing library with respect to clinical stage of development and disease indication. b) dose response reconfirmation results, with the sars-cov-2 ec 50 of each compound plotted against its host cell toxicity cc 50 as assessed in uninfected hela-ace2 cells. dotted lines represent maximal concentrations tested in dose-response studies for the assay compounds (40 µm) and controls apilimod and remdesivir (10 µm). activities of controls (black diamonds) and assay compounds (pink diamonds) are shown. activity of the reframe library copy of puromycin that was screened as part of this hit reconfirmation is also indicated (red diamond). c) sars-cov-2 ec 50 (blue), infected hela-ace2 ec 50 (orange) and uninfected hela-ace2 cc 50 dose response curves for the remdesivir, apilimod and puromycin control compounds ran as part of reframe hit reconfirmation. d) classification of 66 potent and selective compounds according to their functional annotation. sars-cov-2 (covid19) emerged in china in december 2019 and rapidly spread over the world, causing a world-wide health threat. at the beginning of june 2020 covid19 pandemic has caused around 400,000 fatalities and at least 6 million people have been infected, producing an unprecedent stress to the health-care systems. 1 from a phylogenetic point of view sars-cov-2 belongs to the bgenus of the coronavirus family which includes other highly infective pathogens such as the middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov) or the severe acute respiratory syndrome cov (sars-cov). 2 sars-cov-2 has a large (30 kb of positive rna) genome, which forces it to a high fidelity in replication and accordingly to a relatively low mutational rate. 3, 4 a high-fidelity rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and a proof-reading exonuclease 5 are the crucial elements for maintaining the stability of the viral genome.rdrp is the core of the replication machinery of the virus, and the largest protein in the viral genome (932 residues). it binds to nsp7 and nsp8 to form an active complex, 6 that using as template the sense rna generates a negative copy, which in a second cycle is used to generate new copies of genomic and sub-genomic rnas. at least two other proteins are involved in the replication process: a 601-residue helicase and a 527-residue proof-reading exonuclease. 7 a simple blast 8 query shows that sars-cov-2 rdrp is highly conserved within the coronavirus family, but no homologs are found out of it. this would suggest that we are in front of a quite new protein, which, in principle, did not have enough evolutionary time to optimize its function. unfortunately, the extremely high infectivity of the virus suggests that despite its youth, rdrp is very effective. how the enzyme achieves a good specificity and an excellent catalytic power is still unclear, generating an important gap in our knowledge on sars-cov-2 replicative cycle.due to its central role in the viral infective cycle, rna polymerases are a major target for fighting rna-viruses. 6, 9 as today, the only fda-approved drug for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection 10 is a rdrp inhibitor remdesivir (r), a c-nucleoside (see supplementary fig. 1 ) which was in clinical trials for the treatment of ebola, 11 a negative single strand rna virus very distant from sars-cov-2, but whose replication is also dependent on the action of a rdrp. the mechanism of inhibition of rdrp by remdesivir is mostly unknown and conflicting hypothesis have emerged the last months. this lack of knowledge dramatically hampers our ability to develop new and more active derivatives.we present here a comprehensive theoretical study on the mechanism of action of sars-cov-2 rdrp. md simulations show that despite its youth the enzyme has a discriminant active site which should guarantee high replication fidelity. md and qm/mm simulations demonstrate that the enzyme follows a canonical 2-ions reaction mechanism with a catalytic efficiency similar to that of the highly evolved eukaryotic polymerases. the same type of calculations demonstrates that remdesivir triphosphate (rtp; the expected bioactive form of remdesivir) can be recognized and incorporated into a nascent rna with an efficiency only slightly lower than natural nucleotides, i.e. r is not an inhibitor of nucleotide incorporation. extended md simulations failed to detect any dramatically distortion in the rna duplex due to the presence of remdesivir which would justify inhibitory properties. furthermore, no steric clashes were detected when the nascent rna duplex was displaced along the exit channel (see below), which argue against the hypothesis that steric clashes could explain a delayed inhibition. however, the same analysis suggests that when three more nucleotides are incorporated to the rna after remdesivir, the c1' nitrile group of remdesivir reaches the proximity to ser861 favoring an unexpected crosslinking reaction. activation barriers of polymerization and crosslinking are comparable, raising an interesting scenario of competition between polymerization and inhibition which can explain the unique inhibitory properties of remdesivir. in summary, our results provide then, not only the first atomistic description of the mechanism of action or sars-cov-2 rna polymerase, but also a plausible explanation for the inhibitory mechanism of remdesivir.rdrp complex set-up. the cryo-em structure of the rdrp (nsp12) of sars-cov-2 complexed to nsp8 and nsp7 12 cofactors was used as our starting model. we aligned it with the rdrp from hepatitis-c virus x-ray structure 13 from which rna, the two catalytic metal ions and the diphosphate group of an ntp analogue were extracted (see supplementary methods for details). during the preparation of this manuscript a cryo-em structure of rdrp in complex with a full rna strand appeared 14 , confirming the accuracy of our model (see supplementary  fig. 2 ). afterwards, we built a utp or rtp molecule inside the active site in the expected orientation required for incorporation into the nascent rna strand. the system was solvated and neutralized prior to optimization, thermalization (t=298k) and equilibration (see supplementary methods for details). the final equilibrated structure was the starting point for further md simulations. the progression of the polymerization process was simulated by adding additional base pair steps to the rna duplex, moving the r(r·u) pair from i+1 to i+4 position keeping constant the reactive alignments at the i-position (see supplementary fig. 3 ). these structures allowed us to trace the sliding of the nascent rna duplex along the exit path and check for potential reasons for the r-induced delayed termination of the polymerization reaction.md simulations on rdrp. classical trajectories were used to refine and check the stability of complexes prior to running qm/mm simulations, as well as to determine the impact of rincorporation in rna. minimization, thermalization and equilibration were performed using standard procedures as described in supplementary methods. production simulations were carried out using the amber 18 program 15 and state-of-the art conditions for a total time of at least 0.5 µs. water molecules were described through the tip3p 16 model, parameters of magnesium ions were taken from allner et al., 17 carlson et al. 18 parameters were used for triphosphate groups, parmbsc0-chiol3 for rna. [19] [20] [21] [22] and ff14sb 23 for the proteins. parameters and charges of utp, rtp, remdesivir nucleotide and 3' terminal u and r were derived to be compatible with the force fields making use of the red server. 24 additional details of the simulation setups can be found in supplementary methods. qm/mm systems. two families of systems were generated to explore enzyme reactivity. the first was created to follow nucleotide incorporation, while the second was intended to study a potential crosslinking between ser861 and the nitrile group of rna-incorporated remdesivir.qm subsystems used in reactivity calculations are shown in supplementary fig. 4 . the qm part was described at the b3lyp/6-31g** level of theory, using the link-atom to join qm and mm regions. 15 the hybrid qm/mm models were built using randomly selected snapshots obtained in the last ns of unrestrained md simulations, which were then minimized and re-equilibrated at the b3lyp/6-31g**/mm level of theory. a spherical droplet was extracted to compute twodimensional b3lyp/6-31g**/mm potential energy surfaces (pes) in both forward and reverse directions. selected reaction coordinates for the phosphoryl transfer are shown in fig. 2 b and those for the crosslink of ser861 with remdesivir are shown fig. 3 b, (see also supplementary  fig. 4 and supplementary methods). the amber program interfaced with terachem 1.9 25, 26 was used for the qm/mm calculations. electrostatic embedding was used in all hybrid calculations.qm/mm-md simulations were performed to obtain minimum free energy paths (mfeps) by means of the string method. 27, 28 this method allowed us to explore different reaction mechanisms and select the preferred one in terms of free energy. from 60 to 120 string nodes were used. afterwards, a path collective variable (cv) 28 was defined to obtain the potential of mean force (pmf) using from 60 to 120 umbrella sampling 29 windows. the chosen set of cvs that followed the progress of the reactions, the breaking and forming bonds, are shown in fig.  2 md simulations on nascent rna. we performed md simulations on two duplexes: r(cgcgaauugcgc)·r(gcgcaauucgcg) and r(cgcgaruugcgc)·r(gcgcaauucgcg) to determine the structural impact of the introduction of a remdesivir in a canonical rna duplex. starting structures were those expected for a canonical rna duplex as implemented in amber. systems were hydrated, minimized, thermalized and equilibrated using standard protocols 33,34 before 1 µs long md trajectories at constant temperature (t=298k) and pressure (p=1 atm). details of simulations are shown in supplementary methods.mutations affecting rdrp were reconstructed using the augur pipeline to infer nucleotide changes at the internal nodes 35 applied to 12397 gisaid samples obtained on 30/05/2020. the consequence type of the rdrp mutations was annotated using a customized implementation of the ensembl variant effect predictor (vep version 92) using the first sars-cov-2 sequenced genome (ncbi id: nc_045512v2) as a reference. afterwards, mutations were mapped on the md-refined structure of the rdrp-rna complex to locate their proximity to crucial functional regions. the aggressiveness of each individual mutation was evaluated from blosum80 matrices. 36 homolog search were performed with blastp 8 as implemented in the ncbi web server (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). alignments were performed using emboss program 37 as implemented in the ebi webserver (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/psa/).sars-cov-2 rdrp active site suggests good fidelity and activity. the viral protein (see fig. 1 a) has a quite canonical active site similar to those of other polymerases. two essential mg 2+ coordinate the b and g phosphate groups of the incoming triphosphate nucleotide as well as asp618, asp760, tyr609, and the o3' terminal of the negative rna strand (see fig. 1 b) , which according to the circular reaction mechanism for polymerases by de vivo and coworkers is expected to be ionized. 38 two arginine residues (arg624 and arg553) coordinate the phosphates of the incoming nucleotide aligning the gamma phosphate for an effective transfer (see fig. 1  c) . the affinity for ribonucleotides triphosphate substrates can be explained by the need for north puckering (otherwise reactive groups are not well aligned), as well as by a myriad of specific h-bonds between the 2'oh group of the ntp and the catalytic site asp623 and ser683 side chains (see fig. 1 c) . additional hydrogen bonds are found between i+1 2'oh and ser759 (see fig. 1 d) . the base-specificity is controlled by the complementarity of hydrogen bonding with the template nucleobase (see fig. 1 e, supplementary fig. 5 ), by the phosphate coordination, as well as by the residues surrounding the active site that embrace the pairs introducing strong isosteric requirements that make very unlikely a non-watson-crick pairing scheme (see fig. 1 e) . overall the active site emerging from em structures 12, 14, 39, 40 and atomistic simulation strongly suggest that despite the reduced evolutionary refinement, sars-cov-2 rdrp has all the structural requirements to be an efficient rna polymerase, both in terms of catalysis and substrate specificity. the rna-pol reaction mechanism. qm/mm simulations were used (see methods and supplementary methods) to study the ability of sars-cov-2 rdrp to incorporate a natural triphosphate (ntp, exemplified here by utp), as well as rtp (remdesivir-tp) into a nascent rna. careful analysis of trajectories and of the free energy profiles shows that the calculation is well converged leading to a smooth free energy profile with a single maximum (transition state, ts), a free energy of activation of 15.8 kcal·mol -1 for utp (see fig. 2, supplementary fig. 6 and supplementary video 1) and a negative free energy of reaction (around 5 kcal/mol prior to ppi release). very interestingly, kinetic parameters for rdrp compare well to those associated to prokaryotic or eukaryotic polymerases, [41] [42] [43] which combined with the similarity in the reaction mechanism allow us to conclude that the enzyme can be quite novel in evolutionary terms, but it is as efficient as the highly evolved eukaryotic polymerases.trajectories show that rtp fits very well into the active site showing strong canonical watson crick interactions with the uridine in the template rna. its isosterism with adenosine allows a perfect shape complementarity at the binding site showing an arrangement of reactive groups that predicts that it will be a substrate rather than an inhibitor. this hypothesis is confirmed by accurate qm/mm simulation that show that incorporation of rtp can happen with a free energy barrier only slightly larger than that of a natural substrate (10% up to 17.4 kcal·mol -1 ; see fig. 2 , supplementary fig. 7 and supplementary video 2). such an increase is due mostly to a slight misalignment of the oa-pa-o3' attack angle (161 ± 8º for rtp and 172 ± 5º for utp; see also supplementary fig. 6-8) . thus, in agreement with recent em experiments 14 we can rule out the possibility of remdesivir inhibiting rdrp by blocking the atp-binding site of rna polymerase. on the contrary, our simulation strongly suggests that rtp can be efficiently incorporated in front of uridine in a nascent rna strand.free energy profiles for the incorporation of a u or a r to a nascent viral rna strand. the reaction consists on a nucleophilic attack of the o3' of terminal nucleotide to the pa of the triphosphate nucleotide. b schemes representing the transition states found for utp or rtp substrates. distances included in the definition of the reaction coordinate (s) are shown. c active site insight of the ts found when utp is the substrate for the elongation reaction. the phosphoryl group is halfway to be transferred. mg1 activates the o3' towards the nucleophilic attack and stabilizes the negatively charged ts. mg2 stabilizes the charged ts, and the newborn negatively charged ppi molecule. distances involved in the reaction are shown as dotted lines with its average value in å. d active site insight of the ts found when rtp is incorporated (shown as ball and sticks with its c atoms shown in purple).remdesivir is a c-nucleoside that may produce distortions in the helix which might result in a delayed inhibition of the enzyme due to incorrect displacement of the nascent duplex along the exit channel. to explore this possibility, we performed md simulations of two rna duplexes differing only in the substitution of a central r(a·u) pair by r(r·u) one (see methods). results summarized in fig. 3 strongly suggest that remdesivir is well tolerated in an rna duplex and does not introduce any major structural distortion which could justify termination of rna synthesis. particularly, there are not significant differences between the hydrogen bonding stability of r(a·u) and r(r·u) pairs (see remdesivir can crosslink rna and rdrp. trying to explore alternative reasons for the inhibitory properties of remdesivir we slide the nascent rna duplex along the exit tunnel of rdrp to make the r(r·u) pair by simulating addition of extra nucleotides. this allows us to scan interactions of the rna at several positions along the exit tunnel. after r was incorporated we were not able to detect any point of steric clash that could justify stopping the polymerase progression (see supplementary fig. 9 ). interestingly, when three more nucleotides were incorporated, we found a ser861 whose side chain locates at around 3.7±0.3 å from the nitrile group of remdesivir (see supplementary fig. 10 a b) . the distance does not justify however a steric clash considering the large flexibility of the ser sidechain, especially in a well-solvated microenvironment (see supplementary fig. 10 a) , arguing against the hypothesis that nitrile-ser861 steric clash can explain the inhibitory properties of remdesivir. 10 however, a close look to the trajectories shows that the ser861 side chain is frequently pointing towards the nitrile group of remdesivir in an arrangement suitable for a nucleophilic attack and in the presence of water that spontaneously enters into the cavity (see supplementary fig. 10 c d) . in summary, it is placed in an optimal position as to act as a general acid/base catalyst. note that, while not suggested for this protein, attacks of serine and cysteine to nitrile groups have been characterized for other proteins, 44, 45 which drives us to explore in more detail this potential reaction mechanism by using a qm/mm strategy similar to that used to describe the polymerization reaction (see methods). results (see fig. 4 , qm/mm pes in supplementary fig.  11 , and supplementary videos 3 and 4) show a concerted reaction mechanism where, while hydroxylic group of ser861 attacks the carbon atom of the nitrile group, a water molecule (see supplementary fig. 10 d) abstracts one proton from the hydroxyl group of ser861, donating it to the n atom of nitrile group (see fig. 4 d, supplementary video 3) . the structures sampled along the minimum free energy profile agree with the electronic flow for a pinner reaction. 46 our calculations suggest an exergonic (-10.7 kcal·mol -1 ; see fig. 4 a) process showing a single ts (as expected from a concerted mechanism; see figure 4 and supplementary fig. 11 ) with an activation barrier of 14.7 kcal·mol -1 ; see fig. 3 a), which compare with the activation barrier of polymerization of a utp (15.8 kcal·mol -1 ) and rtp (17.4 kcal·mol -1 ).qm/mm calculations suggest the existence of a kinetic competition between utp incorporation and crosslinking leading to enzyme inhibition. in principle, barrier for utp incorporation is slightly larger than that of crosslinking, which suggests that the rna will be kinetically trapped stopping the extension of the rna, and inhibiting then the activity of the enzyme. however, we can expect residual polymerization leading to longer transcripts, as experimentally observed. 9 a larger concentration of remdesivir might favor the inhibition by a double mechanism: by increasing the probability of rtp incorporation into nascent rna and also by enlarging the gap in relative activation free energy between polymerization and crosslinking (from 1.1 kcal·mol -1 to 2.7 kcal·mol -1 ), and driving then the kinetic balance towards the inhibition side.the proposed covalent inhibition mechanism is consistent with the incorporation of three more nucleotides after incorporation of remdesivir to rna 9 and agrees with a myriad of indirect evidences other than the delay inhibitory properties of remdesivir. for example, mutational analysis shows that ser861 has a crucial role in r-induced inhibition of rdrp. 40 furthermore, large and systematic efforts to substitute the nitrile group by less problematic substituents (the nitrile group appears as a "probably undesired" consequence of the remdesivir synthetic pathway) resulted in molecules with a lower inhibitory profile. 47 finally, pinner reaction has not been described for rdrp, but has been experimentally validated for many several nitrile-containing drugs designed to inhibit cysteine or serine proteases. 48, 49 altogether, results strongly suggest that remdesivir inhibits sars-cov-2 by a covalent mechanism. thousands of sars-cov-2 viruses have been sequenced, showing that rdrp accumulates a non-negligible number of mutations, which lead to viable virus, i.e., to active rdrp. we should then check whether some of these mutations invalidate our reaction mechanism. as shown in supplementary fig. 12 , this is not the case, missense variant leading to amino-acid changes are typically mild according to blosum80 matrices and are located in loops on the surface of the protein ( supplementary fig. 12 a) . particularly, the active site and the exit tunnel are very well conserved during the viral evolution (see supplementary fig. 12 b, c) . moreover, virus has not explored yet mutational landscape in the region of the ser861 (see supplementary fig. 12 d) .remdesivir is not likely to affect human rna polymerases. remdesivir enters in human cells and is transformed into rtp also by human enzymes. considering the similarity in the mechanism of reaction of sars-cov-2 rdrp and human polymerases we could expect remdesivir being incorporated into rna, which could rise to inhibition of the human enzyme with toxic consequences. to check this possibility we explored the extension of the nascent rna along the exit channel to trace close interactions between the nitrile group and serine or cysteine residues in the two crystallized human rna polymerases (rna polymerase 50 and human rna polymerase ii 51 ). we did not find any of these residues in the expected displacement path of remdesivir once incorporated into the nascent rna (see supplementary  fig. 13 ). in other words, no significant inhibition of the human polymerases is expected. note that this explains the reduced toxicity of remdesivir in humans. 52, 53 inhibition mechanism can be common to other viruses. ser861 is highly conserved in other covs rdrps (see supplementary fig. 14) , placing a constant position in an alpha helix that adopts a highly conserved 3d arrangement (compare sars-cov-2 and sars-cov structures) 12, 14, 39, 40, 54 and this position is well preserved in those cases for which cov rdrps structure is available. this would suggest that remdesivir might be effective against many other cov rdrps. the mechanism of inhibition of other distant rna-viruses (marburg virus, ebola, hepatitis c and many others) might be similar, but needs to be elucidated. it is tempting to believe that enzymes evolved to discriminate between dna (2'deoxyribose) and rna (ribose) might be decorated with a large number of serine, tyrosine or threonine in the exit channel, suggesting a general delay inhibitory mechanism like that suggested here. note that this would agree with the delayed inhibition of ebola rdrp by remdesivir. 55 the lack of structural information and the poor sequence similarity between the rdrps precludes to confirm this hypothesis.sars-cov-2 rdrp is a protein common to other coronaviruses, but showing little homology out of the family. as covs are just a few thousand years old, the protein has had a limited evolutionary period and we could expect low efficiency. however, our calculations show that it has a well refined reaction site able to select the entering nucleotide and to catalyze its addition to a nascent rna. the viral enzyme follows a mechanism that is similar to that of bacterial or eukaryotic polymerases with the transferred phosphate being stabilized by 2 mg 2+ ions exquisitely coordinated by acidic residues of the catalytic site, while the phosphates of the incoming nucleotide being stabilized by a network of basic residues.our simulations very clearly suggest that rtp is not inhibiting the active site by competing with atp at the catalytic site, but that it is incorporated into the nascent rna in front of a uridine. the resulting duplex does not show dramatic structural changes which would hinder displacement of the nascent duplex along the exit channel. in fact, analysis of the displacement of the rna-containing remdesivir along the exit tunnel fail to detect points of steric clashes, but show the spontaneous formation of a catalytical arrangement that justifies a pinner reaction (between the nitrile group of remdesivir and ser681), leading to the formation of a protein-rna covalent bond. however, we cannot determine whether this inhibition will be reversible or not, as inspection of the free energy curve (fig. 4d ) and the behavior of similar inhibitors 49 for other proteins suggest that it may display slow reversibility. 49, 56 this potential reversibility combined with the kinetic competition between crosslinking and polymerization might explain the unusual inhibitory properties of remdesivir.results presented here open then the possibility to design better inhibitors of covs rdrps and to a rethinking on the use of covalent inhibitors of pathological proteins.novel coronavirus (covid-19) emerged as an infection and quickly spread to all countries and is primarily transmitted by contact with infected droplets of saliva or discharge from the nose when infected people cough or sneeze. the first identification of human coronaviruses was observed in the mid-1960s [1, 2] . coronaviruses belong to the family of coronaviridae, which is a family of envelopedsingle stranded-positive sense rna virus. in addition to, the family of coronaviridae was divided into four genera: α, β, γ, and δ. coronaviruses of α and β genera generally infect mammals and humans while the type of γ and δ genera mainly infect birds. that specification is according to the phylogenetic analysis and genome structure of coronaviruses [3] . covid-19 is a novel coronavirus of the β genus; the theoretical dft calculations were performed in gas phase by dft method at b3lyp 6-311g (d,p) basis set. all optimum compounds (1-4, figure 1 ) are stable, and this is approved in terms of the absence of the imaginary frequency. the results of the theoretical dft calculations for all investigated drugs revealed the non-planarity except for compound 1. the estimated dft calculations for thermal parameters, dipole moment and the polarizability of the drug derivatives 1-4 are summarized in table 1 the theoretical dft calculations were performed in gas phase by dft method at b3lyp 6-311g (d,p) basis set. all optimum compounds (1-4, figure 1 ) are stable, and this is approved in terms of the absence of the imaginary frequency. the results of the theoretical dft calculations for all investigated drugs revealed the non-planarity except for compound 1. the estimated dft calculations for thermal parameters, dipole moment and the polarizability of the drug derivatives 1-4 are summarized in table 1 . the dft estimated data revealed that the dipole moment of the drugs under investigation is in the order of 2 ˃ 4 ˃ 1 ˃ 3. the high dipole moment 2 and 4 could illustrate their binding pose within a specific target protein and their results of the predicted binding affinity that will be discussed in the following molecular docking part. the polarizability of the materials depends on how the susceptibility of molecular system electron cloud be affected by approaching of a charge. moreover, it depends on the complexity of the compounds as well as the size of the molecular structure. molecules of the large size are more polarizable compounds. it is worth noting that the compound 1 is the smallest in size and has the least polarizability (76 bohr 3 ), however, drug 2 of the highest complexity is predicted to have the highest polarizability, 268 bohr 3 . the dft estimated data revealed that the dipole moment of the drugs under investigation is in the order of 2 <4 <1 <3. the high dipole moment 2 and 4 could illustrate their binding pose within a specific target protein and their results of the predicted binding affinity that will be discussed in the following molecular docking part. the polarizability of the materials depends on how the susceptibility of molecular system electron cloud be affected by approaching of a charge. moreover, it depends on the complexity of the compounds as well as the size of the molecular structure. molecules of the large size are more polarizable compounds. it is worth noting that the compound 1 is the smallest in size and has the least polarizability (76 bohr 3 ), however, drug 2 of the highest complexity is predicted to have the highest polarizability, 268 bohr 3 .frontier molecular orbitals (fmos) are the highest occupied molecular orbital (homo) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (lumo). the homo is the highest energy orbital occupied with electrons, so it is an electron donor, while, lumo is the lowest energy orbital that has a space to accept electrons, so it is an electron acceptor. these orbitals control the mode of the interaction of the drugs with other molecules such as the interactions between these drugs and their receptors. the frontier molecular orbitals (fmo) can give realistic qualitative information about susceptibility of the electrons of the homo to transfer to the lumo. moreover, homo and lumo are very important quantum chemical parameters to determine the reactivity of the molecules and are used to calculate many important parameters such as the chemical reactivity descriptors. the energies of the homos and lumos of the studied compounds were calculated using dft method at b3lyp 6-311g (d,p) basis set and are tabulated in table 2 . the isodensity surface plots of homo and lumo for investigated compounds are shown in figure 2 . the results of the fmos energy analysis revealed that the energies of homos of drugs 1 and 4 are lower compared with the other compounds 2 and 3. however, the destabilization of the lumo level is found to be higher in 1 than the others. consequently, the energy gap of studied drugs is in the order of 1 < 2< 3 < 4.recently, many reports showed that the fmos have to be taken into consideration in investigation of the structure activity relationships [34] [35] [36] . the fmos theory showed that the the results of the fmos energy analysis revealed that the energies of homos of drugs 1 and 4 are lower compared with the other compounds 2 and 3. however, the destabilization of the lumo level is found to be higher in 1 than the others. consequently, the energy gap of studied drugs is in the order of 1 < 2< 3 < 4.recently, many reports showed that the fmos have to be taken into consideration in investigation of the structure activity relationships [34] [35] [36] . the fmos theory showed that the energy level of the homo and the lumo are the most significant aspects that impact the bioactivities of small structural drugs. mainly homos that offer electrons, however, the lumos accept electrons. obviously, the level of energy of homos are different for all investigated drugs. compound 2 showed the most lying homo than the other drugs and consequently it could be a better electron donor drug. interestingly, drug 4 of the largest energy gap ∆e = 5.54 ev, there are several hydrophilic interactions that could facilitate the binding with the receptors. this suggests that such hydrophilic interactions considerably impact the binding affinity of such small drugs to the receptors. the homo of a certain drug and the lumo with the adjacent residues could share the orbital interactions during the binding process.the e homo and e lumo are indicators for the prediction of the ionization potential (i= −e homo ) and the electron affinity (a-e lumo ) of molecules. besides the frontier molecular orbitals are used in estimation of other chemical reactivity descriptors such as electronegativity (χ), global hardness (η), softness (δ), and electrophilicity (ω). these are calculated according to the following equations [37] :the χ value is a prediction of the power of the molecule to attract electrons i.e., lewis acid, while small values of (χ) are indication of a good base. the global hardness (η) is a degree of their charge transfer prohibition, however, the global softness (δ) characterizes the ability of a molecule to accept electrons [37] . soft molecules are of a small energy gap between frontier molecular orbitals and are more reactive than the harder because they could easily transfer electrons to the acceptors.the electrophilicity (ω), calculated from the electronegativity and chemical hardness, is an indicator of lower energy difference due to the highest electron movement between the acceptor, lumo, and the donor, homo.to validate the evidence about the reactivity of the drug as inhibitors, the molecular electrostatic potential (mep) is important to be calculated. although the mep gives an indication about the molecular size and shape of the positive, negative as well as the neutral electrostatic potential. these could be a tool to predict physicochemical property relationships with the molecular structure of the drugs under investigation. moreover, the molecular electrostatic potential is a useful tool to estimate the reactivity of the drugs toward electrophilic and nucleophilic attacks.the molecular electrostatic potential of the studied drugs (1-4) is calculated by the same method under the same base sets and seen in figure 3 . in the mep, the maximum negative region is the preferred sites for electrophilic attack, indicated as red color. so, an attacking electrophile will be attracted by the negatively charged sites, and the opposite satiation for the blue regions. it is obvious that the molecular size and the shape as well as the orientation of the negative, positive, and the neutral electrostatic potential varied according to the drug because of the type of the atoms and its electronic nature. the difference in the mapping of the electrostatic potential around the drug could be principally responsible for variation of its binding affinity with the active sites receptor.to validate the evidence about the reactivity of the drug as inhibitors, the molecular electrostatic potential (mep) is important to be calculated. although the mep gives an indication about the molecular size and shape of the positive, negative as well as the neutral electrostatic potential. these could be a tool to predict physicochemical property relationships with the molecular structure of the drugs under investigation. moreover, the molecular electrostatic potential is a useful tool to estimate the reactivity of the drugs toward electrophilic and nucleophilic attacks.the molecular electrostatic potential of the studied drugs (1-4) is calculated by the same method under the same base sets and seen in figure 3 . in the mep, the maximum negative region is the preferred sites for electrophilic attack, indicated as red color. so, an attacking electrophile will be attracted by the negatively charged sites, and the opposite satiation for the blue regions. it is obvious that the molecular size and the shape as well as the orientation of the negative, positive, and the neutral electrostatic potential varied according to the drug because of the type of the atoms and its electronic nature. the difference in the mapping of the electrostatic potential around the drug could be principally responsible for variation of its binding affinity with the active sites receptor. the mulliken atomic charges of the estimated drugs (1-4) were calculated the dft using b3lyp 6 as a method at -311g (d,p) at a basis set, the data were tabulated in table 3 . it showed that the c7 is the most positive and o10 have the most negative charge for drug 1. on the other hand, it is observed that the most nucleophilic centers of drug 2 are n11 and n31 which are the most electrophilic susceptibility positions. on the other hand, it is obvious that the nucleophilic susceptibility of the the mulliken atomic charges of the estimated drugs (1-4) were calculated the dft using b3lyp 6 as a method at -311g (d,p) at a basis set, the data were tabulated in table 3 . it showed that the c 7 is the most positive and o 10 docking simulation studies were done to predict the binding mode of drugs 1-4 at the sars-cov-2 m pro pocket. similarly, the hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir were docked in the protein pocket as a control. the binding affinity of compounds 1-4 ranged between −4.06 to −7.77 kcal/mol as presented in table 4 . however, the superpositions of the resulted poses of ligands 1-4 with the docking models of hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir, clearly showed that ligand 1 (violet stick) is not located in the catalytic dyad of the receptor (figure 4) . while, ligands 2-4 are located in the active pocket similar to hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir. moreover, ligand 3 (green stick) did not demonstrate any significant interaction with the cys-his catalytic dyad although it was oriented toward his-41 ( figure 5 ). strikingly, ligand 4 is predicted to bind to the catalytic dyad (cys-145 and his-41) with strong hydrogen bonds along with other residues with binding energy (−4.69 kcal/mol). the 2d representation of the binding mode of the ligand 4 in the receptor was predicted a high efficiency of the inhibitor with respect to the remdesivir as illustrated in figure 5 . interestingly, ligand 2 with the least binding energy (−7.77 kcal/mol) might be better inhibitor to sars-cov-2 m pro comparable with the hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir with binding affinity −6.06 and −4.96 kcal/mol, respectively. ligand 2 is interacted with the receptor with different hydrophobic interactions besides three hydrogen bonds with amino acids leu141, cys145, and gln189 in a distance 2.07, 2.91, and 2.39 å ( figure 6 ). the molecular docking results revealed that the effective interactions of proteins with the drug 2 were found on the atoms (n 11 , n 31 , and o 29 ) and this could be attributed to the presence of lone pair electrons on these atoms. moreover, the π-π stacking could be another hydrophobic interaction between the drug and the receptors. as previously discussed from the dft calculations, the electrostatic potential gives an idea about the molecular size and shape of the positive, negative, as well as the neutral electrostatic potential to estimate the reactivity of the studied drugs toward electrophilic and nucleophilic attacks, moreover, van der waals surface will provide some more negative electrostatic force found on n 11 (−0.729) n 31 (−0.742) rather than o 29 (−0.612) for drug 2. however, the negative electrostatic potential is localized on n 1 (−0.336) n 3 (−0.713) rather than o 7 (−0.490) for drug 4. these negative mep charges could be used for h-bond formation or van der walls interactions with protein receptors. it is obvious, that the negative electrostatic potential of drug 2 is higher than that of the drug 4, and this could be an illustration of the least binding affinity of 2 compared with other ligands 1, 3, and 4. effect on the binding affinity [11, 38] . another factor that could affect the degree of the interaction of these drugs with the protein is the dipole moment [39] [40] [41] . the calculated dipole moments of the investigated drugs are in the range of 14. 44-2.26 debye in the order of 2 > 4 > 1> 3, table 1 . all these factors could share together with different extent to significantly impact the degree of the binding affinity of these drugs with the active protein sites. these drugs with the protein is the dipole moment [39] [40] [41] . the calculated dipole moments of the investigated drugs are in the range of 14.44-2.26 debye in the order of 2 > 4 > 1> 3, table 1 . all these factors could share together with different extent to significantly impact the degree of the binding affinity of these drugs with the active protein sites. underline: the most interactive amino acid in the binding pocket. on the other hand, dft calculations of the frontier molecular orbitals to make a comparison between the energy level of homo and lumo as well as with their energy gap of the investigated drugs showed their impact on the bioactivity of these compounds. the energy levels of homos are between −5.65 ev to −7.61 ev, however, the lumo are in between −1.05 to 5.47 ev depending on the conjugation as well as the nature of substituents around the nucleus. further, the order of the fmos energy gap was 2.14, 4.00, 5.28, and 5.54 for 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. it is clear that, the drug 2 of the high lying homo is the most susceptible to be electron donor. moreover, drugs 2 and 4 are considered good electrophiles because of their high electrophilicity indices 13.69 and 12.80, respectively. moreover, drug 2 of a high basicity (χ = 3.70) rather than the others could be another effect on the binding affinity [11, 38] . another factor that could affect the degree of the interaction of these drugs with the protein is the dipole moment [39] [40] [41] . the calculated dipole moments of the investigated drugs are in the range of 14.44-2.26 debye in the order of 2 > 4 > 1 > 3, table 1 . all these factors could share together with different extent to significantly impact the degree of the binding affinity of these drugs with the active protein sites.the theoretical estimations were carried out for the investigated drugs by gaussian 09 software, (2009, gaussian 09, revision a. 02, gaussian. inc.: wallingford, ct, usa) [42] . b3lyp 6-311g basis set was nominated for the dft calculations. the structural geometry was optimized by minimizing its energies compared to all geometrical variables without forcing any molecular symmetry restrictions. the molecular structure of the optimized drugs has been drawn by gauss view [43] . the calculated frequency showed that all molecular structures of the investigated drugs was stationary points in the geometry optimization method without the presence of an imaginary frequency.docking studies were carried out using the autodock 4.2 program [44] . the crystal structure of covid-19 main protease at 2.16 å resolution was retrieved from the protein data bank (pdb: 6lu7): https://www.rcsb.org/structure/6lu7. the 3d structures in pdb format of hydroxychloroquine (db01611) and remdesivir (db14761) were obtained from the drugbank data base. the selected drugs 1-4 were extracted from the pubchem database in the sdf format and were converted to pdb format using pymol (the pymol molecular graphics system, v1.6-alpha; schrodinger llc, new york, ny, usa 2013).before docking compounds 1-4 on the target, the protein was edited using autodocktools (adt). the water molecules were removed, the polar hydrogen atoms were added to the amino acid residues and gasteiger charges were assigned to all atoms of the protein. then the protein in pdbqt format was used as an input for the autogrid program. autogrid performed a pre-calculated atomic affinity grid maps for each atom type in the ligand plus an electrostatics map and a separate desolvation map present in the substrate molecule taking the entire protein as the search space. flexible ligand docking was performed for each compound. docking calculations were carried out using the lamarckian genetic algorithm (lga), and all parameters were the same for each docking. this process was repeated 100 times for each ligand, and the final mean affinity score was taken. the results were shown using discovery studio visualizer v17.2.0.16349 [44] .four known antiviral drugs, favipiravir (1), amodiaquine (2), 2 -fluoro-2 -deoxycytidine (3), and ribavirin (4), have been investigated as inhibitors for covid-19 by dft and molecular docking calculations. the results of the docking studies aimed at studying the binding mode of these drugs to the sars-cov 3clpro. the results revealed that amodiaquine (2) and ribavirin (4) showed the best affinity with the target receptor, even though this behavior was not experimentally verified. it was predicted that the amodiaquine showed the lowest binding energy (−7.77 kcal/mol) with respect to the other drugs. moreover, amodiaquine binding affinity is lower than that of the approved medicines, hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir which have binding affinity −6.06 and −4.96 kcal/mol; respectively. the results of the molecular docking have been illustrated in terms of the dft calculations. the dft results showed that amodiaquine (2) is the most lying homo, and consequently it could be the best to act as an electron donor. moreover, the most electrophilic centers of the drug 2 are n 11 , n 31 , and o 29 and this could be attributed to the presence of the lone pair of electrons on these atoms. further, the π-π stacking could be another hydrophobic interaction between the drug and the receptors. additionally, a high basicity (χ = 3.70) and dipole moment (µ = 14.4 debye) of drug 2 rather than the others, could be the other factors that enhanced the extent of the binding affinity. it could be concluded that these parameters share together with different magnitudes and affect the degree of the binding affinity of these drugs with the active protein sites to afford a certain degree of inhibition. finally, from these in silico studies for drug 2, it is very promising to perform further in vitro and small animal model in vivo studies to establish a solid experimental evidence of its activity as inhibitors for covid-19. in december 2019, a new type of unexplained pneumonia appeared in the south china seafood wholesale market in wuhan, hubei province, but its source has not yet been found. to confirm the cause, whole-genome sequencing of samples from patients with this unexplained pneumonia revealed a betacoronavirus that had never been seen before, which was different from sars-cov and mers-cov [1] . after the alert of this new pathogen, china quickly took measures to completely block off hubei province and implemented a quarantine policy nationwide to keep the outbreak under control. this efficient process was also recognized by the international who. this highly contagious new coronavirus was initially named 2019-ncov. on feb 11, 2020, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses introduced the name "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" (sars-cov-2) to refer to the virus, and the who named the related pneumonia coronavirus pneumonia .this article will go through basic virology of sars-cov-2 and review mainly the drugs used in the battle against covid-19 in china.by genome sequencing, it was found that sars-cov-2 has 82% sequence similarity with sars-cov [2, 3] , and through phylogenetic tree analysis, it has 96% homology with bat coronaviruses at the genome level, for which reason bats were inferred to be the host for sars-cov-2 [4] . the genome structure of sars-cov-2 is shown in fig. 1 .sars-cov-2 is a single-stranded positive-sense rna virus and is classified in the order nidovirales, coronaviridae, and coronavirus [5] . coronaviruses are a large class of viruses that can infect mammals and birds and can cause many diseases, such as respiratory, intestinal, liver, and nervous system diseases [6] . coronaviruses are divided into four groups: alpha-, beta-, gamma-and delta-coronaviruses [7] , and all known human pathogenic coronaviruses are beta-coronaviruses.the single-stranded rna genome of sars-cov-2 is 29891 nucleotides in size. the genes of sars-cov-2 from 5′ to 3′ are a 5′ untranslated region, including 5′ leader sequences; and open reading frame (orf) 1a/b; structural proteins, including the envelope glycoprotein spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleoprotein (n); accessory proteins, such as orf3, 6, 7a, 7b, 8, and 9b; and a 3′ untranslated region [3] .orf1a/b occupy two-thirds of the viral genome, and they encode two polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab [8] . these two polyproteins can be hydrolyzed into 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps), including papain-like protease (plpro), 3c-like protease (3clpro), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, and exonuclease [6] . the enveloped glycoprotein spike (s) forms a layer of glycoproteins protruding from the envelope and is closely related to virus infection of cells [9] . there are multiple sequence segments in the receptor-binding domain of the s protein, which have high homology with sars-cov sequences, and some studies have confirmed that sars-cov-2 can bind to the ace2 receptor on the cell surface, similar to sars-cov [1, 3, 10] . two additional transmembrane glycoproteins, envelope (e) and membrane (m), are incorporated into the virion. nucleoprotein encapsulates the viral (+) rna genome in the form of a spiral in the envelope to prevent degradation. accessory proteins do not participate in viral replication, but they interfere with the host innate immune response or have other unknown functions [10] .the sars-cov-2 possible life cycle begins when the spike glycoprotein on the envelope binds to the ace2 receptor, and membrane fusion occurs either directly with the host cell membrane or with the endosome membrane. after membrane fusion, the viral rna genome is released into the cytoplasm, and the uncoated rna is translated into two polyproteins. the polyproteins are cleaved by the protease encoded by orf1a into the 16 nsps, which can form an rna replicase-transcriptase complex [6, 10] . this complex drives the production of negative-sense rna, which is used as a template for the full-length (+) rna genome. during transcription, subgenomic rnas are produced by discontinuous transcription and then transcribed into subgenomic (+) mrna, which is translated into different structural proteins. the newly formed structural protein and viral genomic rna combine to form a nucleocapsid. the viral particles bud into the er-golgi intermediate compartment (ergic), and then the primary virion is released from the infected cells [10] . a diagram of sars-cov-2 life cycle is shown in fig. 2 .due to the sudden emergence of sars-cov-2, no specific antiviral agents are available. however, many drugs under development are believed to have potential anti-sars-cov-2 activity due to common biological processes in the virus life cycle. currently, there are~200 domestic clinical trials of covid-19 drugs from the chinese clinical trial registry (chictr) as of 10 march, and most are for chemical drugs, chinese patent medicines, and combinations. all of these clinical trials were registered in 2020, after the outbreak of covid-19 [11] .among those covid-19 treatment-related clinical trials, a total of 155 registered covid-19 treatment drug-related interventional studies were obtained from the chictr database (www.chictr.org. cn) with ethics committee approval and informed consent signed by 10 march. statistic information of these registered trials are shown in fig. 3 . the study phase of each trial was extracted, and nearly 25% of these clinical trials were registered as phase 4 studies, which were stated as "postmarketing drugs" or "phase iv clinical trials" by the chictr definition. in phase four studies, many domestically approved chinese patent drugs and chemical agents are being used to treat covid-19 patients.with so many clinical trials registered in such a short period of time, we can see that china has responded to the epidemic in a timely manner and hopes to find sars-cov-2-specific medicines to end the epidemic as soon as possible. this urgent need propelled china's drug research ability to its full power, and this motivation involved many academic institutions, hospitals, and companies. this approach has also led to concerns about this phenomenon. excessive research and drug trials can create the problem of squeezing each other for limited medical resources or even wasting them. this phenomenon and its impact on our medical system, as well as possible improvement in our medical administration, need thorough review and discussion at an appropriate time in the future.in these 155 pooled clinical trials, a number of approved chemical and biomacromolecule drugs have been used in covid-19 treatment clinical trials for drug repurposing, most of which are nucleotide analogs and protease inhibitors against other viral pathogens, including influenza virus, hiv and hcv. comprehensive information about the chemical agents used in covid-19 drug clinical trials is shown in the table below (table 1) .although the mortality rate of sars-cov-2 is not as high as that of sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 is more contagious, and studies have shown that it can be transmitted during the incubation period [12] .to date, there are no specific vaccines or antiviral drugs against covid-19. for the treatment of patients, isolation and symptomatic supportive care are currently recommended, including oxygen therapy, water, and dielectric balance, nutritional interventions and fluid management to reduce symptoms and prevent end-organ dysfunction [13, 14] . for the treatment of severe pneumonia, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy is a new type of adjuvant treatment technology [15] , and gas exchange through cardiopulmonary bypass technology can reduce ventilator-related damage and oxygen toxicity damage to promote early patient recovery. however, the needs for specific technical skill and high expense limit its usage.a number of nonspecific antiviral agents have been recommended in the latest 7th trial version of the "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia". table 2 shown below lists important information about currently available anti-sars-cov-2 drugs ( table 2 ). type i interferons, including ifn-α and ifn-β, have broad-spectrum antiviral effects [16] . ifn-α can directly inhibit virus replication or can achieve antiviral effects by activating innate or adaptive immunity [17] . many studies have proven that ifn-α has an antiviral effect on sars-cov [18] , and other experts discovered that ifn-α can prevent mers-cov infection and effectively inhibit the virus in the early stages of infection [19] . because it is also a coronavirus and highly homologous to sars-cov, ifn-α is recommended for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. according to the latest new "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia", ifn-α at a dose of~5 million u or equivalent dose each time for adults is added to 2 ml of sterile water, and it is aerosolized and inhaled twice a day [13] .lopinavir/ritonavir lopinavir was first approved in the united states in 2000 for the treatment of hiv infection [20] . it is a protease inhibitor and is usually used in combination with ritonavir to increase its half-life through the inhibition of cytochrome p450 [21] . in vitro studies have shown that lopinavir/ritonavir can inhibit the replication of mers-cov and sars-cov and exert antiviral effects [22] [23] [24] [25] . at present, the drug has been used in the clinical treatment of covid-19 at a dose of 400 mg/100 mg for adults twice daily, and the course of treatment does not exceed 10 days [13] . however, this treatment has certain toxic and side effects on the treatment of covid-19. therefore, its safety and effectiveness require further research. recently, some clinical studies have shown that lopinavir/ritonavir treatment has no significant effect [26, 27] .ribavirin is a purine nucleoside analog with a broad-spectrum antiviral effect [28] . it is used mainly to treat respiratory syncytial virus infection [29] and in combination with interferon for hepatitis c [30] . ribavirin was widely used in 2003 to treat sars-cov infection, but when used alone, it seemed to have no effect and caused significant hemolysis in many patients [31] [32] [33] [34] . when ribavirin was combined with ifn-β, it had good antiviral activity in in vitro studies [35] . some studies have shown that in patients with severe mers-cov infection, ribavirin combined with ifn-α-2a treatment can significantly improve patient 14-day survival [36] . preliminary in vitro test results demonstrate that ribavirin can inhibit sars-cov-2 in a human cell line. in the latest "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia", it is recommended to use ribavirin at a dose of 500 mg each time for adults and in combination with interferon or lopinavir/ritonavir, with 2-3 intravenous infusions daily. the course of treatment does not exceed 10 days [13] .chloroquine phosphate chloroquine phosphate is an antimalarial drug that has been on the market for many years, and it also has a potential broadspectrum antiviral effect [37, 38] . it can increase the ph of lysosomes to prevent virus fusion with the cell membrane and then block virus entry and infection [39] . some studies have found that the spike glycoprotein on the virus envelope binds to the ace2 receptor to mediate sars-cov-2 infection [9, 40] . chloroquine phosphate has been reported to interfere with the glycosylation of the ace2 receptor, thereby inhibiting the binding of sars-cov to cells and achieving therapeutic goals [41] . therefore, chloroquine phosphate is used to treat covid-19, and in vitro experiments show that chloroquine phosphate does inhibit sars-cov-2 and that its ec 50 is 1.13 μm [39] . apart from the above antiviral mechanism, chloroquine phosphate can continue to exert antiviral effects after sars-cov-2 invades cells, and it also has immunomodulatory activity to strengthen the antiviral effect [42] . therefore, chloroquine phosphate has been included in the "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia" and is undergoing clinical trials. chloroquine phosphate is used for the treatment of covid-19 in adults aged 18-65 years. those who weigh more than 50 kg will receive 500 mg twice daily for 7 days, while those who weigh less than 50 kg will receive 500 mg twice daily on days 1 and 2 and 500 mg once daily on days 3-7 [13] .arbidol is a non-nucleoside broad-spectrum antiviral drug for upper respiratory tract infections caused by influenza a and b viruses, and it was first approved in russia [43] . it can inhibit the adhesion of viruses to host cells and prevent them from invading human cells [44] . at the same time, it can promote the synthesis of interferon, which can prevent influenza virus invasion and treat influenza virus infection [45] . some studies have confirmed that arbidol has a good effect against sars-cov and mers-cov infections [46, 47] . chinese scientists found in in vitro cell experiments that compared with a drug-untreated control group, 10-30 μm arbidol can effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 up to 60 times and significantly inhibit the pathological effects of the virus on cells [48] . as described in the latest "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia", arbidol is used at a dose of 200 mg for adults three times daily, and the course of treatment does not exceed 10 days [13] . it has been reported that some patients have improved symptoms after receiving arbidol [49] .favipiravir is a nucleoside analog [50, 51] with an ability to inhibit rna-dependent polymerase [52] and was approved for marketing in japan in 2014. it is used for antiviral treatment of influenza a and b [52] and can effectively inhibit ebola virus, yellow fever virus [53] , etc. in vitro experiments have shown that favipiravir is effective for covid-19 and that its ec 50 is 61.88 μm [39] . to date, some clinical trials of favipiravir in the treatment of covid-19 have been carried out in china. recent clinical studies have found that compared with the antiviral drug arbidol, the clinical effect of favipiravir is more significant. nucleic acid positive-to-negative time, mean antipyretic time and cough remission time were all better than those of the arbidol group [27] . remdesivir(gs-5734) remdesivir was first used to treat ebola virus, and it has completed phase 2 clinical trials [54] . as a nucleoside analog, it can interact with rdrp [55, 56] , and the triphosphate form of remdesivir will compete with adenosine triphosphate, leading to delayed chain termination and inhibiting viral replication and transcription [57] . a number of in vitro studies have shown that remdesivir has inhibitory effects on a variety of human and animal coronaviruses [58, 59] . an in vivo study of remdesivir against sars-cov showed that remdesivir can reduce virus levels in the lungs of mice infected with sars-cov and reduce lung function damage caused by the virus [60] . moreover, some studies have found that the antiviral effect of remdesivir against mers-cov is better than that of lopinavir/ritonavir combined with ifn-β [21] . according to the above evidence, remdesivir has been used to treat sars-cov-2, and in vitro experiments showed that remdesivir has a good inhibitory effect on sars-cov-2, with an ec 50 of 0.77 μm [39] . recently, the first covid-19 patient in the united states was treated with remdesivir on the 7th day of hospitalization, and their clinical symptoms were improved significantly [61] . at present, a phase three clinical trial of remdesivir for covid-19 has been officially launched in china, and a total of 761 patients are planned to be enrolled in the study, which will be randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled [62] .as a derivative of chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine has similar efficacy and few adverse reactions. based on its characteristics of immunomodulation, antithrombotic activity, and improved inflammation, hydroxychloroquine has been used in the clinical treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus [63] . hydroxychloroquine has been shown to have anti-sars-cov activity in vitro [64] , and it is clinically safer than chloroquine [65, 66] . some clinical studies have found that after treatment with hydroxychloroquine, the viral load significantly decreases or even disappears, and azithromycin can enhance the antiviral effect [67, 68] .traditional chinese medicine has played an important role in the treatment of previous outbreaks of viral infectious diseases, so it has once again received attention during this epidemic of covid-19 [69, 70] . in response to the outbreak, chinese medicine experts provided different chinese medicine prescriptions and proprietary chinese medicines for selection at different stages of the clinical treatment period of diagnosed patients according to the principle of tcm syndrome differentiation. for example, for patients with fatigue and fever during the medical observation period, jinhua qinggan granules, lianhua qingwen capsules (granules) and shufeng jiedu capsules (granules) can be used, while for patients with fatigue and gastrointestinal discomfort, the chinese patent medicine huoxiang zhengqi capsules (pills, liquid, and oral solution) can be used [13] .lianhua qingwen capsules contain many chinese herbal ingredients with antiviral effects, such as licorice. glycyrrhizic acid, an extract of licorice, has been shown to inhibit virus replication and has been used clinically to treat hcv infection [71] . glycyrrhizic acid has been reported to inhibit the replication of sars-cov in vitro [72] . for the reasons above, lianhua qingwen capsules have been used in the clinic and have a certain effect on improving clinical symptoms because they can obviously alleviate the symptoms of cough, fever, and fatigue in patients with covid-19, reduce the proportion of severe cases, and shorten fever time [73] [74] [75] .in addition, lung cleansing and detoxifying decoction is also recommended for the treatment of confirmed cases in the latest "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia" [13] .in addition to traditional chinese medicine prescriptions, some traditional chinese medicine ingredients also have certain potential for the treatment of sars-cov-2. baicalin is a flavonoid compound isolated from the root of scutellaria baicalensis and has been confirmed to inhibit sars-cov in vitro [76] . ginsenoside improves human immunity and has a curative effect on viral infection [77] .therefore, traditional chinese medicine can also be used as an option to treat covid-19. many clinical trials have been launched to further analyze the safety and effectiveness of traditional chinese medicine, and the traditional chinese medicines mentioned above have been recommended in the latest "diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia" [13] (table 3) .chinese patent medicine chinese patent medicine is herbal medicines in traditional chinese medicine modernized into a ready-to-use form, such as tablets, oral solutions, or dry suspensions. chinese patent medicine has played very important roles in the domestic battle against covid-19 in china, and many clinical investigations have started to more precisely evaluate its effects on covid-19 patient treatment. chinese patent medicine, as well as many herbal medicines, has been very useful in improving symptoms such as coughing, weakness, and digestive system disorders, as well as alleviating anxiety. reports announced that up to 90% of covid-19 patients in china have been given chinese patent medicine or tcm prescriptions. a list of chinese patent medicine currently undergoing covid-19 clinical trials is shown below (table 4) to present an overall message about chinese patent medicine in covid-19 treatment research (table 2) .spike protein some studies have confirmed that sars-cov-2 infects cells through endocytosis via the ace2 receptor on at2 alveolar epithelial cells in the lungs [78, 79] . at present, the protein structure of the s protein and ace2 interaction has been solved, providing reliable guidance for vaccine and drug design [80] . aiming at the mutual use of the s protein and ace2 protein necessary for sars-cov-2 to enter host cells, multiple domestic research teams have discovered a variety of potential ace2- papain-like protease (plpro) plpro is a multifunctional protein with protease and phosphatase activity that is involved in viral replication and ifn antagonism [81] . plpro of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have only 83% sequence similarity [82] . however, the high-level structure of the protein that forms the active site is not altered in the two plpro proteins [83] . there are already domestic teams working to find potential inhibitors of plpro through virtual screening, which needs to be confirmed by experiments.the 3clpro of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have an amino acid sequence similarity of up to 96%, and the structure of 3clpro in sars-cov-2 has been solved [82] . 3clpro is a key protein of the virus, and the virus needs to use it to replicate rna. therefore, finding sars-cov-2 3clpro inhibitors can provide a more effective way to fight covid-19.rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) as an rna virus, sars-cov-2-encoded rdrp plays a key role in the virus's rna replication. rdrp inhibitors can be used as broadspectrum antiviral drugs against rna viruses. the rdrp protein structure has a large and deep groove structural region as the active center of rna synthesis. the sequence similarity of the rdrp proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is as high as 96%, and structural differences exist outside the active center [82] . therefore, high sequence conservation allows the development of rdrp inhibitors against sars-cov to be applied to the development of anti-sars-cov-2 drugs.tmprss2 (serine protease) a recent study showed that in addition to the use of the sars-cov receptor ace2 to enter the cell, sars-cov-2 has two other proteins, cathepsin b and l(catb/l) and tmprss2, that activate the s protein, help sars-cov enter the cell, and play a key role in the process of invasion of normal cells by sars-cov-2 [84] . when a tmprss2 inhibitor is used in combination with a catb/l inhibitor, they can completely inhibit the invasion of sars-cov-2. therefore, tmprss2 may be a potential antiviral target.this article provides an overview of published information on domestic research and the development of coronavirus-related therapeutic agents. the drug-repurposing effort summarized in this article focused primarily on agents currently known to be active against other rna viruses, including sars-cov, mers-cov, influenza, hcv, and ebola, as well as anti-inflammatory drugs. this information provides a strong intellectual groundwork for support of current and future research and development for the discovery and development of therapeutic agents for the treatment of covid-19 and coronavirus-related diseases. however, there are still no officially approved specific antiviral drugs or vaccines for sars-cov-2, and supportive care remains a key to treatment. tcm has accumulated thousands of years of experience in the treatment of pandemic and endemic diseases. complementary and alternative treatments are still urgently needed for the management of patients with sars-cov-2 infection, and experiences in tcm are certainly worth examining. many antiviral chinese patent medicines, such as shuanghuanglian oral solution and others, have been declared to have the effect of heat clearing and detoxifying, which could help clear viral respiratory pathogens and relieve symptoms according to tcm theory. chinese patent medicine has been used in many historic epidemics, such as the previous two coronavirus outbreaks (sars-cov in 2013 and mers-cov in 2012) and seasonal epidemics caused by influenza viruses and dengue virus. fighting against current epidemics also provides an opportunity to test the true value of tcm in treating emerging contagious diseases. it is encouraging that controlled clinical studies to evaluate the efficacy of tcm in the treatment of sars-cov were conducted and reported. we believe that specific and efficient antiviral drugs and therapy will arise from these ongoing and developing drugs, especially from the rich tradition of herbal medicines in china.competing interests: the authors declare no competing interests. coronaviruses (covs) have caused a major outbreak of human fatal pneumonia since the beginning of the 21st century. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) broke out and spread to five continents in 2003 with a lethal rate of 10% 1, 2 (mers-cov) broke out in the arabian peninsula in 2012 with a fatality rate of 35% 3, 4 . both sars-cov and mers-cov are zoonotic viruses, and their hosts are bat/civet and dromedary, respectively 5, 6 . to date, no specific therapeutic drug or vaccine has been approved for the treatment of human coronavirus. therefore, covs are considered to be a kind of viruses, of which the outbreak poses a huge threat to humans. because wuhan viral pneumonia cases were discovered at the end of 2019, the coronavirus was named as 2019 novel coronavirus or "2019-ncov" by the world health organization (who) on january 12, 2020 7, 8 . since 2019-ncov is highly homologous with sars-cov, it is considered a close relative of sars-cov. theinternational virus classification commission (ictv) classified 2019-ncov as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) on february 11, 2020. at the same time, who named the disease caused by 2019-ncov as covid-19. common symptoms of a person infected with coronavirus include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath, and dyspnea. in more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure, and even death. there is currently no specific medicine or treatment for diseases caused by sars-cov-2 9 .covs are enveloped viruses with a positive rna genome, belonging to the coronaviridae family of the order nidovirales, which are divided into four genera (α, β, γ, and δ). the sars-cov-2 belongs to the β genus.covs contain at least four structural proteins: spike (s) protein, envelope (e) protein, membrane (m) protein, and nucleocapsid (n) protein 10 . among them, spike promotes host attachment and virus-cell membrane fusion during virus infection. therefore, spike determines to some extent the host range.potential anti-coronavirus therapies can be divided into two categories depending on the target, one is acting on the human immune system or human cells, and the other is on coronavirus itself. in terms of the human immune system, the innate immune system response plays an important role in controlling the replication and infection of coronavirus, and interferon is expected to enhance the immune response 11 .blocking the signal pathways of human cells required for virus replication may show a certain anti-viral effect.in addition, viruses often bind to receptor proteins on the surface of cells in order to entering human cells, for example, the sars virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor [12] [13] [14] and the mers binds to the dpp4 receptor 15, 16 . the therapies acting on the coronavirus itself include preventing the synthesis of viral rna through acting on the genetic material of the virus, inhibiting virus replication through acting on critical enzymes of virus, and blocking the virus binding to human cell receptors or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process through acting on some structural proteins.in the fight against coronavirus, scientists have come up with three strategies for developing new drugs 17 .the first strategy is to test existing broad-spectrum anti-virals 18 . interferons, ribavirin, and cyclophilin inhibitors used to treat coronavirus pneumonia fall into this category. the advantages of these therapies are that their metabolic characteristics, dosages used, potential efficacy and side effects are clear as they have been approved for treating viral infections. but the disadvantage is that these therapies are too "broad-spectrum" and cannot kill coronaviruses in a targeted manner, and their side effects should not be underestimated. the second strategy is to use existing molecular databases to screen for molecules that may have therapeutic effect on coronavirus 19, 20 . high-throughput screening makes this strategy possible, and new functions of many drug molecules can be found through this strategy, for example, the discovery of anti-hiv infection drug lopinavir/ritonavir. the third strategy is directly based on the genomic information and pathological characteristics of different coronaviruses to develop new targeted drugs from scratch.theoretically, the drugs found through these therapies would exhibit better anti-coronavirus effects, but the research procedure of new drug might cost several years, or even more than 10 years 11 .for the development of medicines treating sars-cov-2, the fastest way is to find potential molecules from the marketed drugs. once the efficacy is determined, it can be approved by the green channel or approved by the hospital ethics committee for rapid clinical treatment of patients. herein, bioinformatics analysis on the proteins encoded by the novel coronavirus genes was systematically conducted, and the proteins of sars-cov-2 were compared with other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and mers-cov. we conducted homology modeling to build all possible protein structures, including viral papain like protease (plpro), main protease (3clpro, also named 3-chymotrypsin-like protease), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, spike, etc. further, we used these proteins and human relative proteins [human ace2 and type-ii transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) enzymes] as targets to screen zinc u. s food and drug administration (fda)-approved drug database (zinc drug database, zdd), our own database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine), and the database of commonly used anti-viral drugs (78 compounds) by virtual ligand screening method. this study predicts a variety of compounds that may inhibit novel coronaviruses and provides scientists with information on compounds that may be effective. subsequent validation of anti-viral effects in vitro and in vivo will provide useful information for clinical treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia.the complete genome of wuhan-hu-1 (nc_045512.2) was downloaded from ncbi nucleotide database. the nucleotide sequences were aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes (alogorithm parameters, max target sequences: 1000, expect threshold: 10). we obtained the sars-cov-2 genome from gene bank. the genome sequence of wuhan-hu-1 was aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes. after phylogenetic analysis and sequence alignment of 23 coronaviruses from various species. we found three coronaviruses from bat (96%, 88% and 88% for bat-cov ratg13, bat-sl-covzxc12 and bat-sl-covzc45, respectively) have the highest genome sequence identity to sars-cov-2 (fig. 1a) . moreover, as shown in fig is helicase. as a new coronavirus, structure biology study about these proteins still at early stage. until now, only one crystal structure of 3clpro has been deposited in pdb (pdb code: 6lu7).in order to acquire more three-dimensional structure information of proteins about these new coronaviruses for subsequent drug screening, we aligned all protein sequences from sars-cov-2 with all sequences in pdb1018 database in fold & function assignment system (supporting information figs. s19-s34). fortunately, most of these proteins have found their high homology proteins that have three-dimensional structure, with homology between 72%-99% (supporting information table s1 ). those pdb codes were labeled below the corresponding sequences in fig. 2b . unsurprisingly, all these proteins with the highest homology are from sars. nevertheless, there are some proteins still have not high homologous in the database. after the prediction of transmembrane helices in these proteins carried out in tmhmm server, as expected, we found that all these proteins are transmembrane proteins except for nsp2 (supporting information figs. s35-s41). so far, we have found as much structural information of this viral proteins as possible, which provides the basis for subsequent homology modeling and drug screening. before homology modeling, all these proteins sequences were aligned with model sequences derived from sars-cov and predicted secondary structure as the same time ( fig. 3a and table s1 ). interestingly, as shown in fig. 3a , important anti-virus drug target protein like 3clpro, plpro, and rdrp are highly conserved between those two human coronaviruses, especially in functional region. as shown in table s1 , all these potential drug target proteins have been homologously modeled, and all generated protein models were provided as the pdb files in supporting information. all other coordinates of target-screening hit complexes can be provided upon request.in order to verify the accuracy of homologous modeling, we aligned the computational structure of the sars-cov-2 3clpro that modeled from the sars-cov 3clpro with its crystal structure of sars-cov-2 3clpro (6lu7) just solved and released during this manuscript was being prepared. sequence between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is 76% (fig. 3c ). recent researches speculated that sars-cov-2 could also bind to ace2, and this was verified by computational docking and elisa measurement 24, 25 . moreover, homology of the spike-rbd sequence between sars-cov-2 and bat-covratg13 is as high as 95%. despite the high homology of ratg13 and sars-cov-2 in spike sequence, our analysis found that four among the five most important amino acids (l465, l495, y502, d510, and h514) that bind to ace2 12 in bat-cov ratg13 differ from sars-cov-2 ( fig. 3c ). and there is no related research literature about whether bat-cov ratg13 can infect human yet. we also performed homology modeling on the bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd (supporting information fig. s1 ). three spike rbd structures have been docked with human ace2. among them, for the conformations which most resemble the crystal structure of sars rbd-ace2 complex 26 , the binding free energy between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and human ace2 was -33.72 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s2 ), that between sars-cov spike rbd and ace2 was -49.22 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s3 ), and that between bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd and ace2 was -31.06 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s4 ).the therapies that act on the coronavirus can be divided into several categories based on the specific pathways:(1) some acting on enzymes or functional proteins that are critical to virus, preventing the virus rna synthesis and replication; (2) some acting on structural proteins of virus, blocking virus from binding to human cell receptors, or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process; (3) some producing virulence factor to restore host's innate immunity; (4) some acting on host's specific receptors or enzymes, preventing virus from entering into host's cells. the related target proteins include nsp1, nsp3 (nsp3b, nsp3c, plpro, and nsp3e), based on homology models of the above 18 viral proteins (19 models) and 2 human targets, we resorted to structure-based virtual ligand screening method using icm 3.7.3 modeling software (molsoft llc) to screen potential small-molecule compounds from a zinc drug database (2924 compounds) and a small in-house database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine) and derivatives (1066 compounds). compounds with lower calculated binding energies (being expressed with scores and mfscores) are considered to have higher binding affinities with the target protein.as plpro is responsible for the cleavages of n-terminus of the replicase poly-protein to release nsp1, nsp2 and nsp3, which is essential for correcting virus replication 27 .plpro was also confirmed to be significant to antagonize the host's innate immunity [28] [29] [30] . as an indispensable enzyme in the process of coronavirus replication and infection of the host, plpro has been a popular target for coronavirus inhibitors. it is very valuable for targeting plpro to treat coronavirus infections, but no inhibitor has been approved by the fda for marketing.the screening results (table 1 and anti-viral drug ribavirin was predicted to bind to plpro with low binding energy (scores=-38.58). from generated docking model, ribavirin was bound in the active site of the enzyme as reported sars-plpro inhibitors (pdb code 3e9s). hydrogen bonds were predicted between gly164, gln270, tyr274, asp303 and the compound. also, π-π stacking was found between tyr265 and triazolering in the compound ( fig. 4a and b). the strong hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction between ribavirin with the enzyme imply it may be a potent plpro inhibitor.the 3clpro, also known as nsp5, is first automatically cleaved from poly-proteins to produce mature enzymes, and then further cleaves downstream nsps at 11 sites to release nsp4-nsp16 31 . 3clpro directly mediates the maturation of nsps, which is essential in the life cycle of the virus. the detailed investigation on the structure and catalytic mechanism of 3clpro makes 3clpro an attractive target for anti-coronavirus drug development. inhibitors targeting at sars-cov 3clpro mainly include peptide inhibitors and small-molecule inhibitors [32] .3clpro monomer has three domains, domain i (residues 8-101), domain ii (residues 102-184) anddomain iii (residues 201-303), and a long loop (residues 185-200) connects domains ii and iii. the active site of 3clpro is located in the gap between domains i and ii, and has a cyshis catalytic dyad (cys145 and his41) 33 . as shown in table 3 and supporting excel file 3clpro.xlsx), anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline and oxytetracycline), anti-hypertensive drugs (nicardipine and telmisartan), and conivaptan treating hyponatremia show highest binding affinity to 3clpro. several natural compounds and derivatives with anti-virus and anti-inflammatory effects also exhibited high binding affinity to 3clpro (table   4 and supporting excel file 3clpro_np.xlsx), including a series of andrographolide derivatives (chrysin-7-o-β-glucuronide from scutellaria baicalensis, betulonal from cassine xylocarpa, 2β-hydroxy-3,4-seco-friedelolactone-27-oic acid, isodecortinol and cerevisterol from viola diffusa, hesperidin and neohesperidin from citrus aurantium, kouitchenside i and deacetylcentapicrin from the plants of swertia genus. the above results suggest that these small-molecule compounds might be the potential 3clproinhibitors and could probably be used for treating sars-cov-2.it's worth mentioning, anti-asthmatic drug montelukast also showed low binding energy to 3clpro. as shown in fig. 5a , montelukast was well fitted into the active pocket of 3clpro, in which lots of hydrophobic amino acids, just like thr24, leu27, his41, phe140, cys145, his163, met165, pro168 and his172 compose a relatively hydrophobic environment to contain the compound and stabilize its conformation. hydrogen bonding was predicted between asn142 and the carbonyl group of the compound (fig. 5b ). dna and rna along the 5′-3′ direction in an ntp-dependent manner 37 . importantly, it has been reported that the sars-nsp13 sequence is conserved and indispensable, and is a necessary component for the replication of coronavirus. therefore, it has been identified as a target for anti-viral drug discovery, but there are few reports about nsp13 inhibitors 38, 39 .based on structure modeling of helicase protein, anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, cefsulodine and rolitetracycline), anti-fungal drug itraconazole, anti-human immunodeficiency virus-1 (hiv-1) drug saquinavir, anti-coagulant drug dabigatran, and diuretic drug canrenoic acid were predicted to be helicase inhibitors with high mfscores through virtual ligand screening. the natural products, such as many flavanoids from different sources (α-glucosyl hesperidin, hesperidin, rutin, quercetagetin 6-o-β-d-glucopyranoside and homovitexin), showed high binding affinity to this target.besides the above targets, some non-structural proteins, including nsp3b, nsp3e, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp9, nsp10, nsp14, nsp15, and nsp16, also play an important role in the virus rna synthesis and replication, suggesting these proteins may be useful targets for the anti-viral drug discovery. the virtual screening results showed many anti-bacterial, anti-viral, or anti-inflammatory drugs from zinc drug database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database displayed potential good affinity to these targets, and the detailed information of virtual screening results is shown in supporting excel files (for zdd screening results, file names as target.xlsx; for natural products screening results, file names as target_np.xlsx).spike is the main structural protein of coronavirus and assembles into a special corolla structure on the surface of the virus as a trimer. spike is a main protein that interacts with the host by binding to host cell receptors to mediate virus invasion and determine viral tissue or host tropism 40 . spike is cleaved into s1 and s2 by the host cell protease like tmprss2, etc. the main function of s1 is to bind with host cell surface receptors, and the however, most of above compounds were not predicted to bind with the binding interface of the spike-ace2 complex. the only compound that could target the binding interface between spike and ace2 was hesperidin, as shown in fig. 6a . hesperidin was predicted to lie on the middle shallow pit of the surface of rbd of spike, where the dihydroflavone part of the compound went parallel with the β-6 sheet of rbd.and the sugar part was inserted into the shallow pit in the direction away from ace2, where a few hydrophobic amino acids, including tyr436, try440, leu442, phe443, phe476, try475, try481 and tyr49 form a relatively hydrophobic shallow pocket to contain the compound (fig. 6b) . hydrogen bonding was predicted between tyr440 and the compound. by superimposing the ace2-rbd complex to the hesperidin-rbd complex, a distinct overlap of hesperidin with the interface of ace2 could be observed (fig.   6c ), suggesting hesperidin may disrupt the interaction of ace2 with rbd.except for spike protein, e protein (e-channel) possesses important biological functions for the structural integrity of coronavirus and host virulence. nrbd and crbd of coronavirus n protein are needed for n proteins in host cells to bind with coronavirus rna efficiently. therefore, e protein or n protein (nrbd and crbd domains) can be used as targets for the discovery of anti-viral drugs. through virtual screening, many anti-bacterial, anti-viral, anti-tumor, anti-asthmatic, and anti-inflammatory drugs, etc. from zinc database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database were found to display relatively good affinity to these targets. and the detailed results of virtual screening are given in supplementary excel files.there are three coronavirus virulence factors nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a related to interfering host's innate immunity and assisting coronavirus immune escape. nsp1 interacts with host 40s ribosomal subunit that induces specifically host mrna degradation 42 and also inhibits type-i interferon production 43 . nsp3c has ability to bind with host's adp-ribose to help coronavirus resist host innate immunity 44 . bone marrow matrix antigen 2 (bst-2) can inhibit the release of newly-assembled coronavirus from host cells. sars-cov orf7a directly binds to bst-2 and inhibits its activity by blocking the glycosylation of bst-2 45 . these evidences suggest that nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a may be potential targets for anti-viral drug discovery.the detailed screening results of nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a showed that a series of clinical drugs and natural products with anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory effects exhibited relatively high binding affinity to these three target proteins, such as piperacillin, cefpiramide, streptomycin, lymecycline, tetracycline, platycodin d from platycodon grandifloras, wogonoside from scutellaria baicalensis, vitexin from vitex negundo, andrographolide derivatives, and xanthones from swertia genus. the detailed results of virtual screening are shown in supporting excel files.the host ace2 has been proved by many studies to be the specific receptor for the spike rbd of sars-cov 12 . the latest research shows that the host receptor of sars-cov-2 is consistent with sars-cov, exhibiting that the spike rbd sequence of sars-cov-2 is similar to sars-cov rbd and there are important interactions between several key amino acid residues of rbd receptor-binding motif and ace2 24 .based on the current research progress, ace2 is considered as a host target for the treatment of coronavirus infection to block sars-cov-2 from entering host cells.based on the virtual screening results of ace2 protein, anti-diabetes drug troglitazone, anti-hypertensive drug losartan, analgesia drug ergotamine, anti-bacterial drug cefmenoxime, and hepatoprotective drug silybin, etc., were predicted to bind with ace2 with low energy. the natural products, such as phyllaemblicin g7from phyllanthus emblica, xanthones from the plants of swertiagenus, neohesperidin and hesperidin from citrus aurantium, exhibited potentially high binding affinity to ace2 protein. however, none of above ace2binding compounds was predicted to target the ace2-rbd interface.in addition, tmprss2 was known to cut the spike to trigger the infection of sars-cov and mers-cov. studies have shown that inhibiting the enzyme activity of tmprss2 can prevent some coronaviruses from entering host cells 46 . as a possible target for anti-viral drug discovery, the virtual screen results (shown in supporting excel files) predicted many anti-bacterial drugs (pivampicillin, hetacillin, cefoperazone and clindamycin) and anti-virus natural compounds (phyllaemblicin g7, neoandrographolide, kouitchenside i), etc. to be potential tmprss2 inhibitors.in order to further verify the screening results of zinc drug database and utilize the current resource of anti-viral drugs immediately, we constructed a database of 78 anti-viral drugs for deep calculation, including compounds already on the market and currently undergoing clinical trials to treat sars-cov-2 infections.the rdrp inhibitor gpc-n114 49 .the binding pocket of remdesivir was in the bottom of the rna template channel, which position was for the acceptor template nucleotide ( fig. 7a and b) . the compound was well fitted with the shape of the pocket, where it formed three hydrogen bonds with asn497, arg569 and asp684.in addition, hydrophobic interactions with leu576, ala685 and tyr687 may further direct the favorite conformation of remdesivir (fig. 7c) .interestingly, remdesivir was predicted to bind with the target tmprss2 with low binding energy for both score and mfscore. as shown in fig. 8a , remdesivir was bound in a relatively positively-charged allosteric pocket which is far away from the enzyme active center. asn84 and arg405 formed two hydrogen bonds with the phosphate groups of the compound. weak hydrophobic interaction between the pyrrolotriazine ring of remdesivir with tyr131 and try401, and side chains of some polar amino acids may further stabilize the compound conformation (fig. 8b) . we also performed the longitudinal analysis on the drugs against 21 targets, and the results showed that only tenofovir, disoproxil, fumarate, and beclabuvir may bind to nsp1. fewer compounds were predicted to act on some targets, such as nsp1, nsp3e, nsp9, nsp10, nsp16, nrbd, crbd, orf7a, and tmprss2,showing that these selected anti-viral drugs are unlikely to acting on the above targets of the new coronavirus, which provides a meaningful reference for our future research.for other targets, such as nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp,helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2, more anti-viral drugs were predicted to bind with them, especially e-channel, rdrp, 3clpro and plpro, indicating that these targets are more likely to be useful for the discovery of sars-cov-2 therapeutic drugs from known anti-virals, and should be the focus of our subsequent research.the ongoing sars-cov-2 epidemic makes us painfully realize that our current for those targets which are difficult to find direct inhibitors, or non-druggable targets, just like nsp1, nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel, etc., currently popular protac technology may be a good strategy to degrade these proteins and then inhibit the virus. the potential binding compounds found in this study for these targets might be a good start point.for spike protein, we found only one compound, natural hesperidin was targeting the binding between spike rbd and human ace2. however, not like the ace2 binding compounds, non-interface binding compound may still meaningful applications, considering that the fusion of covs membrane with host cell membrane need the big conformational change of remained spike part after rbd removal 55 . any small molecule bound to spike at this time may interfere the re-folding of spike therefore inhibits the viral infection process. furthermore, small molecule that can target any part of spike protein may be a good start point to design protac based therapy.also, we dock existing anti-viral drugs with our targets, analyze the possible targets of each anti-viral drug horizontally, and analyze the drugs that may interact with 21 targets vertically. we analyzed 21 targets based on the docking results and found that nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp, helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2 are more likely to be therapeutic targets of anti-viral drugs. the three targets nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel are screened more anti-viral drugs. this may be due to the model problem because of flexible small protein (nsp3b and nsp3c) or partial model (e-channel).whether the screened anti-viral drugs really work on these targets needs further verification. we also do not recommend the application of new coronavirus pneumonia to compounds for which no target has been predicted.the triphosphate nucleotide product of remdesivir, remdesivir-tp, competes with rdrp for substrate atp, so it can interfere with viral rna synthesis. our docking results show that remdesivir-tp binds to sars-cov-2 rdrp, with a score of -112.8, and the docking results are consistent with its original anti-viral mechanism, so we think remdesivir may be good in treating sars-cov-2 pneumonia. in addition, remdesivir also predicted to bind with the human tmprss2, a protein facilitating the virus infection, this is a new discovery and provides ideas for subsequent research.chloroquine phosphate has shown better anti-sars-cov-2 effects in recent studies, but this drug has no clear target of action. in our docking results, chloroquine phosphate is predicted to possibly combine withnsp3b and e-channel. but we need to do further experiments to verify this conclusion.in coronaviruses (covs) have caused a major outbreak of human fatal pneumonia since the beginning of the 21st century. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) broke out and spread to five continents in 2003 with a lethal rate of 10% 1,2 . the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) broke out in the arabian peninsula in 2012 with a fatality rate of 35% 3, 4 . both sars-cov and mers-cov are zoonotic viruses, and their hosts are bat/civet and dromedary, respectively 5, 6 . to date, no specific therapeutic drug or vaccine has been approved for the treatment of human coronavirus. therefore, covs are considered to be a kind of viruses, of which the outbreak poses a huge threat to humans. the novel coronavirus found at the end of 2019 was named as 2019 novel coronavirus or "2019-ncov" by the world health organization (who) on january 12, 2020 7, 8 . since 2019-ncov is highly homologous with sars-cov, it is considered a close relative of sars-cov. the international virus classification commission (ictv) classified 2019-ncov as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) on february 11, 2020. at the same time, who named the disease caused by 2019-ncov as covid-19. common symptoms of a person infected with coronavirus include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath, and dyspnea. in more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure, and even death. there is currently no specific medicine or treatment for diseases caused by sars-cov-2 9 .covs are enveloped viruses with a positive rna genome, belonging to the coronaviridae family of the order nidovirales, which are divided into four genera (a, b, g, and d). the sars-cov-2 belongs to the b genus. covs contain at least four structural proteins: spike (s) protein, envelope (e) protein, membrane (m) protein, and nucleocapsid (n) protein 10 . among them, spike promotes host attachment and virusecell membrane fusion during virus infection. therefore, spike determines to some extent the host range.potential anti-coronavirus therapies can be divided into two categories depending on the target, one is acting on the human immune system or human cells, and the other is on coronavirus itself. in terms of the human immune system, the innate immune system response plays an important role in controlling the replication and infection of coronavirus, and interferon is expected to enhance the immune response 11 . blocking the signal pathways of human cells required for virus replication may show a certain antiviral effect. in addition, viruses often bind to receptor proteins on the surface of cells in order to entering human cells, for example, the sars virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor 12e14 and the mers binds to the dpp4 receptor 15, 16 . the therapies acting on the coronavirus itself include preventing the synthesis of viral rna through acting on the genetic material of the virus, inhibiting virus replication through acting on critical enzymes of virus, and blocking the virus binding to human cell receptors or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process through acting on some structural proteins.in the fight against coronavirus, scientists have come up with three strategies for developing new drugs 17 . the first strategy is to test existing broad-spectrum anti-virals 18 . interferons, ribavirin, and cyclophilin inhibitors used to treat coronavirus pneumonia fall into this category. the advantages of these therapies are that their metabolic characteristics, dosages used, potential efficacy and side effects are clear as they have been approved for treating viral infections. but the disadvantage is that these therapies are too "broad-spectrum" and cannot kill coronaviruses in a targeted manner, and their side effects should not be underestimated. the second strategy is to use existing molecular databases to screen for molecules that may have therapeutic effect on coronavirus 19, 20 . high-throughput screening makes this strategy possible, and new functions of many drug molecules can be found through this strategy, for example, the discovery of anti-hiv infection drug lopinavir/ritonavir. the third strategy is directly based on the genomic information and pathological characteristics of different coronaviruses to develop new targeted drugs from scratch. theoretically, the drugs found through these therapies would exhibit better anti-coronavirus effects, but the research procedure of new drug might cost several years, or even more than 10 years 11 .for the development of medicines treating sars-cov-2, the fastest way is to find potential molecules from the marketed drugs. once the efficacy is determined, it can be approved by the green channel or approved by the hospital ethics committee for rapid clinical treatment of patients. herein, bioinformatics analysis on the proteins encoded by the novel coronavirus genes was systematically conducted, and the proteins of sars-cov-2 were compared with other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and mers-cov. we conducted homology modeling to build all possible protein structures, including viral papain like protease (plpro), main protease (3clpro, also named 3-chymotrypsin-like protease), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, spike, etc. further, we used these proteins and human relative proteins [human ace2 and type-ii transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) enzymes] as targets to screen zinc u. s. food and drug administration (fda)-approved drug database (zinc drug database, zdd), our own database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine), and the database of commonly used anti-viral drugs (78 compounds) by virtual ligand screening method. this study predicts a variety of compounds that may inhibit novel coronaviruses and provides scientists with information on compounds that may be effective. subsequent validation of anti-viral effects in vitro and in vivo will provide useful information for clinical treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia.the complete genome of sars-cov-2/whu02 (mn988669.1) was downloaded from ncbi nucleotide database. thenucleotide sequences were aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes(alogorithm parameters, max target sequences: 1000, expect threshold: 10). nucleotide sequence editing was conducted using bioedit and dnaman, and sequence alignment was conducted using dna-man and clustaiw. the evolutionary history was inferred using the neighbor-joining method in mega seven software package. the percentage of replicate trees in which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test was determined by 500 replicates. protein sequence management and analysis were carried out by using snap gene view, and sequence alignment was performed using clustalw method in jalview software. the second structure of protein sequences were predicted by jpred4.the homology model prediction was carried out through searching in pdb1018 database included in fold and function assignment system (ffas.godziklab.org) 21 . prediction of transmembrane helices in proteins was carried out in tmhmm server v. 2.0 online (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/tmhmm/). 3d structure structures are aligned by pymol structure alignment tool.approved drug database was from the subset of zinc database, zdd (zinc drug database) containing 2924 compounds 22 . natural products database was constructed by ourselves, containing 1066 chemicals separated from traditional chinese herbals in own laboratory and naturally occurring potential anti-viral components and derivatives. anti-viral compounds library contains 78 known anti-viral drugs and reported anti-viral compounds through literature search.corresponding homology models predicted by fold and function assignment system server for each target protein were downloaded from protein data bank (www.rcsb.org). alignment of two protein sequences and subsequent homology modeling were performed by bioinformatics module of icm 3.7.3 modeling software on an intel i7 4960 processor (molsoft llc, san diego, ca, usa). for the structure-based virtual screening, ligands were continuously resiliently made to dock with the target that was represented in potential energy maps by icm 3.7.3 software, to identify possible drug candidates. 3d compounds of each database were scored according to the internal coordinate mechanics (internal coordinate mechanics, icm) 23 . based on monte carlo method, stochastic global optimization procedure and pseudo-brownian positional/torsional steps, the position of intrinsic molecular was optimized. by visually inspecting, compounds outside the active site, as well as those weakly fitting to the active site were eliminated. compounds with scores less than à30 or mfscores less than à100 (generally represents strong interactions) have priority to be selected. proteineprotein docking was followed the manual of icm software.we obtained the sars-cov-2 genome from gene bank. the genome sequence of sars-cov-2/whu02 was aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes. after phylogenetic analysis and sequence alignment of 22 coronaviruses from various species. we found three coronaviruses from bat (96%, 88% and 88% for bat-cov ratg13, bat-sl-covzxc12 and bat-sl-covzc45, respectively) have the highest genome sequence identity to sars-cov-2 (fig. 1a) . moreover, as shown in fig. 1b , bat-cov ratg13 exhibited the closest linkage with sars-cov-2. among all coronaviruses from human, sars-cov (80%) exhibited the highest genome sequence identity to sars-cov-2. and mers/isolate nl13845 also has 50% identity with sars-cov-2. sars-cov is the most clearly studied one among all these viruses according to previous literatures. structure and function of its most genome encoded proteins have been elucidated in recent years. in this study, because of high genome identity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, the structure and function prediction of sars-cov-2 genome encoded protein were mainly based on those researches on homology protein in sars-cov. sars-cov-2 genome has 10 open reading frames ( fig. 2a) . orf1ab encodes replicase polyprotein 1 ab. after cleaved by two proteases, replicase proteins showed multifunction involved in transcription and replication of viral rnas. orf2-10 encodes viral structural proteins such as s, m, n, and e proteins, and other auxiliary proteins. the s, m, e proteins are involved in the formation of the viral coat, and the n protein is involved in the packaging of the rna genome (fig. 2c ). by aligning with the amino acid sequence of sars pp1ab and analyzing the characteristics of restriction cleavage sites recognized by 3clpro and plpro, we speculated 14 specific proteolytic sites of 3clpro and plpro in sars-cov-2 pp1ab (fig. 2b ). plpro cleaves three sites at 181e182, 818e819, and 2763e2764 at the n-terminus and 3clpro cuts at the other 11 sites at the c-terminus, and forming 15 non-structural proteins. among them, nsp3 contains multiple domains, including a segment of sars unique domain and a deubiquitination and proteolytic enzyme plpro. nsp5 is 3clpro, nsp12 is an rdrp, analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 and nsp13 is helicase. as a new coronavirus, structure biology study about these proteins still at early stage. until now, only one crystal structure of 3clpro has been deposited in pdb (pdb code: 6lu7).in order to acquire more three-dimensional structure information of proteins about these new coronaviruses for subsequent drug screening, we aligned all protein sequences from sars-cov-2 with all sequences in pdb1018 database in fold & function assignment system (supporting information figs. s19es34). fortunately, most of these proteins have found their high homology proteins that have three-dimensional structure, with homology between 72%e99% (supporting information  table s1 ). those pdb codes were labeled below the corresponding sequences in fig. 2b . unsurprisingly, all these proteins with the highest homology are from sars. nevertheless, there are some proteins still have not high homologous in the database. after the prediction of transmembrane helices in these proteins carried out in tmhmm server, as expected, we found that all these proteins are transmembrane proteins except for nsp2 (supporting information figs. s35es41). so far, we have found as much structural information of this viral proteins as possible, which provides the basis for subsequent homology modeling and drug screening. before homology modeling, all these proteins sequences were aligned with model sequences derived from sars-cov and predicted secondary structure as the same time ( fig. 3a and table s1 ). interestingly, as shown in fig. 3a , important anti-virus drug target protein like 3clpro, plpro, and rdrp are highly conserved between those two human coronaviruses, especially in functional region. as shown in table s1 , all these potential drug target proteins have been homologously modeled, and all generated protein models were provided as the pdb files in supporting information. all other coordinates of target-screening hit complexes can be provided upon request.in order to verify the accuracy of homologous modeling, we aligned the computational structure of the sars-cov-2 3clpro that modeled from the sars-cov 3clpro with its crystal structure of sars-cov-2 3clpro (6lu7) just solved and released during this manuscript was being prepared. the computational model of sars-cov-2 3clpro showed a ca rmsd of 0.471 å on the overall structure compared to the sars-cov-2 3clpro structure (fig. 3b) . what's more, the ca rmsd between their substrate binding regions is only 0.126 å , showing very subtle difference.ace2 molecule was known as a human entry receptor for spike which facilitates its cross-species transmission. sequence alignment results show that the homology of the spike-receptor binding domain (rbd) sequence between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is 76% (fig. 3c ). recent researches speculated that sars-cov-2 could also bind to ace2, and this was verified by computational docking and elisa measurement 24, 25 . moreover, homology of the spike-rbd sequence between sars-cov-2 and bat-cov ratg13 is as high as 95%. despite the high homology of ratg13 and sars-cov-2 in spike sequence, our analysis found that four among the five most important amino acids (l465, l495, y502, d510, and h514) that bind to ace2 12 in bat-cov ratg13 differ from sars-cov-2 (fig. 3c) . and there is no related research literature about whether bat-cov ratg13 can infect human yet. we also performed homology modeling on the bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd (supporting information fig. s1 ). three spike rbd structures have been docked with human ace2. among them, for the conformations which most resemble the crystal structure of sars rbdeace2 complex 26 , the binding free energy between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and human ace2 was à33.72 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s2 ), that between sars-cov spike rbd and ace2 was à49.22 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s3 ), and that between bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd and ace2 was à31.06 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s4 ).the therapies that act on the coronavirus can be divided into several categories based on the specific pathways: (1) some acting on enzymes or functional proteins that are critical to virus, preventing the virus rna synthesis and replication; (2) some acting on structural proteins of virus, blocking virus from binding to human cell receptors, or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process; (3) some producing virulence factor to restore host's innate immunity; (4) some acting on host's specific receptors or enzymes, preventing virus from entering into host's cells. the related target proteins include nsp1, nsp3 (nsp3b, nsp3c, plpro, and nsp3e), nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp9ensp10, and nsp14ensp16, 3clpro, e-channel (e protein), orf7a, spike, ace2, c-terminal rna binding domain (crbd), n-terminal rna binding domain (nrbd), helicase, rdrp, and tmprsss2.based on homology models of the above 18 viral proteins (19 models) and two human targets, we resorted to structure-based virtual ligand screening method using icm 3.7.3 modeling software (molsoft llc) to screen potential small-molecule compounds from a zinc drug database (2924 compounds) and a small in-house database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine) and derivatives (1066 compounds). compounds with lower calculated binding energies (being expressed with scores and mfscores) are considered to have higher binding affinities with the target protein.as significant functional proteins of coronavirus, nsps are involved in rna transcription, translation, protein synthesis, plpro is responsible for the cleavages of n-terminus of the replicase poly-protein to release nsp1, nsp2 and nsp3, which is essential for correcting virus replication 27 . plpro was also confirmed to be significant to antagonize the host's innate immunity 28e30 . as an indispensable enzyme in the process of coronavirus replication and infection of the host, plpro has been a popular target for coronavirus inhibitors. it is very valuable for targeting plpro to treat coronavirus infections, but no inhibitor has been approved by the fda for marketing. the screening results (table 1 and supporting excel file plpro.xlsx) showed that a series of anti-virus drugs (ribavirin, valganciclovir and thymidine), anti-bacterial drugs (chloramphenicol, cefamandole and tigecycline), muscle relaxant drug (chlorphenesin carbamate), anti-tussive drug (levodropropizine) may have high binding affinity to plpro. the natural products ( table 2 and supporting excel file plpro_np.xlsx), such as platycodin d from platycodon grandiflorus, baicalin from scutellaria baicalensis, sugetriol-3,9-diacetate from cyperus rotundus, phaitanthrin d and 2,2-di (3-indolyl)-3-indolone from isatis indigotica, catechin compounds ((e)-epigallocatechin gallate and 2-,5,7-tetrol) exhibited high binding affinity to plpro protein, suggesting the potential utility of these compounds in the treatment of sars-cov-2.anti-viral drug ribavirin was predicted to bind to plpro with low binding energy (scores z e38.58). from generated docking model, ribavirin was bound in the active site of the enzyme as reported sars-plpro inhibitors (pdb code 3e9s). hydrogen bonds were predicted between gly164, gln270, tyr274, asp303 and the compound. also, pep stacking was found between tyr265 and triazolering in the compound ( fig. 4a and b) . the strong hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction between ribavirin with the enzyme imply it may be a potent plpro inhibitor.the 3clpro, also known as nsp5, is first automatically cleaved from poly-proteins to produce mature enzymes, and then further cleaves downstream nsps at 11 sites to release nsp4ensp16 31 . 3clpro directly mediates the maturation of nsps, which is essential in the life cycle of the virus. the detailed investigation on the structure and catalytic mechanism of 3clpro makes 3clpro an attractive target for anti-coronavirus drug development. inhibitors targeting at sars-cov 3clpro mainly include peptide inhibitors and small-molecule inhibitors 32 .3clpro monomer has three domains, domain i (residues 8e101), domain ii (residues 102e184) and domain iii (residues 201e303), and a long loop (residues 185e200) connects domains ii and iii. the active site of 3clpro is located in the gap between domains i and ii, and has a cyshis catalytic dyad (cys145 and his41) 33 . as shown in table 3 and supporting excel file 3clpro.xlsx), anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline and oxytetracycline), anti-hypertensive drugs (nicardipine and telmisartan), and conivaptan treating hyponatremia show highest binding affinity to 3clpro. several natural compounds and derivatives with anti-virus and anti-inflammatory effects also exhibited high binding affinity to 3clpro (table 4 and supporting excel file 3clpro_np.xlsx), including a series of andrographolide derivatives, chrysin-7-o-b-glucuronide from s. baicalensis, betulonal from cassine xylocarpa, 2b-hydroxy-3,4seco-friedelolactone-27-oic acid, isodecortinol and cerevisterol from viola diffusa, hesperidin and neohesperidin from citrus aurantium, kouitchenside i and deacetylcentapicrin from the plants of swertia genus. the above results suggest that these small-molecule compounds might be the potential 3clpro inhibitors and could probably be used for treating sars-cov-2.it's worth mentioning, anti-asthmatic drug montelukast also showed low binding energy to 3clpro. as shown in fig. 5a , montelukast was well fitted into the active pocket of 3clpro, in which lots of hydrophobic amino acids, just like thr24, leu27, his41, phe140, cys145, his163, met165, pro168 and his172 compose a relatively hydrophobic environment to contain the compound and stabilize its conformation. hydrogen bonding was predicted between asn142 and the carbonyl group of the compound (fig. 5b ).nsp12, a conserved protein in coronavirus, is an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and the vital enzyme of coronavirus replication/transcription complex. the rdrp domain of polymerase is located at the c-terminus and has a conserved ser-asp-asp motif 34 . nsp8 can de novo synthesize up to six nucleotides in length, which can be used as a primer for nsp12-rdrp rna synthesis. further, the nsp7_nsp8 complex increases the binding of nsp12 to rna and enhances the rdrps enzyme activity of nsp12 35 . in the research of sars-cov and mers-cov inhibitors, nsp12-rdrp has been used as a very important drug target. in principle, targeted inhibition of nsp12-rdrp could not cause significant toxicity and side effects on host cells, but no specific inhibitors have been found until now 36 .virtualscreeningresultsofrdrpdemonstratedsomedrugsmightbe potentialinhibitorswith mfscoreslowerthanà110,suchasseveralantifungal drug itraconazole, anti-bacterial drug novobiocin, gallstonedissolving drug chenodeoxycholic acid, anti-allergic drug cortisone, anti-tumor drug idarubicin, hepatoprotective drug silybin, muscle relaxant drug pancuronium bromide, and chronic enteritis, anticoagulant drug dabigatran etexilate (table 5 and supporting excel file rdrp.xlsx). the natural products and derivatives with anti-virus, antiinflammation and anti-tumor effects exhibited high binding affinity to rdrp, such as betulonal from c. xylocarpa, gnidicin and gniditrin from gnidia lamprantha, 2b,30b-dihydroxy-3,4-seco-friedelolactone-27lactone from v. diffusa, 14-deoxy-11,12-didehydroandrographolide from andrographis paniculata, 1,7-dihydroxy-3-methoxyxanthone from swerti apseudochinensis, theaflavin 3,3 0 -di-o-gallate from camellia sinensis, and andrographolide derivative (r)-((1r,5as,6r,9as )-1,5a-dimethyl-7-methylene-3-oxo-6-((e )-2-(2oxo-2,5-dihydrofuran-3-yl)ethenyl)decahydro-1h-benzo [c]azepin-1-analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 yl)methyl 2-amino-3-phenylpropanoate (table 6 and supporting excel file rdrp_np.xlsx).helicase (nsp13), a multi-functional protein, include n-terminal metal binding domain (mbd) and helicase domain (hel). n-terminal structure contains 26 cysteine residues to form a zn 2þ binding domain and helicase domain with a conserved motif at the c-terminus. nsp13 can unravel double-stranded (ds) dna and rna along the 5 0 e3 0 direction in an ntp-dependent manner 37 . importantly, it has been reported that the sars-nsp13 sequence is conserved and indispensable, and is a necessary component for the replication of coronavirus. therefore, it has been identified as a target for anti-viral drug discovery, but there are few reports about nsp13 inhibitors 38, 39 .based on structure modeling of helicase protein, anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, cefsulodine and rolitetracycline), anti-fungal drug itraconazole, anti-human immunodeficiency virus-1 (hiv-1) drug saquinavir, anti-coagulant drug dabigatran, and diuretic drug canrenoic acid were predicted to be helicase inhibitors with high mfscores through virtual ligand screening. the natural products, such as many flavanoids from different sources (a-glucosyl hesperidin, hesperidin, rutin, besides the above targets, some non-structural proteins, including nsp3b, nsp3e, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp9, nsp10, nsp14, nsp15, and nsp16, also play an important role in the virus rna synthesis and replication, suggesting these proteins may be useful targets for the anti-viral drug discovery. the virtual screening results showed many anti-bacterial, anti-viral, or antiinflammatory drugs from zinc drug database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database displayed potential good affinity to these targets, and the detailed information of virtual screening results is shown in supporting excel files (for zdd screening results, file names as target.xlsx; for natural products screening results, file names as target_np.xlsx).spike is the main structural protein of coronavirus and assembles into a special corolla structure on the surface of the virus as a trimer. spike is a main protein that interacts with the host by binding to host cell receptors to mediate virus invasion and determine viral tissue or host tropism 40 . spike is cleaved into s1and s2 by the host cell protease like tmprss2, etc. the main function of s1 is to bind with host cell surface receptors, and the s2 subunit mediates virusecell and cellecell membrane fusion. spike structural integrity and cleavage activation play a key role in virus invasion and virulence 41 . therapeutic strategies to block coronavirus from entering host cells by targeting spike proteins or specific receptors on the host surface are valuable for the development of anti-viral drugs.on the basis of virtual screening results of small-molecule compounds against spike protein, some drugs showed high analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 9 + model binding affinity (mfscore<e150 or score<e35), such as antihypertensive drugs (rescinnamine, iloprost and prazosin), antifungal drugs (posaconazole and itraconazole), anti-bacterial drug (sulfasalazine, azlocillin, penicillin and cefsulodin) and anticoagulant drug dabigatran etexilate. some natural flavanoids, licoflavonol from glycyrrhiza uralensis, cosmosiin from s. baicalensis, neohesperidin from c. aurantium, mangostin from garcinia mangostana, kouitchenside d from swertia kouitchensis, excoecariatoxin from excoecaria agallocha, phyllaemblicin g7 from p. emblica, and piceatannol from vitis vinifera, exhibited high binding affinity. the detailed virtual screening results are shown in supporting excel files. however, most of above compounds were not predicted to bind with the binding interface of the spikeeace2 complex. the only compound that could target the binding interface between spike and ace2 was hesperidin, as shown in fig. 6a . hesperidin was predicted to lie on the middle shallow pit of the surface of rbd of spike, where the dihydroflavone part of the compound went parallel with the b-6 sheet of rbd. and the sugar part was inserted into the shallow pit in the direction away from ace2, where a few hydrophobic amino acids, including tyr436, try440, leu442, phe443, phe476, try475, try481 and tyr49 form a relatively hydrophobic shallow pocket to contain the compound (fig. 6b) . hydrogen bonding was predicted between tyr440 and the compound. by superimposing the ace2erbd complex to the hesperidinerbd complex, a distinct overlap of hesperidin with the interface of ace2 could be observed (fig. 6c) , suggesting hesperidin may disrupt the interaction of ace2 with rbd.except for spike protein, e protein (e-channel) possesses important biological functions for the structural integrity of coronavirus and host virulence. nrbd and crbd of coronavirus n protein are needed for n proteins in host cells to bind with coronavirus rna efficiently. therefore, e protein or n protein (nrbd and crbd domains) can be used as targets for the discovery of anti-viral drugs. through virtual screening, many antibacterial, anti-viral, anti-tumor, anti-asthmatic, and antiinflammatory drugs, etc. from zinc database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database were found to display relatively good affinity to these targets. and the detailed results of virtual screening are given in supplementary excel files.there are three coronavirus virulence factors nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a related to interfering host's innate immunity and assisting 42 and also inhibits type-i interferon production 43 . nsp3c has ability to bind with host's adp-ribose to help coronavirus resist host innate immunity 44 . bone marrow matrix antigen 2 (bst-2) can inhibit the release of newly-assembled coronavirus from host cells. sars-cov orf7a directly binds to bst-2 and inhibits its activity by blocking the glycosylation of bst-2 45 . these evidences suggest that nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a may be potential targets for anti-viral drug discovery. the detailed screening results of nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a showed that a series of clinical drugs and natural products with anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory effects exhibited relatively high binding affinity to these three target proteins, such as piperacillin, cefpiramide, streptomycin, lymecycline, tetracycline, platycodin d from platycodon grandifloras, wogonoside from s. baicalensis, vitexin from vitex negundo, andrographolide derivatives, and xanthones from swertia genus. the detailed results of virtual screening are shown in supporting excel files.the host ace2 has been proved by many studies to be the specific receptor for the spike rbd of sars-cov 12 . the latest research shows that the host receptor of sars-cov-2 is consistent with sars-cov, exhibiting that the spike rbd sequence of sars-cov-2 is similar to sars-cov rbd and there are important interactions between several key amino acid residues of rbd receptor-binding motif and ace2 24 . based on the current research progress, ace2 is considered as a host target for the treatment of coronavirus infection to block sars-cov-2 from entering host cells.based on the virtual screening results of ace2 protein, antidiabetes drug troglitazone, anti-hypertensive drug losartan, analgesia drug ergotamine, anti-bacterial drug cefmenoxime, and hepatoprotective drug silybin, etc., were predicted to bind with ace2 with low energy. the natural products, such as phyllaemblicin g7 from p. emblica, xanthones from the plants of swertia genus, neohesperidin and hesperidin from c. aurantium, exhibited potentially high binding affinity to ace2 protein. however, none of above ace2 binding compounds was predicted to target the ace2erbd interface.in addition, tmprss2 was known to cut the spike to trigger the infection of sars-cov and mers-cov. studies have shown that inhibiting the enzyme activity of tmprss2 can prevent some coronaviruses from entering host cells 46 . as a possible target for anti-viral drug discovery, the virtual screen results (shown in supporting excel files) predicted many anti-bacterial drugs (pivampicillin, hetacillin, cefoperazone and clindamycin) and antivirus natural compounds (phyllaemblicin g7, neoandrographolide, kouitchenside i), etc. to be potential tmprss2 inhibitors.in order to further verify the screening results of zinc drug database and utilize the current resource of anti-viral drugs immediately, we constructed a database of 78 anti-viral drugs for deep calculation, including compounds already on the market and currently undergoing clinical trials to treat sars-cov-2 infections. the compounds were docked with 19 constructed targets of sars-cov-2 and two human targets to predict their possible targets, and also to search possible binding partners of certain important targets. special attentions were paid to the drugs currently in clinical trials. all results of calculated docking scores were listed in the supporting excel file (anti-virals_vs_targets_scores), significant scores (score<e32, mfscore<e110) were highlighted in brighten yellow. remdesivir (gs-5734), a nucleoside analogue, is an rdrp inhibitor. it can inhibit virus by inhibiting synthesis of viral nucleic acid and has not yet been approved for marketing in any country. on january 31 of this year, the new england journal of medicine reported the diagnosis and treatment of the first sars-cov-2 patient in the united states 47 . remdesivir showed some potential in the treatment of the first patient with novel coronavirus infection. on vero e6 cells, the ec 50 of remdesivir for sars-cov-2 is 0.77 mmol/l, and the selection index si is greater than 129 48 . remdesivir is currently undergoing a randomized, double-blind, controlled phase iii clinical study in china. our molecular docking results show that the potential targets of remdesivir is nsp3b (score z e36.5), rdrp (mfscores z e112.8), e-channel (mfscore z e125.1), and tmprss2 (score z e36.23, mfscores z e109.4).for rdrp, from generated docking model, remdesivir could bind to the rna-binding channel of the sars-cov-2 rdrp, and the binding mode and site were highly similar to that of coxsackievirus b3 (cvb3) rdrp inhibitor gpc-n114 49 .the binding pocket of remdesivir was in the bottom of the rna template channel, which position was for the acceptor template nucleotide (fig. 7a and b) . the compound was well fitted with the shape of the pocket, where it formed three hydrogen bonds with asn497, arg569 and asp684. in addition, hydrophobic interactions with leu576, ala685 and tyr687 may further direct the favorite conformation of remdesivir (fig. 7c) .interestingly, remdesivir was predicted to bind with the target tmprss2 with low binding energy for both score and mfscore. as shown in fig. 8a , remdesivir was bound in a relatively positively-charged allosteric pocket which is far away from the enzyme active center. asn84 and arg405 formed two hydrogen bonds with the phosphate groups of the compound. weak hydrophobic interaction between the pyrrolotriazine ring of remdesivir with tyr131 and try401, and side chains of some polar amino acids may further stabilize the compound conformation (fig. 8b ). lopinavir and ritonavir have been marketed in china and are mainly used to treat hiv-1 infection in adults and children over 2 years of age. in vitro studies have shown that lopinavir and ritonavir can inhibit the replication of mers-cov and sars-cov to exert anti-viral effects. the drug is listed as a recommended drug in the anti-viral drugs section of the new coronavirus infected pneumonia diagnosis and treatment program. the molecular docking results showed that ritonavir's possible target is nsp3c or e-channel with the mfscores of à152.100 and à277.769, respectively. lopinavir's possible target is nsp3b, nsp3c, helicase, nrbd or e-channel with the mfscores of à158.050, à189.140, à114.018, à171.127, and à221.785, respectively.arbidol is a broad-spectrum anti-viral drug, mainly for the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections caused by influenza a and b viruses, etc. in recent years, many studies have proven its effectiveness against both sars-cov and mers-cov. arbidol hydrochloride can block virus replication by inhibiting the fusion of the lipid membrane of the virus with the host cells. compared with the untreated control group, arbidol can effectively inhibit coronavirus up to 60 times at a concentration of 10e30 mmol/l, and significantly inhibit the virus's pathological effects on cells. the docking results of arbidol with the possible drug targets of the new coronavirus showed that it may interact with nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, e-channel, or spike with the mfscores of à136.087, à118.253, à118.253, à117.879, and à145.125, respectively.darunavir is an hiv-1 protease inhibitor that selectively inhibits the cleavage of hiv-encoded gag-pol polyprotein in virally infected cells, thereby preventing the formation of mature infectious virus particles. at a concentration of 300 mmol/l, darunavir can significantly inhibit virus replication, and the inhibition efficiency is 280 times compared with the untreated group. our docking results showed that the possible targets of darunavir are nsp3c, plpro, e-channel or spike proteins with the mfscores of à126.149, à110.759, à157.184, and à111.865, respectively.favipiravir, a broad-spectrum anti-viral drug, is used to treat flu. the shenzhen health commission has now initiated clinical studies on the use of favipiravir to treat sars-cov-2 infections.while, the scores of favipiravir docking with the targets in our virtual screening are relatively low.chloroquine phosphate has been used in the treatment of malaria since the 1940s and later in rheumatoid arthritis. chloroquine has been reported in some earlier studies to have direct anti-viral effects, such as inhibiting flavivirus, retrovirus (such as hiv), and many coronaviruses. recent study showed that with ec 50 of 1.13 mmol/l and si greater than 88, chloroquine can effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 in the cell level. its efficiency in the human body for sars-cov-2 infection has not yet been clinically proven. chloroquine phosphate was turned into chloroquine in the body to play therapeutic effect. our docking results showed that the possible target of chloroquine is nsp3b or echannel with the docking mfscores of à130.355 and à107.889, respectively.we also performed the longitudinal analysis on the drugs against 21 targets, and the results showed that only tenofovir, disoproxil, fumarate, and beclabuvir may bind to nsp1. fewer compounds were predicted to act on some targets, such as nsp1, nsp3e, nsp9, nsp10, nsp16, nrbd, crbd, orf7a, and tmprss2, showing that these selected anti-viral drugs are unlikely to acting on the above targets of the new coronavirus, which provides a meaningful reference for our future research.for other targets, such as nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp, helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2, more anti-viral drugs were predicted to bind with them, especially e-channel, rdrp, 3clpro and plpro, indicating that these targets are more likely to be useful for the discovery of sars-cov-2 therapeutic drugs from known anti-virals, and should be the focus of our subsequent research.the progressed to the (early) preclinical stage to date. as with the sars virus 17 years ago and the current sars-cov-2, emerging coronaviruses in the future may continue to pose a threat to global public health. therefore, finding broad-spectrum inhibitors that may reduce the effects of human coronavirus infection remains a challenging research focus. given the time-consuming nature of anti-viral drug development and registration, existing treatments for other diseases may be the only fastest treatment option for emerging infectious diseases. for most of these drugs that have been prepared, the medication has sufficient experience and dosage, and their safety and adme situation are well known.in this study, based on the results of bioinformatics analysis, 20 homology structures of 18 sars-cov-2 proteins and one human protein were built, plus human ace2 structure, totally 21 targets were setup for high throughput virtual ligand screening. the special double scoring system icm-pro soft allowed us to evaluate the docking results more accurately. the score of icm software is calculated by the overall empirical function of predicted physical interaction, whiles the mfscore (mean force score) is computed by the knowledge-based potential functions derived from statistics of ligandereceptor complex in pdb 50, 51 .from proteineprotein docking results, we can deduce that sars-cov-2 spike protein have strong binding affinity to human ace2, although weaker than that of sars-cov spike protein.unexpectedly, bat-cov ratg13 spike protein only has slightly weaker binding affinity with ace2 compared to sars-cov-2. it is speculated that the virus may be capable of infecting humans directly, or it is close. if sars-cov-2 evolved from bat-cov ratg13, there may be no more than one or two host evolutions involved. but there are no published articles that directly related to intermediate hosts yet. according to the most recent research paper on the clinical characteristics of sars-cov-2 infection 52 , sars-cov-2 can spread rapidly by human-to-human transmission, this was consistent with observed proteineprotein docking results of sars-cov-2 spike rbd and human ace2, for both of ours and previous prediction 25 . however, the fast growing incidents of sars-cov-2 pneumonia and related deaths implied the weaker binding of sars-cov-2 spike with human ace2 compared to sars spike may not fully explained the current situation of this epidemic. there must have some other receptors of sars-cov-2 or infection facilitating mechanisms in the human host, or sars-cov-2 spike-rbd may take other lower energy binding conformation different from current sars-cov spike-rbd conformation found in the crystal structure, probably by induce fitting. these need to be further investigated.to search potential coronavirus therapeutic drugs as soon as possible, we first screened potential compounds from a zinc drug database (2924 compounds) and a small in-house database of natural products (about 1066 compounds). a series of clinical drugs and natural products with anti-viral, anti-bacterial and antiinflammatory effects exhibited high binding affinity to different target proteins, indicating their potential utility for treating sars-cov-2.we have identified a number of compounds that might have antiviral activity from the approved drugs library, such as anti-virus drugs (ribavirin, valganciclovir and thymidine), anti-bacterial drugs (cefpiramide, sulfasalazine, phenethicillin, lymecycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline, oxytetracycline and tigecycline), antiasthmatic drugs (montelukast, fenoterol and reproterol), and hepatoprotective drug silybin. the original pharmacological actions of these drugs could be helpful for the therapy of viral infection pneumonia. the natural products, such as flavanoids like compounds as major components might be meaningful for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infections. for ace2 target, although several compounds could bind with ace2 through virtual screening in our studies, no compound was found to bind with the contact surface of ace2espike complex, suggesting that these compounds are only the inhibitors of ace2 enzyme activities, rather than inhibitors of ace2 driven virus infections. just like what described in recently published research 53 , most of selected compounds are also unable to bind with the contact surface of ace2espike complex. actually, these potential ace2 inhibitors may not be suitable to use as drugs for treating sars-cov-2 infection because the poor prognosis would be induced by the inhibition of ace2 enzyme activities, for ace2 was considered as a protective factor of lung injury 54 .for those targets which are difficult to find direct inhibitors, or non-druggable targets, just like nsp1, nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel, etc., currently popular protac technology may be a good strategy to degrade these proteins and then inhibit the virus. the potential binding compounds found in this study for these targets might be a good start point.for spike protein, we found only one compound, natural hesperidin was targeting the binding between spike rbd and human ace2. however, not like the ace2 binding compounds, noninterface binding compound may still meaningful applications, considering that the fusion of covs membrane with host cell membrane need the big conformational change of remained spike part after rbd removal 55 . any small molecule bound to spike at this time may interfere the re-folding of spike therefore inhibits the viral infection process. furthermore, small molecule that can target any part of spike protein may be a good start point to design protac based therapy.also, we dock existing anti-viral drugs with our targets, analyze the possible targets of each anti-viral drug horizontally, and analyze the drugs that may interact with 21 targets vertically. we analyzed 21 targets based on the docking results and found that nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp, helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2 are more likely to be therapeutic targets of anti-viral drugs. the three targets nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel are screened more anti-viral drugs. this may be due to the model problem because of flexible small protein (nsp3b and nsp3c) or partial model (e-channel). whether the screened anti-viral drugs really work on these targets needs further verification. we also do not recommend the application of new coronavirus pneumonia to compounds for which no target has been predicted.the triphosphate nucleotide product of remdesivir, remdesivir-tp, competes with rdrp for substrate atp, so it can interfere with viral rna synthesis. our docking results show that remdesivir-tp binds to sars-cov-2 rdrp, with a score of à112.8, and the docking results are consistent with its original anti-viral mechanism, so we think remdesivir may be good in treating sars-cov-2 pneumonia. in addition, remdesivir also predicted to bind with the human tmprss2, a protein facilitating the virus infection, this is a new discovery and provides ideas for subsequent research.chloroquine phosphate has shown better anti-sars-cov-2 effects in recent studies, but this drug has no clear target of action. in our docking results, chloroquine phosphate is predicted to possibly combine with nsp3b and e-channel. but we need to do further experiments to verify this conclusion.in response to the recently reported anti-aids drugs lopinavir and ritonavir tablets, which have a poor effect on the treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia and have toxic side effects, we analyzed it in conjunction with the docking results. the molecular docking results show that ritonavir's possible target is nsp3c or echannel. lopinavir's possible target is nsp3b, nsp3c, helicase, nrbd or e-channel. some of these targets (such as nsp3b, nsp3c, e-channel) may be false positives due to the model inaccuracy for small flexible protein or partial model. for both lopinavir and ritonavir, we did not observe possible binding to major targets like 3clpro, plpro, rdrp, and so on. this docking result implies lopinavir and ritonavir tablets may not be suitable for treatment of sars-cov-2 infections.the results of the entire article are based on computer virtual screening. we have not conduct further in vivo and in vitro antiviral experiments yet, because we want to share our results with scientists in anti-sars-cov-2 research as soon as possible. our subsequent research will try to solve the three-dimensional structures of all 24 proteins of sars-cov-2 and their drug complexes, providing more target information for drug intervention and long-term drug design, perform in vivo and in vitro evaluations for candidate drugs obtained in this study, and prepare for clinical trial applications. analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 21a cluster of unexplained pneumonia cases linked to the huanan seafood market in wuhan, china was first reported on december 31, 2019 [1] . after testing negative for common respiratory viruses, these patients tested positive for a novel coronavirus -severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which is the cause of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [2, 3] . some of these initial patients demonstrated hypoxemia, ground glass opacification on chest imaging, abnormal laboratory results -low white blood cell (wbc) count, low absolute lymphocyte count (alc), low platelet count, elevated liver enzymes, and elevated creatinine [2] . covid-19 was declared a global pandemic by the world health organization with over 750,000 confirmed cases in over 200 countries and territories as of march 31, 2020 [4] . we report the case of an early patient with covid-19 who was evacuated from wuhan, china and developed signs of infection at a southern california quarantine facility. this case highlights our patient's clinical course, including relevant history, diagnostic work-up, medical management, and challenges in defining non-infectivity.a 51-year-old chinese woman with no significant past medical history presented to our institution with a 1-day history of fevers, chills, sweats, nonproductive cough from a southern california quarantine facility. she had worked as a nurse in an outpatient medicine clinic in wuhan, china, where she cared for patients with upper respiratory tract symptoms, but without confirmed diagnoses of covid-19. while caring for these patients, she reported wearing a standard surgical mask and gloves. three weeks prior to hospital admission, upon becoming aware of a rapidly spreading pulmonary infection within her community, our patient took leave from work and self-isolated herself in her apartment with her husband and grandson, neither of whom had signs of infection. she had no direct exposure to the huanan seafood market.four days prior to hospital admission, she and her grandson were evacuated on a flight from the wuhan international airport. late the next day, she arrived at a southern california government facility for an intended 14-day quarantine. one day prior to admission, our patient developed a nonproductive cough, fever, chills and sweats. the same day, nasopharyngeal (np) and oropharyngeal (op) swabs for covid-19 using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) were sent from the quarantine facility to the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) laboratory per recommended guidelines (appendix).the following day, she was admitted to our institution and was placed in contact, droplet, and airborne isolation precautions per cdc recommendations. at admission, her temperature was 38.4°c, blood pressure was 101/69 mm hg, heart rate was 84 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 17 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 96% on room air. a physical examination including cardiopulmonary evaluation was unremarkable. laboratory studies were notable for wbc 3600 per mm 3 (range 4100-10,400/mm 3 ), absolute neutrophil count (anc) 2100 per mm 3 , alc 1000 per mm 3 , and platelet count 121,000 per mm 3 . other test results including liver function tests, coagulation studies, procalcitonin, and urinalysis were unremarkable. a np swab using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) was negative for usual viral pathogens, including influenza a/b, respiratory syncytial virus, human rhinovirus/enterovirus, human metapneumovirus, parainfluenza, and four common coronavirus strains previously known to cause human illness (229e, hku1, nl63, and oc43). a chest x-ray demonstrated clear lung fields bilaterally without consolidation or effusion (fig. 2a) . serial np and op swabs were tested every other day per cdc guidance to evaluate clearance of infection. no antibiotics were given to our patient. np and op swabs from the day prior to admission returned positive for covid-19, and our patient became the 14th confirmed case in the united states.during days 1-6 of hospitalization, she experienced daily fevers, chills, drenching night sweats, and a nonproductive cough. by day 3, she had dyspnea with minimal exertion, exacerbated by coughing fits. she also had diminished appetite with occasional nausea. she denied abdominal pain, diarrhea, or dysuria. between days 3 and 6, her maximum temperature (tmax) ranged from 39.0°c to 39.7°c (fig. 1) . her blood pressure remained in low normal range. a pulmonary examination demonstrated bibasilar crackles without labored breathing. on hospital day 3, her chest x-ray demonstrated new findings of bilateral lower lobe reticular opacities (fig. 2b) . her platelets reached a nadir of 101,000 per mm 3 on day 4, before improving. her wbc count improved to 5100 per mm 3 on hospital day 5, however, alc decreased to 600 per mm 3 on day 6, before recovering ( fig. 1) . liver enzymes remained normal until day 6 when aspartate aminotransferase (ast) rose to 50 u/l (fig. 3) . a transthoracic echocardiogram was unremarkable. her chest x-ray on day 6 showed worsened bibasilar reticular opacification (fig. 2c) . her blood cultures remained negative during hospitalization. a quantiferon-tb test resulted negative. treatment was largely supportive during this time, comprising intravenous hydration and antipyretic therapy (acetaminophen < 4 g daily, ibuprofen, and axillary ice packs).on day 6 of hospitalization, due to persistent high fevers, relative hypoxemia, evolving chest x-ray findings, and mildly abnormal liver function, our patient was initiated on compassionate use remdesivir 200 mg intravenous on day 1 followed by 100 mg daily. remdesivir, an investigational antiviral for covid-19, was previously used in ebola virus disease, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [5] . her fever curve improved on day 8 (fig. 1) . our patient continued to have mild dyspnea, nausea, poor appetite, and fatigue. her cough became productive of scant white sputum. alanine aminotransferase (alt) peaked at 84 u/l on day 10, before trending down (fig. 3) . as of hospital day 11, she remained afebrile off antipyretics. her oxygen saturations improved to 97% on ambient air. her dyspnea and auscultatory rales resolved, however, a mild productive cough persisted.on hospital day 9, the cdc reported serial np and op swabs from her entire hospitalization to be negative (table 1 ). this included samples at the height of illness severity (days 1-7). due to concerns with the adequacy of negative op and np testing in defining infection clearance, sputum pcr for covid-19 on days 10 and 11 were obtained. surprisingly, both sputum samples returned positive (table 1 ). given the possibility that her productive cough harbored transmissible live virus, our patient was discharged on day 15 to a government medical facility for continued isolation until the resolution of all symptoms. at the time of transfer, she remained afebrile and asymptomatic apart from a mild productive cough. our patient returned home after 19 days at the government isolation facility after resolution of her cough. she remained non-symptomatic at home when last followed up.our case helps offer insight into the clinical course of covid-19 patients. coronavirus disease is thought to be transmitted from person to person by respiratory droplets and direct contact [6] . despite working as an outpatient nurse, it is less likely that she contracted covid-19 at the workplace as symptom onset was 3 weeks after her last known patient contact. the incubation period of covid-19 is estimated to be between 2 and 14 days [7] [8] [9] . alternatively, she may have been exposed during her self-imposed home isolation in wuhan, however her apparent contacts, including her husband and grandson, were asymptomatic. her grandson later tested negative for covid-19. there is a likelihood that she was infected during transit to the quarantine facility at either the wuhan international airport or on her flight to the united states. exposure at the quarantine facility seems less likely as that would reflect an incubation period of only a day. similar to the first documented cohort of covid-19 patients linked to the huanan seafood market, our patient had leukopenia and thrombocytopenia, both of which recovered during the course of her illness [2] . she notably developed lymphopenia on hospital day 6, which also recovered. the rise in liver enzymes was more likely related to the disease course of covid-19 than to druginduced liver injury from remdesivir, as enzyme levels down trended to normal during daily antiviral infusions. no other clear implicating medications causing liver injury were utilized. relative hypoxemia was noted by oxygen saturation, however, our patient never required supplemental oxygen. chest imaging findings were also significant for infiltrates. in contrast to the reported cohort, [2] renal function in this patient remained normal during the disease course.the clinical improvement in our patient coincided with the initiation of remdesivir on day 6 of hospitalization. however, it is unclear if this improvement can be attributed to the drug and/or to the natural course of covid-19 infection. ongoing investigational trials will help establish the efficacy of remdesivir and other antivirals in covid-19 management [10] [11] [12] .cdc-guided np and op samples of our patient from hospital day 1 onward all tested negative for covid-19 (table 1) . although our patient was clinically ill enough to warrant continued hospitalization and initiation of the antiviral remdesivir; she would have met laboratory criteria to clear isolation precautions by hospital day 3 with two negative np and op specimens on two separate days. during hospital days 1-7, her high fevers and infectious signs in the setting of np and op negativity question whether our patient was infective at the time or whether these were manifestations of a prolonged, excessive cytokine and chemokine response that has been documented in other highly pathogenic coronaviruses including sars-cov and mers-cov [13] .our patient's positive sputum rt-pcr result for covid-19 likely represented inactive viral shedding in the lower respiratory tract rather than active contagious virus, given she had dramatic clinical improvement by hospital day 11. in the 2003 sars-cov outbreak, viral shedding was detected in the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and urinary tracts for many weeks after onset of illness, while active transmission of infection was not day 0 correlates with day of illness onset (tests done at quarantine facility), day 1 is initial day of hospitalization noted after 2 weeks [14] . the pragmatic correlation of sars-cov-2 detection by rt-pcr in sputum, np, and op samples with infectivity is warranted to explore similar trends for covid-19. further research aimed at the understanding of transmission dynamics will help to guide screening practices and support clearance of infectivity.our experience with one of the earliest cases of covid-19 in the united states offers insight into the pertinent clinical and laboratory findings of this novel disease entity. use of remdesivir without any overt side effects in our patient, supports the ongoing clinical trials as a candidate therapeutic agent in covid-19. in addition, the case highlights possible areas for improvement in diagnosing coronavirus disease and robust protocols in establishing clearance of infection to facilitate removal of isolation precautions and safe return of patients to the community. these topics are pertinent for controlling disease spread and promoting public safety.ribavirin should be used in combination with alpha-interferon or lopinavir/ritonavir, 500 mg 1 per adult, 2 to 3 times per day, and be given by intravenous infusion, and the course of 2 treatment should not exceed ten days (zehua zhang et al., 2020). 3glucocorticoids are not only the most important hormones regulating stress response, but 5 also the most widely used and effective anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant agent in 6 clinic (allan et al., 1984) . glucocorticoids are fat-soluble hormones that pass through the 7 cell membrane and bind to glucocorticoid receptor (gr). gr is a macromolecular complex 8 of 90 kda, which is composed of heat shock protein (hsp90) and p59 protein. hsp90 9 dissociates from the complex, and the activated gcs-gr complex rapidly enters the 10 nucleus, binds to the glucocorticoid response components on the target gene promoter in the 11 form of a dimer, and thus to promotes or inhibits the transcription of the target gene, and 12 finally produces pharmacological effects or side effects by regulating the gene products 13 (wilckens and rijk, 1997) . in addition, gcs-gr complex interacts with other transcription 14 factors such as nf-κb to inhibit the expression of inflammatory genes and directly 15 influence the gene regulation and anti-inflammation (rhen and cidlowski, 2005; schäcke et 16 al., 2002) . in emergency or critical cases, glucocorticoid is often the first choice for the 17 treatment for primary or secondary (pituitary) adrenocortical dysfunction, mainly combined 18 with physiological dose of hydrocortisone or cortisone as a supplementary or replacement 19 therapy. 20the common clinical glucocorticoids are prednisone, methylprednisone, betamethasone, 21 11 beclomethasone propionate, prednisone, prednisolone, hydrocortisone and dexamethasone 1 etc. glucocorticoids had been used to treat sars and mers, resulting in lower mortality 2 and shorter hospitalization stay, and were not associated with significant secondary lower 3 respiratory infection and other complications. however, more evidence is needed either for 4 supporting or opposing the systemic therapeutic administration of glucocorticoids in 5 patients with sars-cov-2 infection (qin et al., 2020 a variety of immune cells  20  and improves the immunity, while ifn-β takes effect by inhibiting the adsorption of certain  1   viruses, enhancing phagocytosis of natural killer cells and mononuclear macrophages tocilizumab is a recombinant humanized anti-il-6 receptor (il-6r) monoclonal antibody, 21 13 which can specifically bind to soluble and membrane-bound il-6 receptors and inhibit 1 signal transduction mediated by il-6, thereby reducing inflammation and blocking cytokine 2 storm caused by covid-19 (scheinecker et al., 2009) . tocilizumab was initially used in a 3 study of 21 chinese patients with severe covid-19 (xu et al., 2020a) . based on its 4 encouraging therapeutic effect, a multi-center, large-scale clinical trial 5 (chictr2000029765) was further initiated, and approximately 500 severe or critically ill 6 patients were included. in the dtpncp (trial version 7), tocilizumab was recommended 7for the treatment of patients with extensive lung lesions or laboratory tests for elevated il-6 8 levels (antinori et al., 2020). in addition, tocilizumab combined with other drugs has been 9 applied in more than 20 countries including italy (toniati et al., 2020). 10the convalescent plasma donated by patients recovered from covd-19 contains a high 12 titer of specific antibody to sars-cov-2, which may mediate a strong passive immunity well tolerated, and patients who received plasma transfusion were improved in terms of 20 several parameters, including lymphocyte counts and c-reactive protein. in addition, no 1 severe adverse effects were observed (duan et al., 2020) . serological findings showed that 2 the plasma from six donors recovered from covid-19 had high igg titers (above 1:320), 3 and patients who received plasma transfusion showed no related adverse event and did not 4 require mechanical ventilation 11 days after plasma transfusion (zhang et al., 2020b) . 5though several cured cases have been reported, more expanded clinical trials remains to be 6 fufilled. 7 authorization for the treatment of adults and children with severe covid-19 disease 20 (hendaus, 2020) . though remdesivir was considered as a promising option for covid-19, 21 17 its safety and effect in humans still requires more evidence from additionalclinical trials (li 1 et al., 2020). abundant studies on acute lung injury caused by highly pathogenic viruses, such as 2 influenza a virus and coronavirus, have found that overactivation of complement 3 (especially c5a) may be the central event in that process (wang et al., 2015) . therefore, c5a 4 is highly valued as a rational target for the treatment of highly pathogenic virus-mediated 5 acute lung injury. most of the promising drugs described above are small molecule drugs, but biological 8 products with specific targeting abilities and less side effects are gradually attracting 9interests. the mechanisms underlying the therapies for covid-19 that have been approved 10 for clinical use or are being evaluated in clinical trials include blocking viral replication, 11 regulation of immune function, reducing inflammatory response and alleviating lung 12 injury (table 1) medical university) for their linguistic assistance during the revison of this manuscript. 11the authors declare no competing interests. there is a current worldwide outbreak of a new type of coronavirus (covid- 19) , which originated from wuhan, china and has now spread to 140 other countries, including japan, korea and italy. the world health organization (who) declared that covid-19 has become a global health concern, causing severe respiratory tract infections in humans. current evidence indicates that sars-cov-2 spread to humans via transmission from wild animals illegally sold in the huanan seafood wholesale market. phylogenetic analysis shows that sars-cov-2 is a new member of the coronaviridae family but is distinct from sars-cov (identity of approximately 79%) and mers-cov (identity of approximately 50%) [1 , 2] . knowing the origin of such a pathogen is critical to developing the means to block further transmission and vaccines [3] . notably, sars-cov-2 shares a high level of genetic similarity (96.3%) with the bat coronavirus ratg13, which was obtained from bats in yunnan in 2013; however, bats are not the immediate source of sars-cov-2 [4] .the typical symptoms of covid-19 are fever, sore throat, fatigue, cough or dyspnea coupled with recent exposure. as of period of 6.4 days (95% ci, 5.6-7.7) [8] . an unusual case was also reported in which the incubation period was as long as 19 days [9] . notably, a long incubation time means adjustments in screening and control policies [10] . the 19-day incubation period is a low probability event, and experts suggest 14 days for quarantine.the basic reproduction number is model-based, largely depends on the epidemiological setting, and is the most important parameter to determine intrinsic transmissibility. the early outbreak data largely follow exponential growth. different models based on the clinical progression of the disease were devised to estimate the basic reproduction number. in the early stages of covid-19, the pandemic doubled in size every 7.4 days, and the basic reproduction number was estimated to be 2.2 [7] . another study estimated the basic reproduction number as ranging from 2.24 to 3.58 [11] . however, a deterministic compartmental model based on the likelihood and a model analysis showed that the control reproduction number may be as high as 6.47 [12] . the authors noted that this basic reproduction number was higher because the estimate accounts for 3-4 generations of viral transmission and intensive social contacts. the basic reproduction number estimated by the majority of studies ranges from 2.24 to 3.58 [13] , which is slightly higher than that of sars.rapid and accurate detection of covid-19 is crucial to control outbreaks in the community and in hospitals [14] . current diagnostic tests for coronavirus include reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), real-time rt-pcr (rrt-pcr), and reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) [15 , 16] . rt-lamp has similar sensitivity to rrt-pcr, is highly specific and is used to detect mers-cov [17 , 18] . according to current diagnostic criteria founded by the china national health commission, laboratory examinations, including nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab tests, have become a standard assessment for diagnosis of covid-19 infection. to identify patients earlier, two one-step quantitative rt-pcr (qrt-pcr) assays were developed to detect two different regions (orf1b and n) of the sars-cov-2 genome [19] . three novel rt-pcr assays targeting the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp)/helicase (hel), spike (s), and nucleocapsid (n) genes of sars-cov-2 were developed. among the three novel assays, the covid-19-rdrp/hel assay had the lowest limit of detection in vitro; highly sensitive and specific assays may help to improve the laboratory diagnosis of covid-19 [20] . the sars-cov e gene assay was more sensitive than the rdrp gene assay combined with the one-step rt-pcr system [21] . the e gene pcr was sufficient to diagnose a sars-cov-2 infection but the rdrp protocol was recommended to confirm a positive result [22 , 23] . the overall positive rate of rt-pcr detection of sars-cov-2 infection in 4880 cases from one hospital in wuhan was 38% [24] . the positive rate of pcr for oropharyngeal swabs is not very high: only 53.3% of covid-19-confirmed patients had positive oral swabs tests [25] . in a series of 51 patients with confirmed covid-19 infection, 71% patients were rt-pcr positive at the first time of testing of throat swab or sputum samples [26] . the rt-pcr results usually become positive after several days (2-8 days) [27] . automated solutions for molecular diagnostics can handle large numbers of samples and can be scaled to keep pace with fluctuating demand [28] [29] [30] . the good analytical performance of a molecular assay for the detection of sars-cov-2 on a highthroughput platform, the cobas 6800, was observed with minimal hands-on time, while offering fast and reliable results [31 , 32] .the current laboratory test is time-consuming, and a shortage of commercial kits delays diagnosis. for patients suffering from fever, sore throat, fatigue, coughing or dyspnea that is coupled with recent exposure, covid-19 infection should be diagnosed with typical chest computerized tomography (ct) characteristics despite negative rt-pcr results [33] . of 1014 patients, 59% had positive rt-pcr results, and 88% had positive chest ct scans [34] . covid-19 belongs to the coronaviridae family; therefore, it is not surprising that covid-19 has imaging findings that are similar to those for sars-cov and mers-cov [35] . typical ct findings included bilateral pulmonary parenchymal ground-glass and consolidative pulmonary opacities, sometimes with a rounded morphology and peripheral lung distribution [33] . eighty-six percent of patients showed ground-glass opacities or consolidation, and more than one lobe (71%) with bilateral involvement (76%) was affected in the 21 initial chest ct scans [36] . notably, lung cavitation, discrete pulmonary nodules, pleural effusions, and lymphadenopathy were absent [36] . lung abnormalities on chest ct scan were most severe approximately 10 days after the initial onset of symptoms [37] . chest ct scans can be used to assess the severity of covid-19. covid-19 also manifests with chest ct imaging abnormalities in asymptomatic patients, with rapid evolution from focal unilateral to diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacities that progressed to or co-existed with consolidations within 1-3 weeks. combining assessment of imaging features with clinical and laboratory findings could facilitate early diagnosis of covid-19 pneumonia [38] [39] [40] . as the diagnostic criteria expanded from laboratory examination to chest ct imaging, more than 14 0 0 0 patients were diagnosed on february 12, 2020.classical public health measures, including isolation, quarantine, social distancing and community containment, can be used to curb the pandemic of this respiratory disease [41] . china has been preparing since 2003 to contain future pandemics by applying lessons learned from sars [42] . in the covid-19 pandemic, china issued the largest quarantine in history. all the residents living in mainland china were locked-in, and city public transportation, including buses, trains, ferries, and airports, were shutdown. given the trajectory of this outbreak, the chinese government scaled up such effort s to keep pace with the rapid increase in cases and geographical spread. the wuhan government made full use of the gym and two convention centers and transformed them into makeshift hospitals with 3400 beds in only one night to isolate covid-19 patients from healthy controls. more makeshift hospitals are under construction. isolation beds were quickly expanded from only 137 at the beginning of the outbreak of covid-19 to 56 0 0 0 to separate infected patients from non-infected individuals. the swift and decisive response of china contributed to reducing the control reproduction number and transmission risk. due to the powerful and effective isolation measures taken by the chinese government, the increase in covid-19 began to slow down on february 14, 2020, according to the data released by the china national health commission.there is no current evidence from randomized controlled trials (rcts) to recommend any specific anti-sars-cov-2 treatment for patients with a suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection. lopinavir (lpv) inhibits the protease activity of coronavirus in vitro and in animal studies. a retrospective, matched-cohort study including 1052 sars patients showed that lpv/ritonavir as initial treatment was associated with a reduced death rate (2.3% vs. 11.0%) [43] . the protease inhibitor lpv is an effective treatment based on the experience accumulated from the sars and mers outbreaks, indicating it is a potential treatment option for covid-19 [44] . ribavirin, a guanosine analogue, is an antiviral compound used to treat several virus infections, including respiratory syncytial virus, hepatitis c virus, and some viral hemorrhagic fevers. promising results were obtained with ribavirin in a mers-cov rhesus macaque model [45] . in addition, sars-cov-2 rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) model is targeted by ribavirin after sequence analysis, modeling, and docking to build the model. this feature increases its potential as an antiviral against sars-cov-2 [46] .the antiviral agent, remdesivir was designed for the ebola virus disease [47] . remdesivir shows broad-spectrum antiviral activity against several rna viruses, and it may compete for rdrp [48] . remdesivir and ifnb have superior antiviral activity to lpv and ritonavir in vitro [49] . in a mouse model of sars-cov pathogenesis, both prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir improved pulmonary function and reduced lung viral loads and severe lung pathology [50] . in a rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection, prophylactic remdesivir treatment was initiated 24 h prior to inoculation, and mers-cov did not induce clinical disease and did not replicate in respiratory tissues, thus preventing the formation of lung lesions [51] . in cell-based assays, the triphosphate form of remdesivir incorporated at position i, and rna chain termination was delayed, which explained the high potency of remdesivir against rna [52] . remdesivir was used to treat the first case of covid-19 infection in the united states: the patient's clinical condition improved after only one day of remdesivir treatment [53] . a phase ii clinical trial of remdesivir was performed by the university of nebraska medical center, and a phase iii clinical trial was performed by the china-japan friendship hospital. the results of these clinical trials will be revealed in april 2020. remdesivir improved pulmonary function, reduced lung viral loads, and ameliorated severe lung pathology. in contrast, prophylactic lpv/rtv-ifnb only slightly reduced viral loads and did not impact other disease parameters, and therapeutic lpv/rtv-ifnb improved pulmonary function, but did not reduce virus replication or severe lung pathology [49] . overall, these results indicated that remdesivir showed more potential than lpv/rtv-ifnb [54] . in a case report, lopinavir/ritonavir (kale-tra®) and arbidol were associated with significant improvements in covid-19 patients [55] . the efficacy and safety of these antiviral agents for covid-19 will be assessed in further clinical trials. thirty-four trials of antiviral agents in patients with covid-19 have been registered up to march 15, 2020 ( table 1 ) .chloroquine is a widely-used antimalarial and autoimmune disease drug that has been reported to be a potential broad-spectrum antiviral drug [56] [57] [58] . chloroquine is known to block virus infection by increasing endosomal ph required for virus/cell fusion, as well as interfering with the glycosylation of cellular receptors of sars-cov [59] . the first results obtained from more than 100 patients showed the apparent efficacy of chloroquine in terms of reduction of exacerbation of pneumonia, duration of symptoms and delay of viral clearance, all in the absence of severe side effects [60] . chloroquine was included in the recommendations for the prevention and treatment of covid-19 pneumonia [60 , 61] . the optimal dosage of chloroquine for sars-cov-2 will need to be assessed in future trials [62] .hydroxychloroquine is a chloroquine analog for which there are fewer concerns about drug-drug interactions [63] . in the previous sars outbreak, hydroxychloroquine was reported to have anti-sars-cov activity in vitro [64] . using physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (pbpk) models, hydroxychloroquine was found to be more potent than chloroquine in sars-cov-2-infected vero cells [65] . cytokines il-6 and il-10 have been reported to be increased in response to sars-cov-2 infection [66 , 67] . this may progress to a cytokine storm, followed by multiorgan failure and death. both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have immunomodulatory effects and can suppress the immune response [68 , 69] . therefore, 21 clinical studies were launched by chinese hospitals and the university of oxford to evaluate the efficacy of these agents in covid-19 infection ( table 2 ) . it is also necessary to determine whether the benefit of chloroquine therapy depends on the age of the patient and the clinical presentation or stage of the disease [70] . if clinical data confirm the biological results, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine may be used in prophylaxis as well as curative treatment for individuals exposed to sars-cov-2 [71] .in a study of 41 covid-19 patients, 21% received corticosteroids, which could suppress lung inflammation [66] . the administered dose of methylprednisolone varied depending on disease severity. current interim guidance from the who on the clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection when sars-cov-2 infection is suspected (released january 28, 2020) advises against the use of corticosteroids unless indicated for another reason. the clinical outcomes of coronavirus and similar outbreaks do not support the use of corticosteroids. in a retrospective observational study of 309 adults who were critically ill with mers, patients who were given corticosteroids were more likely to require mechanical ventilation, vasopressors, and renal replacement therapy [72] . for the management of sars, corticosteroid treatment was more associated with psychosis, diabetes and avascular necrosis [73 , 74] . overall, there is no unique reason to expect that patients with covid-19 infection will benefit from corticosteroids, and such treatment may be harmful [75] . however, according to our clinical experience, corticosteroids could be prescribed at the right time for the right patients. the clinical trials involving corticosteroids are shown in table 3 .the development of vaccines and therapeutic antibodies against covid-19 has important implications. considering the relatively high identity of the receptor-binding domain (rbd) in sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, the cross-reactivity of anti-sars-cov antibodies with the covid-19 spike protein was assessed. the spike protein is the major inducer of neutralizing antibodies. fortunately, the sars-cov-specific human monoclonal antibody cr3022 binds potently with the covid-19 rbd [76] . however, other sars-cov rbd-directed antibodies 230, m396 and 80r cannot bind to the covid-19 rbd [77] . cr3022 may be a potential therapeutic candidate, alone or in combination with other neutralizing antibodies, for the prevention and treatment of covid-19 infections. antibodies mab114 and regn-eb3 were designed for treatment of ebola virus infection and significantly reduce mortality from ebola virus disease [47] . monoclonal antibodies can only recognize a single antigen epitope, which limits the use of mab114 and regn-eb3 in the treatment of covid-19. however, the development of covid-19-specific antibodies requires a long time. it is not easy to apply monoclonal antibodies for new pathogens to clinical practice in a short time. convalescent plasma was administered early after symptom onset in the treatment of sars, and the pooled odds of mortality following treatment was reduced compared with placebo or no therapy (odds ratio, 0.25) [78] . however, in ebola virus disease, the transfusion of up to 500 ml of convalescent plasma in 84 patients was not associated with a significant improvement in survival [79] . in a laboratory test, the covid-19 virus was isolated from the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of a critically ill patient, and it could be neutralized by sera from several patients [80] . current clinical trials involving convalescent plasma transfusion are shown in table 4 . the national health commission of china appealed to convalescent patients to donate blood for the treatment of covid-19 infection. convalescent plasma should be collected within two weeks after recovery to ensure a high neutralization antibody titer. the difficulty in obtaining plasma during convalescence limits its clinical application. well-designed clinical trials are needed to further evaluate the efficacy and safety of convalescent plasma therapy in patients with covid-19 infection.the structure of sars-cov-2 s protein has been revealed, and this should enable the rapid development and evaluation of medical countermeasures to address the ongoing public health crisis [77] . these findings provide the basis for further studies to optimize vaccination strategies for this emerging infection. the majority of the vaccines being developed for coronaviruses target the spike glycoprotein or s protein [81] . vaccine development is a long process, and no vaccines are available at the time of a pandemic outbreak. for example, the ebola epidemic outbreak occurred in 2013, and three years later, the rvsv ebola vaccine was selected for phase i clinical trials for its safety and immunogenicity in africa and europe [82] . in november 2019, the european commission granted marketing authorization to merck sharp and dohme b.v. in europe for their ebola vaccine, ervebo. fortunately, moderna company announced on february 24, 2020 that the company's experimental mrna covid-19 vaccine, known as mrna-1273, is ready for human testing. it is a remarkably fast development cycle to develop an initial vaccine just weeks after identifying the sars-cov-2 genetic sequence. the clinical trial of safety and immunogenicity of mrna-1273 in the treatment of covid-19 is under investigation (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04283461). moreover, a new oral sars-cov-2 vaccine has been successfully developed at tianjin university, which uses food-grade safe saccharomyces cerevisiae as a carrier and targets the s protein.there are 18 biotechnology companies and universities in china working on sars-cov-2 vaccines. vaccines for sars-cov-2 have been developed much faster than those for ebola because of the collaborative effort s of scientist s around the world and the fast-track approval of sars-cov-2 vaccine development effort s by the chinese health organizations.bats have been recognized as a natural reservoir and vectors of a variety of coronaviruses, and these viruses have crossed species barriers to infect humans and many different kinds of animals, including avians, rodents, and chiropters [83 , 84] . while the origin of covid-19 is still being investigated, covid-19 has features typical of the coronaviridae family and was classified in the beta-coronavirus 2b lineage. covid-19 can be transmitted between humans. interventions, including intensive contact tracing followed by quarantine and isolation, can effectively reduce the spread of covid-19, with the effect of travel restrictions. wearing masks, washing hands and disinfecting surfaces contribute to reducing the risk of infection. human coronaviruses can be efficiently inactivated within 1 min using surface disinfection procedures with 62-71% ethanol, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite [85] .identification of the causative viral pathogens of respiratory tract viral infections is important to select an appropriate treatment, control the pandemic, and reduce the economic impact of covid-19 on china and the world. in acute respiratory infection, rt-pcr is routinely used to detect causative viruses from respiratory secretions. the positive rate of pcr from oropharyngeal swabs is not very high. in this situation, more swab testing is needed to clarify diagnosis. typical ct findings can help early screening of suspected cases and diagnosis of covid-19.the covid-19 infection has a clustering onset and is more likely to affect older males (average age 51 years) with comorbidities [86] . no evidence supports adverse birth outcomes, intrauterine infection, or vertical transmission of covid-19 [87] . however, viral infections can be acquired when the infant passes through the birth canal during vaginal delivery or through postpartum breastfeeding [88] . the most common symptoms were fever, cough, expectoration, headache, myalgia or fatigue, diarrhea, and hemoptysis [89] . some people may experience severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. histological examination of lung biopsy samples showed bilateral diffuse alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates [90] . other organs are also susceptible to covid-19. the single-cell rna-seq data was used to analyse receptor ace2 expression to reveal the potential risk of different human organs to covid-19 infection [91] . covid-19 uses the same cell entry receptor as sars-cov, ace2, which regulates both cross-species and human-to-human transmissions [80] . proximal tubular cells also express higher levels of the ace2 receptor, which leads to susceptibility to covid-19 [91] and induces kidney injury. data from 33 patients with a complete clinical course were analysed, and the levels of blood urea and creatinine were higher in non-survivors than in survivors [92] .all patients with covid-19-infected pneumonia received antibacterial agents, 90% received antiviral therapy, and 45% received methylprednisolone [92] . clinical trials are underway to investigate the efficacy of new antiviral drugs, convalescent plasma transfusion, and vaccines. most of the trials were initiated by investigators and the study period is 1 to 11 months. although the final results of these studies will take a long time to complete, the interim research data may provide some help for the current urgent demand for therapy [93] .the covid-19 pandemic is a public health emergency of international concern, and all countries need a coordinated international effort to fight covid-19. the transmission of pneumonia associated with sars-cov-2 has not yet been eliminated. in the absence of vaccines and antivirals, isolation and quarantine are achieving remarkable results. it is necessary to strengthen the monitoring of covid-19 and to develop drugs and vaccines against the covid-19 infection as soon as possible. disseminated on an almost daily basis, often with incomplete or conflicting results and without adequate peer review. understandably, while the focus of these investigations has centered on therapeutic efficacy, attention should also be paid to the clinical pharmacology and potential for drug-drug interactions which is often lacking published data. for the front-line clinician, this information is vital to providing optimal care for covid-19 patients with complex underlying medical conditions receiving multiple medications.remdesivir (gs-5734), developed by gilead sciences, inc., has recently emerged as a promising new antiviral agent against sars-cov-2. initially developed to combat ebola, remdesivir has been administered to over 1800 patients worldwide since january, 2020 through clinical trials, individual compassionate use, and expanded access. published reports of remdesivir have shown mixed efficacy. 2, 3 a case series of 53 hospitalized patients who received remdesivir via the compassionate use program showed an overall mortality of 13%, with higher mortality (18%) in patients who were mechanically ventilated. a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial from china found no benefit of remdesivir compared to placebo.however, the study was terminated early due to failure to achieve its target enrollment and was, therefore, underpowered to show clinical benefit. adverse events were similar in both studies, ranging from 60-66% of patient receiving remdesivir (compared with 64% patients receiving placebo). serious adverse events occurred in 20-23% of patients. notable adverse events include rash (8%) and abnormal liver function tests (5-23%). more promising preliminary results are emerging from the national institute of health adaptive covid-19 clinical trial (actt) which showed a statistically significant decrease in time to recovery, defined as return to normal activity or hospital discharge. the median time to recovery was 11 days for patients treated with remdesivir, compare with 15 days for patients receiving placebo (p<0.001). while not statistically significant, results did suggest a survival benefit with a mortality of 8.0% of patients in the remdesivir group compared to 11.6% of patients in the placebo group (p=0.059). 4 topline results from the open-label phase 3 simple trial showed that patients with severe covid-19this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. respectively) allowing for once-daily dosing. remdesivir has wide distribution to most tissues including the kidneys, liver, prostate gland and salivary gland but does not cross the blood-brain barrier. metabolism is mediated predominantly by hydrolases with 74% and 18% of remdesivir recovered in urine and feces. 10, 11 the majority of remdesivir recovered in urine was metabolite this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.gs-441524; 10% was recovered as remdesivir. it is worth noting that remdesivir is formulated in sulfobutylether--cyclodextrin (sbecd), an excipient to enhance solubility. sbecd has been shown to accumulate in moderate to severe renal dysfunction and, in preclinical studies, has resulted in renal vacuolation. 12 caution should be exercised when co-administration with other parenteral medications formulated in sbecd (e.g., voriconazole, amiodarone), particularly in patients with creatinine clearance less than 30 ml/min.to date, there are only limited in vitro transporter and enzyme-mediated drug interaction studies on remdesivir. remdesivir is a substrate of multiple cytochrome p450 enzymes including cyp2c8, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4, and is also a substrate of the organic anion transporting polypeptide oatp1b1, and p-glycoprotein (p-gp). remdesivir is also a weak inhibitor of cyp3a4, oatp1b1, oatp1b3, bile acid export pump (bsep), multidrug resistanceassociated protein 4 (mrp4), and sodium-taurocholate cotransporter protein (ntcp). however, metabolism of remdesivir is believed to be mediated predominantly via hydrolases and not cyp enzymes, as noted above. 11 due to the high extraction ratio of remdesivir, hepatic clearance is likely driven by hepatic blood flow and not metabolic enzyme activity. this, in addition to the short plasma half-life and need for iv administration that avoids hepatic first pass metabolism, likely results in a low potential for drug-drug interactions with the administered drug. (table 1) therapies. 13 listed drugs include remdesivir, lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, tocilizumab, and favipravir among others. according to the website (accessed 4 may 2020), coadministration of strong cyp3a4 inhibitors such as voriconazole is labeled as "no clinically significant interaction expected." in contrast, co-administration with strong cyp3a4 inducers such as rifampicin can lead to decreased remdesivir levels and it is recommended that "these drugs should not be coadministered." to add to the confusion, three recent published reviews or guidelines of covid-19 therapeutics resulted in discordant conclusions regarding the significance and clinical management of potential cyp3a4 interactions. mccreary et al correctly noted that the initial actt protocol erroneously stated that "remdesivir is a prodrug that is metabolized to its active form as a substrate of cyp3a4" when, in fact, remdesivir is activated to the active metabolite, gg-441524 via plasma carboxylesterases and metabolized by hydrolases. 14 the authors concluded that, while remdesivir is a substrate of multiple cyp isoforms, drug interactions with cyp3a4 inhibitors or inducers were unlikely. this is in contrast to a recent review of covid-19 pharmacologic therapeutics published in jama which states that while "not a significant inducer/inhibitor of cyp enzymes, monitor with strong inducers/inhibitors." 15 on april 21, 2020, the nih released their own covid-19 treatment guidelines. 16 in their review, the authors note that while remdesivir is unlikely to be affected by cyp enzymes or p-gp transporters, remdesivir should not be administered with strong cyp or p-gp inducers but may be co-administered with strong cyp inhibitors. the basis for this recommendation is unclear but is clearly aimed at minimizing the potential for subtherapeutic remdesivir levels. while the impact of strong cyp inhibitors, such as voriconazole, is typically limited to the major isoenzyme, cyp3a4, cyp inducers can affect multiple cyp isoenzymes and transporters leading to a larger cumulative decrease in substrate concentration when metabolized and transported via multiple pathways. at present, the contribution of each cyp isoenzyme and transporter to the overall metabolism of remdesivir and its metabolites is this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.unclear. this approach also assumes that increased remdesivir levels, and potentially increased levels of the active metabolite, gs-441524, will not lead to increased toxicity which may or may severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), the cause of coronavirus disease-19 (covid- 19) , 1 was first reported to the world health organization (who) on december 31, 2019, 2 and declared a global pandemic on march 11, 2020. 3 to date, there are approximately 5.8 million confirmed cases and over 350,000 deaths globally. 4 there are no food and drug administration 5 or european medicines agency 6 approved vaccines or medications for the treatment of covid-19. no specific therapies are recommended by the centers for disease control and prevention, 7 infectious diseases society of america, 8 society for critical care medicine, 9 or who 10 outside of clinical trials. the national institutes of health (nih) 11 guideline was recently updated to recommend remdesivir in certain patients based on preliminary evidence from clinical trials.despite absence of guideline-supported recommendations, several therapies thought to be effective for covid-19 are in use around the world. however, access to these treatments is not equitable among all populations. 12 remdesivir and chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine are drug therapies that have received the most attention.remdesivir was initially available through individual compassionate use requests. this pathway was halted for the majority of patients due to the overwhelming numbers of requests and the need to focus on clinical trials. remdesivir access was then limited to these clinical trials and expanded access programs. 13 however, not all patients had the equal opportunity to enroll due to study site locations and eligibility criteria. 14, 15 it was only on may 1, 2020, that the fda granted emergency use authorization (eua) for remdesivir. it is now available for suspected or confirmed disease in hospitalized adults and children with severe disease, which is defined as low blood oxygen levels or needing oxygen therapy or mechanical ventilation. 16 however, allocation of remdesivir through eua has not been transparent, and fears grow as healthcare providers are faced with rationing the limited drug supply. 17, 18 chloroquine and its metabolite hydroxychloroquine are widely prescribed for other indications. however, when reports emerged of their possible activity against sars-cov-2, shortages quickly developed in the united states (us). [19] [20] [21] these drugs can be obtained for covid-19 treatment through the fda eua, but use is reserved for only the sickest patients in certain hospitals. 22 additionally, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are associated with potentially severe cardiac side effects. 23 furthermore, an early clinical trial failed to demonstrate efficacy. 24 every 12 h, ribavirin, 400 mg orally every 12 h, and three doses of 8 million international units of interferon beta-1b on alternate days when compared to 14 days of lopinavir, 400 mg, and ritonavir, 100 mg, every 12 h. this multicenter, prospective, open-label, randomized, phase 2 trial conducted at six sites in hong kong demonstrated that the triple antiviral therapy was safe and superior to lopinavir and ritonavir alone. 25 due to concerns over equitable access and adverse events of notable experimental treatments, we aimed to investigate potential alternative agents for treatment of covid-19 that may have better availability and side effect profiles. vitamins and essential nutrients are well known for their overall tolerability and requisite role in immune function. thus, they were a natural choice for our investigation. this narrative review summarizes current and ongoing clinical trials of high-dose vitamins and supplements, alone or in combination with each other or other therapies, for the treatment of covid-19. while not the focus of this review, vitamins and supplements may have an additional benefit in covid-19 prevention, with a number of clinical trials planned to investigate this hypothesis. if shown to be safe and effective, vitamins and supplements may provide the muchneeded answer to the covid-19 pandemic.the authors searched the nih us library of medicine clinical trials database (www.clinicaltrials.gov) and the who's international clinical trials registry platform (who ictrp) via the nih (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/who_table). prospective interventional trials of vitamins and/or supplements, excluding chinese traditional medicine (ctm), for the treatment of covid-19 posted on or before may 4, 2020, were included. synonyms for covid-19 were sars-cov-2, 2019-ncov, 2019 novel coronavirus, and sars-cov-2. additional search terms of 'vitamin' and 'supplement' were used to narrow search results. traditionally, indexed literature and abstracts would have been added to the search methodology, but given the novelty of the subject, medline and embase searches for interventional studies yielded no results. this manuscript was exempted from ethics review as it did not involve human subjects.in the nih covid-19 database, the additional search terms of 'vitamin' yielded 28 studies and 'supplement' yielded 115 additional studies. of these 143 studies, 18 met inclusion criteria from this database ( figure 1 ). reasons for study exclusion were: erroneous search result (n=103); vitamin/ supplement given as placebo, control, or standard of care (n=9), ctm (n=4); prevention study (n=5); diet plan as intervention (n=2; ayurveda and ketogenic); and methodology (n=2; retrospective design and covid-19 not required for inclusion).filtering the nih's who ictrp covid-19 study table using the terms 'vitamin' yielded 27 studies. filtering by 'supplement' yielded 36 additional studies. of those 63 studies, 12 met inclusion criteria from this database. reasons for study exclusion were: erroneous search result (n=37), diagnostic study (n=3), cancelled by investigator (n=3), ctm (n=2), prevention study (n=4), retrospective design (n=1), and vitamin/ supplement given as placebo, control, or standard of care (n=1). one trial was dual registered in the american and european databases, leaving 11 unique studies.of the two clinical trial registries searched, a total of 29 studies met inclusion for evaluation and focused on the role of fatty acids, honey, medicinal plant extracts, probiotics, vitamins a, b, c, and d, and zinc (table 1) . although these studies are ongoing and enrolling subjects, it is important to understand the potential role of these supplements and vitamins ( table 2 ).the vitamins and supplements are under investigation in these trials largely as a result of their anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. it is postulated that honey also has antiviral properties. 34, 35 table 1 highlights the mechanism of action, commercial availability, common uses, considerations for adverse events and drug-drug interactions, and proposed use in covid-19 for the vitamins and supplements.twelve studies in six countries seek to evaluate nutritional supplementation or supplements for the treatment of covid-19. [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] agents evaluated in these studies are α-lipoic acid (ala) (n=2), 55,56 curcumin (n=1), 57 chlorella vulgaris (green algae) with a herbal tea blend (n=1), 58 escin (n=1), 59 honey (n=1), 60 imfluna (=1), 61 n-acetyl cysteine (nac) (n=2) 62,63 , fatty-acid/antioxidant-enriched oral supplement (n=1), 64 probiotics (n=1), 65 and resistant starch (n=1). 66 nineteen studies in eight countries seek to evaluate vitamins and minerals for the treatment of covid-19. [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] agents evaluated in these studies are: vitamin a (n=3), 67-69 vitamin b (n=2), 69, 70 vitamin c (n=10), 69,71-78 vitamin d (n=8), 64, 69, 77, [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] and zinc (n=3). 77, 78 the sum of studies here is more than 29, as multiple agents are investigated in some trials. for each study, table 2 provides the trial location, design, treatment arms, requirements for treatment, status, planned end date, and endpoints.the majority of vitamin supplements in these trials are administered orally, although some are parenteral. ala is administered parenterally in both studies, 55,56 escin is administered parenterally in one arm of its study, 59 nac 62 and vitamin b 69 are administered parenterally in one study each, and vitamin c is administered parentally [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] in all studies except one. 69 intervention and comparator arms vary across the trials. the intervention arms call for the study agent to be given alone, in combination with other study agents, or with standard of care. comparator arms include other study agents (e.g. adalimumab), standard of care, and/or placebo. standard of care is not described in all trails. it may only be defined as such or specific antivirals (e.g. hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin) may be listed. study agents investigated in issn there are a wide range of planned primary and secondary outcomes among the studies. notable planned outcomes include disease progression or recovery, adverse events, mortality, change in symptoms, vitals, radiology, and/or laboratory inflammatory markers, and rate of, length of, or time to hospitalization or mechanical ventilation. the study expected to have peer-reviewed results earliest is of ala plus standard of care in critically ill patients with covid-19. 56 the majority of the other trials are recruiting (n=15). this is followedby not yet recruiting (n=11), enrolling (n=1), and recruitment compete (n=1). 55,57-83although the full potential of vitamins and herbal supplements have not been elucidated, various studies are underway to assess these agents as potential treatment options and/ or additive therapies to current treatment choices that vary around the world as there is no definitive treatment at this point in time. depending on the formulation, vitamins and herbal supplements are relatively affordable and accessible. availability in certain markets may be limited as this novel virus has caused patients and providers to stockpile medications, vitamins, and supplements for later use without proven efficacy and unknown safety profiles at higher than normal doses, leading to imposing limitations on the quantity that can be purchased. 84 although the use of remdesivir has been expanded in the united states, its role in the fight of covid-19 has not provided patients and providers with the relief they expected. although no difference in clinical outcomes was observed between 5 and 10 days of remdesivir treatment, a study conducted in hubei, china, failed to demonstrate clinical improvements in adults with severe covid-19 in the remdesivir arm. 85, 86 interestingly, time to clinical improvement in patients treated earlier was observed but needs confirmation in larger studies. 85 in an exploratory analysis, the sponsor of remdesivir, gilead sciences, inc., found that patients who received remdesivir within 10 days of symptoms onset had improved outcomes compared with those treated after more than 10 days of symptoms. additionally, when data were pooled across treatment arms, by day 14, 62% of patients treated early were discharged from the hospital compared to those who were treated late; yet statistical analysis was not performed. 86 furthermore, notable exclusion criteria in these moderateto-severe covid-19 patients included mechanical ventilation at screening as well as patients receiving mechanical ventilation > 5 days or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase > 5 x upper limit of normal (uln), and creatinine clearance (crcl) < 50 ml/min. 14,15 therefore, the true potential and efficacy of remdesivir therapy require expanded investigation into additional populations.although doses of vitamins in these ongoing clinical trials are higher than normal, use of vitamins at higher doses compared to recommended dietary allowance is safe, and upper limits for the use are defined. in addition, the use of vitamins and herbal supplements likely has more benign side effects when compared to self-medicating with unproven remedies lacking adequate investigations for use. in the instance of chloroquine phosphate and its derivative hydroxychloroquine, a wife and husband ingested chloroquine phosphate in the united states in march 2020, after hearing from a press conference that this medication was likely a very promising treatment option. the couple consumed hydroxychloroquine based on the intended use for their aquarium because they feared contracting the virus, and it was easily accessible. they were both hospitalized shorty after ingesting the product, and the husband ultimately died. 87 meanwhile, hundreds in iran died after drinking neat alcohol in early 2020, which was publicized on social media as a cure/ prevention for covid. 88 it is not clear how many of these deaths can be directly tied to social media misinformation, as a larger problem of contaminated bootleg alcohol was revealed.the most studied supplement in the acute care setting has been vitamin c, where it has been used as treatment for multiple conditions, including sepsis, acute bronchitis, cardiovascular disease, postoperative infection, and prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. a meta-analysis published in these authors also performed a meta-regression analysis in critically ill patients receiving mechanical ventilation and found that in 5 studies consisting of 471 patients, vitamin c (1-6 g/ day) was most beneficial in reducing ventilation time by an average of 25% (p<0.0001) in patients requiring more than 10 h of mechanical ventilation. 90 these findings can serve as a foundation for analyzing the role of vitamin c in potentially reducing the time spent on mechanical ventilation in patients with covid-19.vitamin c infusion for treatment in sepsis induced acute lung injury (citris-ali), a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, multicenter trial conducted in 7 medical icus in the usa evaluated the effects of vitamin c infusion in 167 patients and its role in organ failure along with biomarkers of inflammation and vascular injury in patients with sepsis and severe acute respiratory failure. patients were assigned to receive either an infusion of vitamin c, 50 mg/kg, or placebo dextrose, 5% in water, every 6 h for 96 h. although this study failed to improve organ dysfunction scores or alter markers of inflammation and vascular injury, vitamin c was associated with a significant reduction in 28-day all-cause mortality as well as significantly increased icu-free days to day 28 and hospital-free days to day 60. 91 these findings also suggest that further research may be warranted to determine whether vitamin c has a role in the care of patients with sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), which has been associated with covid-19.vitamin d is currently under evaluation for its role in covid-19 for its immunomodulatory effects. a trial conducted in guinea-bissau investigated vitamin d as supplementary treatment for tuberculosis in 365 patients. the intervention was 100,000 iu of cholecalciferol or placebo at inclusion and again at 5 and 8 months after the initiation of treatment. findings from this study failed to demonstrate improvements in clinical outcomes or mortality in patients receiving vitamin d as part of tuberculosis treatment, but this may be due to the dose not being high enough or given consistently.additional studies evaluating the role of vitamin d supplementation in the prevention and reduction of acute respiratory infections, copd exacerbations, and pneumonia were analyzed in the vitamin d3 supplementation in patients issn: 1740-4398 review -vitamins and/or supplements for coronavirus drugsincontext.com excluded in many of these ongoing trials as well. this includes women, who are pregnant or lactating, as well as patients with chronic diseases (i.e. kidney disease), or patients with short life expectancies (i.e. cancers).the greatest promise in combatting this life-threatening virus appears to be through reducing the cytokine storm associated with covid-19. 95 this is where anti-inflammatory and antioxidant vitamins and supplements may play a potential role. results of these ongoing clinical trials are urgently needed.at this time, we recommend vitamins and supplements as specific covid-19 treatment in the context of a clinical trial. this recommendation is in-line with the major organizational guidelines for potentially effective covid-19 treatments at the time of this writing. while the vitamins and supplements under investigation for covid-19 described in this manuscript are generally without serious adverse effects and drug interactions, no therapy is completely free of risk. additionally, while also being generally affordable, broad recommendation and implementation of unproven treatments are likely not cost effective. that being said, vitamins and supplements with existing evidence supporting their use in conditions associated with covid-19, such as sepsis or ards, can be considered when potential benefit is determined to outweigh risk.with the rapidity of hypothetical treatments' data being generated for covid-19, clinical investigations up until this point have not provided efficacious treatments in eradicating the virus. while it is important to investigate treatments with the potential to reduce the severity and consequences of covid-19, vitamins and supplements should be continued to be evaluated to provide the much-needed evidence for possible treatment modalities. a systematic review will be conducted once results from ongoing and recruiting clinical trials are available.with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (vidico) trial. this trial investigated whether vitamin d3 supplementation would reduce the incidence of moderate or severe copd exacerbations and upper respiratory infections in 240 patients across clinics in london. patients received six 2-month oral doses of 3 mg of vitamin d over a 1-year period. vitamin d3 was associated with protective effects against moderate or severe copd exacerbations in participants with baseline serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d concentrations of less <50 nmol/l (p=0·021), but not in those with baseline concentrations > 50 nmol/l. baseline serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d concentrations had no effect on time to first upper respiratory infection. 92 a systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated 24 randomized, controlled trials of supplementation with vitamin d in regard to incidence of acute respiratory tract infection. protective effects were observed in subjects receiving daily or weekly vitamin d supplementation without additional bolus doses and were stronger in those with baseline 25-hydroxyvitamin d levels <25 nmol/l. serum 25(oh)d concentration was inversely associated with risk and severity of acute respiratory tract infection; where for each 10 nmol/l decrease in 25(oh)d concentration, the odds of acute respiratory tract infection increased by 1.02 (0.97-1.07). 93 therefore, some protective effects of vitamin d in those with lower baseline levels have been seen. however, the role of vitamin d for the treatment of acquired infections, including covid-19, requires further investigation especially in subjects with low baseline levels of vitamin d. this concept is currently under investigation in france. 94 when evaluating proposed studies of vitamins and supplements throughout the world, there are notable limitations in currently available information, such as standard of care. while many of the studies report a comparator arm as standard of care, there is no definition of what that actually means as there is no widely recognized treatment for covid-19.in addition, much like other clinical trials, key populations areat the end of december 2019, a novel coronavirus, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, caused an outbreak of pneumonia spreading from wuhan, hubei province, to the whole country of china and then the entire world, forcing the world health organization to make the assessment that the coronavirus disease (covid-19) can be characterized as a pandemic, the first ever caused by a coronavirus to date, clinical evidence and guidelines based on reliable data and randomized clinical trials for the treatment of covid-19 are lacking in the absence of definitive management protocols, many treatments for covid-19 are currently being evaluated and tested worldwide some of these options were soon abandoned due to ineffectiveness, while others showed promising results the basic treatments are mainly represented by antiviral drugs, even if the evidence is not satisfactory among the antivirals, the most promising appears to be remdesivir corticosteroids and tocilizumab seem to guarantee positive results in selected patients so far, although the timing of starting therapy and the most appropriate therapeutic schemes remain to be clarified efficacy of the other drugs is still uncertain, and they are currently used as a cocktail of treatments in the absence of definitive guidelines what will represent the real solution to the enormous problem taking place worldwide is the identification of a safe and effective vaccine, for which enormous efforts and investments are underwaypharmacologicaltreatment of covid-19: lights and shadowsat the end of december 2019, a novel coronavirus, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), caused an outbreak of pneumonia spreading from wuhan, hubei province, to the whole country of china and then the entire world, forcing the world health organization (who) to make the assessment that the coronavirus disease (covid- 19) can be characterized as a pandemic, the first ever caused by a coronavirus. 1 the coronaviridae family comprises pathogens that primarily target the human respiratory system. of the other six coronaviruses known to infect humans, two, previously characterized as agents that are a great public health threat, present with major symptoms (severe acute respiratory syndrome [sars]-cov and the middle east respiratory syndrome [mers]-cov), and four present with mild symptoms (hku1, nl63, oc43, and 229e). 2 coronaviruses (covs) (order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, subfamily coronavirinae) are enveloped viruses with a positive sense, single-stranded ribonucleic acid (rna) genome. based on genetic and antigenic criteria, covs have been organized into three groups: α-covs, β-covs, and γ-covs. 3 genome sequencing analysis attributed sars-cov-2 to the genus betacoronavirus, within a subgenus (sarbecovirus) that includes sars-cov (whereas mers-cov falls in a separate subgenus, merbecovirus). 4 the origin of sars-cov-2 was explained with two possible scenarios: natural selection in an animal host before zoonotic transfer and natural selection in humans following zoonotic transfer. 5 sars-cov-2 possesses the typical coronavirus structure with spike protein and other polyproteins, nucleoproteins, and membrane proteins, such as rna polymerase, 3-chymotrypsinlike protease, papain-like protease, helicase, glycoprotein, and accessory proteins. 6 the spike protein of sars-cov-2 contains the 394 glutamine residue in the receptor-binding domain region of sars-cov-2, which is recognized by the critical lysine 31 residue on the human angiotensin 2 converting enzyme (ace2) receptor. 7 thus, sars-cov-2 uses the same ace2 cell receptor and mechanism for entry into the host cell as sars-cov, 8, 9 with a single n501t mutation in sars-cov-2's spike issn: 1740-4398 review -pharmacological treatment of covid- 19 drugsincontext.com protein that may have significantly enhanced its binding affinity for ace2. 7 infection with sars-cov-2 results in mild and nonspecific symptoms, such as fever and cough (common symptoms), and nasal congestion, fatigue, loss of appetite and smell, body ache, and diarrhea (noted in a small number of patients).on the contrary, severe cases might rapidly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), septic shock, and difficult-to-tackle metabolic acidosis and bleeding and coagulation dysfunction. 10 suspicions have risen regarding the possibility that an excessive immune response -the socalled cytokine storm -associated with macrophage activated syndrome (mas) may be driving covid-19-related ards. 11 specifically, a cytokine profile resembling mas has been noted in covid-19 patients, with increased interleukin (il)-1β, il-2, il-6, il-17, il-8, tumor necrosis factor, and c-c motif chemokine ligand 2. 12 current recommendations for the treatment of covid-19 severe cases consist of using existing, approved therapies with proven safety profiles to address the immediate need to reduce the rising mortality. 13 the aim of this review is to explore covid-19 treatment options and describe the potential benefits or disadvantages of their use in severe cases.a search strategy based on validated keywords filters was devised to select articles regarding sars-cov-2 and related treatments. in detail, a selective search on pubmed was carried out up to april 2020, and research papers, international guidelines, case reports, and meta-analyses have been considered. the search strategy was based on the following keywords: coronavirus, sars-cov-2 pneumonia, covid-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome, antivirals, corticosteroids, biologics, and anticoagulants. a total of 136 potential papers were identified in the first search through pubmed, and 72 of these were considered eligible for inclusion in this review by the authors. because of the rapid developments in this area, we have also added and cited any newsworthy reports, as appropriate.to date, clinical evidence and guidelines based on reliable data and randomized clinical trials (rcts) for the treatment of covid-19 are lacking. in the absence of definitive management protocols, many treatments for covid-19 are currently being evaluated and tested worldwide ( table 1) . some of these options were soon abandoned due to ineffectiveness, 14 while others have shown promising results, 15, 16 although it is still too early to have conclusive results, especially from rigorous rcts. the use of many drug classes is producing numerous data, which are often contradictory. it is extremely difficult to evaluate the results of clinical studies during a pandemic. so far, no therapy has been proven to be effective for treating the severe evolution of sars-cov-2 virus infection. 17current antiviral treatments are mainly based on previous experiences (favipiravir) or on experimental drugs (remdesivir) used for the treatment of viral infections due to different viruses, such as influenza virus (infv), ebolavirus (ebov), human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), mers, and sars. 18 these molecules act as nucleoside analogues, either in the form of adenine or guanosine, and target the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), causing the block of viral rna synthesis. 19 favipiravir favipiravir, a guanine analogue, was able to block the rdrp of sars-cov and mers in vitro. due to the high similarity of sars-cov-2 genome with sars-cov, 20 this treatment is considered a potential candidate for covid-19, even if in vitro efficacy on sars-cov-2 has not been tested yet. 21 favipiravir is now being assessed in rcts recruiting patients with covid-19, to evaluate its efficacy when combined with interferon-α or baloxavir marboxil (approved infv inhibitor) (chictr2000029548).remdesivir, a nucleotide analogue inhibitor of rdrp, is considered one of the most promising antivirals for the treatment of covid-19. this drug has a broad antiviral spectrum against hepatitis b virus and hiv and mers-cov and sars-cov, both in vivo and in vitro. 22, 23 the safety profile also appears reassuring. two trials on the efficacy of remdesivir on mild-tomoderate (nct04252664) and severe (nct04257656) covid-19 patients are currently ongoing in china; these studies may provide very important data on the efficacy of remdesivir. a recent work has shown that the antiviral activity of remdesivir begins immediately after the virus enters vero e6 cells, carrying out its antiviral mechanism as a nucleotide analogue. 15 this drugs acts as a competitor by incorporation with adenosine triphosphate to confuse viral rdrp, evading proofreading from viral exoribonuclease and causing a decrease in viral rna production. 24 a trial on remdesivir was conducted by the us national institute of allergy and infectious diseases on a cohort of 1063 patients. preliminary data showed a positive effect in diminishing the time to recovery and reducing mortality rate. however, the latter result was not statistically significant. 25 in a very recent randomized, double-blind, rct, 237 patients with covid-19 pneumonia and acute respiratory failure were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to intravenous remdesivir or placebo infusions for 10 days. unfortunately, also in this case, remdesivir was not associated with statistically significant clinical improvements. 26 neuraminidase inhibitors, such as oral oseltamivir and intravenous peramivir, have demonstrated significant clinical improvement in the treatment of patients with influenza in the past. 31 oseltamivir has recently been used for sars-cov-2 suspected and confirmed patients in china. 32 unfortunately, to date, no other data are available on their efficacy in covid-19.chloroquine sulfate and phosphate salts were both marketed as antimalarial drugs. hydroxychloroquine has been widely used as an antimalarial and in autoimmune diseases, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis (ra). these are drugs with a good safety profile with mild and transient side effects, if correctly dosed. in case of overdose or prolonged treatments, they can cause cardiomyopathies and qt prolongation. 33 chloroquine has also been used in various chronic viral diseases. in hiv infection, no positive results emerged, so the drug was not included in the recommended panel for the treatment of hiv. 34 the only viral infection in which hydroxychloroquine showed any efficacy was found in chronic hepatitis c, especially if associated with interferon pegylated plus ribavirin. 35 interestingly, wang and colleagues evaluated various antivirals and chloroquine in vitro, concluding that this is highly effective in controlling sars-cov-2 replication. 15 some data indicate that chloroquine interferes with the ability of sars-cov-2 to acidify lysosomes; moreover, it inhibits cathepsins, allowing the cleavage of the spike protein of sars-cov-2. 36 in a recent study, chloroquine phosphate was found to be superior to control in the treatment of covid-19 pneumonia, improving clinical and imaging aspects and shortening the course of the disease. 37 in a nonrandomized clinical trial on a small group of patients, a significant improvement in viral clearance was demonstrated. furthermore, the combination with azithromycin was significantly more effective for the reduction or disappearance of the viral load compared with hydroxychloroquine monotherapy. 38 on the contrary, in a study with a small cohort of patients hospitalized for severe sars-cov-2 infection, no strong antiviral activity or clinical efficacy of the combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin was found. 39 the strong discrepancy of what emerged from the results of these studies highlights the fundamental need of rcts to assess the efficacy of these drugs in the treatment of covid-19. conclusions from the published data are that there is currently no evidence of the efficacy of chloroquine for the treatment of covid-19. the use should be limited to clinical studies to further clarify its role in the management of covid-19. 40the evidence on the efficacy of corticosteroids is conflicting, and the setting of application of these drugs needs further clarification. in the absence of reliable data, the who interim guidance on covid-19 management does not recommend their routine use. 41 furthermore, according to version 7 of the national health commission of china guidelines, corticosteroids should be used carefully in the case of sars-cov-2 infection. 42 in a recent study in patients with ards due to covid-19, a significant increase in survival was found in those who received methylprednisolone treatment (p=0.003). 43 in a retrospective study on a cohort of critically ill patients with sars-cov-1, appropriate use of corticosteroids was found to significantly reduce hospitalization mortality and duration. 44 all this without increasing superinfections and other important complications.another study in intensive care unit patients treated with corticosteroids had no conclusions due to the small sample size. 10 corticosteroids associated with invasive and noninvasive mechanical ventilation should be considered to prevent progression to ards, especially in severe patients. 45 the chinese thoracic society has defined an expert consensus statement on the use of corticosteroids for the treatment of covid-19 pneumonia. 46 according to this document, corticosteroids should be used with caution in critically ill patients, and the dosage should be low to moderate (≤0.5-1 mg/kg per day of methylprednisolone or equivalent) with a short course (≤7 days). other authors argue that rcts are needed to obtain more precise indications on the correct use of these important drugs. 47 tocilizumab tocilizumab (atlizumab) is a humanized igg1k monoclonal antibody that targets the soluble or membrane il-6 receptors (sil-6r and mil-6r). this drug has so far been used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as ra or large vessels vasculitis. 48 as for sars-cov-2 infection, it is now known that the serum levels of inflammatory mediators are proportional to the severity of the clinical picture. 10 in these patients, exaggerated immunological responses can trigger cytokine storms and cause damage to multiple organs. the increase in il-6 levels can also be a sensitive biomarker of clinical worsening and serious organ damage. tocilizumab can block two fundamental inflammatory factors, il-6 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor , thereby reducing the level of inflammation. a multicenter rct to evaluate the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in the treatment of moderate patients at high risk of evolution toward serious and critical illness (registration number: chictr2000029765) was recently concluded. results of this trial are not yet available; however, they are assumed to be positive in patients with elevated il-6 levels.sarilumab is a fully human monoclonal igg1 antibody targeting soluble and membrane il-6 receptors, inhibiting il-6-mediated signal transduction mediated by these receptors. 49 this biologic is approved as subcutaneous treatment in patients over 18 years of age with moderate-to-severe active ra refractory or intolerant to one or more disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. 50 based on the experience of tocilizumab, sarilumab is recently being used in the treatment of patients with severe forms of covid-19. five rcts are ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04315298, nct04327388, nct04324073, nct04322773, and nct04321993), the results of which will be of great value.the latest version of the guidelines issued by the chinese national health commission for the diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 infection and the who interim guidelines advise against the unnecessary use of antibiotics, even on a broad spectrum. 42 these should be used in the event of an increase in procalcitonin (pct), in the case of hospital-acquired pneumonia or ventilator-associated pneumonia, in case of microbiological tests indicative of bacterial superinfection. if fungal infection is suspected, voriconazole is indicated for aspergillus infections, while fluconazole is indicated for candida spp. infections. for pneumocystis pneumonia in immunosuppressed patients, the drugs to be considered are sulfamethoxazole and caspofungin. 51 teicoplanin teicoplanin is a first-generation glycopeptide with antimicrobial activity against aerobic and anaerobic grampositive bacteria including multi-resistant staphylococci. this antibiotic has shown efficacy in the past against numerous viruses, such as ebov, infv, flavivirus, hepatitis c, hiv, mers-cov, and sars-cov. 52, 53 the antiviral activity has recently been confirmed against sars-cov-2. 54 it will be necessary to confirm these results and the possible use of teicoplanin in covid-19 through rcts.it is now known that about 20% of patients with covid-19 have clotting alterations; thrombosis of lungs, liver, and other organs; and marked increase in d-dimer. 10, 32 anticoagulant therapy should be administered carefully in clinical practice or in case of surgery. in these cases, platelet transfusion, administration of fresh frozen plasma, or more commonly low molecular weight heparin (lmwh) is recommended. in critically ill patients, anticoagulant therapy is recommended if no contraindications are present. recently, new evidence has appeared on coagulopathies and the appearance of antiphospholipid antibodies with consequent multiple heart attacks in patients with sars-cov-2 infections. 55 large cohorts of severe covid-19 patients showed a high risk of disseminated intravascular coagulation and venous thromboembolism. low molecular weight heparin therapy is related to a higher survival rate in patients with severe covid-19. 56 in light of these data, it is even more important to reiterate the importance of anticoagulant therapy in severe covid-19 patients.the concern about the possibility that drugs blocking the renin-angiotensin system (ras) might increase the risk of developing a life-threatening sars-cov-2 infection could be due to the fact that the ace2 receptor allows the entry of coronavirus into cells. 57 however, there are no data to support the possibility that ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) favor the entry of coronaviruses by increasing the expression of ace2 in humans.ras dysfunction is present in patients with covid-19, but clinical outcomes of ras inhibitor therapy, for example, with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ace inhibitors) or arbs are currently unknown, and there is no evidence for their suspension. in a retrospective study of 417 patients with covid-19, patients treated with an acei or arb had a better prognosis and lower levels of il-6 in peripheral blood. 58 in addition, therapy with these drugs had increased cd3 and cd8 t-cell counts in peripheral blood and reduced viral load. these data could indicate that the treatment with an acei or arb issn: 1740-4398 review -pharmacological treatment of covid-19 drugsincontext.com may have positive effects on a more favorable evolution of the covid-19 infection.to assess more clearly the potential benefits of arbs, such as valsartan or losartan, on the evolution of covid-19, rcts are ongoing (nct04335786, nct04335123, and nct04312009).only when the data of these studies are published, it will be possible to define the potential benefits or the risks related to these treatments.exploring and understanding the immunogenicity of covid-19 are essential for developing the most effective vaccine. however, evidence on the immunogenicity of sars-cov-2 is limited. the genome of the sars-cov-2 is over 80% identical to the sars-like bat cov, and studies on b-cells and t-cells epitopes have revealed high homology between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 proteins. 59 previously, studies on sars-cov-1 vaccines revealed that the s protein on the surface of the virus is an ideal target for a vaccine, as antibody responses directed against it showed promising results in protecting from infection in mouse models. 60, 61 moreover, while b-cell response toward sars-cov gave limited protection over time, 62 t-cell response provided long-term protection, even up to 11 years post-infection, and are thus considered as a potential target for vaccines against coronaviruses. 63 research efforts are aimed at identifying the ideal sars-cov-2 epitopes, against which directing vaccines is increasing. many vaccines are currently under development (table 2) , following different strategies. 58, 64 whole virus vaccines are currently being investigated by companies such as johnson & johnson. 65 they have the advantage of eliciting a strong immune response, through the stimulation of toll-like receptors; however, they require longer testing to guarantee safety. 66 furthermore, subunit vaccines, which rely on stimulating an immune response against the viral s-protein preventing its binding with the cell-receptor, are already under investigation by companies such as novavax, clover biopharmaceuticals, and different consortia in the usa and australia. [67] [68] [69] finally, nucleic acids vaccines, both based on deoxyribonucleic acid and rna platforms, are being considered by biotech companies, such as inovio pharmaceuticals and moderna therapeutics, both at phase i stage (nct04336410 and nct04283461). these latter formulations have not been successful in eliciting protective immunity in humans so far; however, expectations are high that this approach might eventually be successful. 70 targeted therapies. corticosteroids and tocilizumab seem to guarantee positive results in selected patients so far, although the timing of starting therapy and the most appropriate therapeutic schemes remain to be clarified. efficacy of the other drugs is still uncertain, and they are currently used in combination and in variable ways in the absence of definitive guidelines. what will represent the real solution to the enormous problem taking place worldwide is the identification of a safe and effective vaccine, for which enormous efforts and investments are underway.at the moment, treatment of covid-19 unfortunately has more shadows than lights. the basic treatments are mainly represented by antiviral drugs such as remdesivir, chloroquine, or lopinavir/ritonavir, even if the evidence for their use is not satisfactory. among the antiviral agents, the most promising appears to be remdesivir, though this needs to be confirmed by ongoing rcts. however, many questions remain open about pathogenesis, the molecular mechanism of input, viral replication, and immunological pathways, in order to identify contributions: fm and mb conceived the manuscript outline, contributed to all the sections, and revised the whole manuscript. cb and fl drafted the paragraphs concerning antibiotics and anticoagulants. nf reviewed and approved the manuscript. all the authors read and approved the final version. all named authors meet the international committee of medical journal editors (icmje) criteria for authorship for this article, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given their approval for this version to be published. in late 2019, a cluster of pneumonia cases reported in wuhan (china) was associated with a novel coronavirus, initially called the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) [1] . posteriorly, the sequence of the 2019-ncov genome revealed high similarity to sars-cov, the causative agent of the epidemic of severe and acute respiratory syndrome (sars) between 2002 and 2003 in asia. then, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) renamed 2019-ncov as sars-cov-2, and the world health organization (who) defined that this pathogen causes the coronavirus disease of 2019 (covid-19) [2] [3] [4] [5] .sars-cov-2 is responsible for a respiratory infection that can progress to severe pneumonia. covid-19 has an estimated mortality rate of approximately 2-3.5%, which increases with age and the presence of comorbidities (e.g., hypertension, cardiac insufficiency, diabetes, and asthma). by april 15, 2020, the novel coronavirus had affected 2,033,406 people and caused more than 130,000 deaths worldwide [6] . the public health calamity caused by covid-19 has led to the exhaustion of health systems worldwide, forcing countries to adopt extreme measures, such as the closure of their land borders and initiating social distancing policies to slow down the spread of the disease [7] .currently, laboratories and medical teams worldwide have focused on the repurposing of food and drug administration (fda)-approved drugs to treat the most severe cases of covid-19, since there are no specific chemotherapeutic agents to treat this infection [1] . indeed, drug repositioning might be a short-term alternative to fight this disease. since the efficacy, safety, and toxicity of these drugs are already well known, the initial phases of clinical trials could be skipped, which would reduce the cost and duration of the process [8] . in general, drug repurposing is a cheaper, faster, and accessible way to make drugs available to the clinic [9, 10] .in this context, several clinical and preclinical studies have searched for new pharmacological alternatives against covid-19 in clinically available drugs. however, current studies remain decentralized, and no recent review has been able to summarize the available evidence of the anti-sars-cov-2 activity of these fda-approved drugs. thus, in this systematic review, we aim to describe the drug repositioning strategy against sars-cov-2 and its clinical impact in the current context of the covid-19 pandemic.we performed a systematic review according to the cochrane handbook [11] . the search and selection of articles, as well as extraction, analysis, and interpretation of data, were conducted according to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) statement [12] . pubmed/medline, scopus, cochrane library, and biblioteca virtual de saúde (bvs) were searched for articles investigating the antiviral activity of clinically available drugs published until march 23, 2020. we aimed to select articles describing clinical and pre-clinical tests (in vitro, in vivo, and in silico) to include the largest amount of data in this review. additionally, we searched the clinicatrial.gov website to identify ongoing trials with potential candidates for the drug repositioning strategy against sars-cov-2.indexed keywords from medical subject headings (mesh) were used to build search strategies. the terms "antiviral agents" or "drug repositioning" or "drug repurposing" were combined with the keywords "covid-19" or "sars-cov-2" or "2019-ncov" by the use of boolean and between the terms, as in the example: "drug repositioning" and "covid-19". all details about the search strategies can be found in the supplementary file. to avoid losing any possible study, the reference list of all included studies and relevant reviews regarding this topic were also screened.two authors (w.g.l. and j.c.m.b.) independently screened the databases and extracted relevant information following the prisma flowchart. the degree of agreement between the evaluators was determined by the kappa coefficient (performed with a 95% confidence interval) [13] . discrepancies about the relevance of the sources were resolved by a third researcher (w.s.c.n.). finally, all data of interest were summarized in tables (tables 1, 2, 3 and 4) for further critical analysis and interpretation.as shown in figure 1 , we identified 33 articles during the initial search (30 from pubmed/medline, two from biblioteca virtual de saúde, and one from scopus). after the exclusion of repeated records and the selection of articles by the inclusion criteria ( fig. 1) , 15 relevant studies were preselected. of these, 11 were excluded following the criteria described in figure 1 , and four were selected for extraction of variables of interest [14] [15] [16] [17] . the reference lists of included articles were analyzed, and eight new studies were identified [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] , totaling 12 papers [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . the degree of agreement between the two authors was considered substantial (kappa = 0.825) [13] .all selected studies were published in 2020, and they describe a total of 57 drugs that showed some evidence of antiviral activity against sars-cov-2 ( fig. 2 and tables 1, 2, 3 and 4) [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . as shown in figure 2a , 22 different classes of drugs showed a potential therapeutic effect against covid-19. antivirals, especially antiretrovirals, were the most frequently studied class of therapeutic agents (30%; 17/57). however, the activity of antitumor (16%; 9/57), antimalarial (7%, 4/57), antibacterial (5%; 3/57), anticoagulant (3.5%; 2/57), anti-inflammatory (3.5%; 2/57), phosphodiesterase (pde)-inhibiting (3.5%; 2/57), anti-rheumatic (3.5%; 2/57), sedative-hypnotic (3.5%; 2/57), and anti-venous insufficiency (3.5%; 2/57) agents was also investigated. other classes of drugs have also been studied against sars-cov-2 (i.e., anthelmintic, antiallergic, antiemetic, antiepileptic, antifungal, antihypertensive, antipsychotic, anti-hemolyticuremic syndrome, anti-angioedema, lipid-lowering, immunomodulatory, and anti-pulmonary-hypertension drugs); however, only one agent of each class was evaluated (1/57, 1.7%) ( fig. 2a) .most of the drugs with potential activity against covid-19 were identified by molecular docking (53%; 30/57) ( fig. 2b ) [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] using the main protease (3clpro) of sars-cov-2 as the molecular target (table 3) . moreover, 39% (22/57) (fig. 2b ) of the drugs showed an anti-covid-19 effect in clinical trials (table 4) , and 10% of them showed evidence of action in clinical practice (10%; 6/57) [14] [15] [16] [17] (table 1) . additionally, 19% (11/57) [18, 19] ( fig. 2b ) of the drugs studied showed antiviral activity in vitro. for instance, remdesivir showed the highest activity against sars-cov-2, inhibiting 50% of the virus at a concentration of 0.77 μm [18] , while ribavirin showed a less pronounced effect (109.50 μm) [18] (table 2) . therefore, the antiviral activity of only 27 compounds (47%; 27/57) has been experimentally evaluated. the remaining 30 reported drugs were identified only by theoretical methods (in silico) and need proof of antiviral efficacy in further studies (table 3) .regarding the clinical trials of new therapeutic options against covid-19, most drugs are in phase ii (36%; 8/22) or iii (27%; 6/22) (table 4 ). only seven drugs (chloroquine, tetrandrine, umifenovir (arbidol), carrimycin, table 1 clinical evidence of potential candidates for drug repositioning against covid-19 (sars-cov-2) *lopinavir (400 mg) + ritonavir (100 mg), q12h, orally; associated with umifenovir (200 mg), q12h, orally. the duration of antiviral treatment was 6-15 days **solution containing umifenovir (20.0%), lopinavir + ritonavir (17.4%) and interferon (19.4%) administered through inhalation ***in this study, 99 patients were assigned to receive lopinavir/ritonavir (400 mg and 100 mg, orally), and 100 patients were assigned to the standard of care (oxygen supplementation, noninvasive and invasive ventilation, antibiotic agents, vasopressor support, renal-replacement therapy, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) # in these studies, the therapeutic scheme used was not clearly defined treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir did not improve the clinical condition of patients compared to the standard of care*** (table 4 ). interestingly, two of these agents in advanced clinical studies, umifenovir (arbidol) and the association lopinavir/ritonavir, have demonstrated previous evidence of action. wang et al. [14] reported that the use of arbidol in combination with lopinavir/ritonavir inhibits the aggravation of pneumonia caused by sars-cov-2 and promotes a virus-negative conversion in patients from china. arbidol has also shown a potent in vitro effect against sars-cov-2, inhibiting the virus up to 60 times compared to the untreated control at concentrations ranging from 10 to 30 μm [26] .the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2), the causative agent of covid-19, has quickly become a threat to the public health and economy worldwide [7, 27] . recent clinical reports have shown that sars-cov-2 causes mild, selflimiting respiratory tract illness as well as severe progressive pneumonia, which can progress to multiorgan failure and death [1] . despite the severity of some cases, there are no current pathogen-specific antivirals available to treat this disease [1] . therefore, many studies have focused on the evaluation of the anti-sars-cov-2 activity of clinically available drugs [1] . after the analysis of the selected studies, we identified 57 molecules with potential antiviral activity against sars-cov-2. of these, only six drugs (lopinavir/ritonavir, umifenovir (arbidol), remdesivir, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine) have shown promising results in preclinical trials and have clinically lessened the symptoms of covid-19. since the other fda-approved drugs reported in this review showed weak activity against covid-19, we have chosen to discuss only the most promising molecules.lopinavir and ritonavir are antiretrovirals widely used as a combination drug to treat human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infections. lopinavir is an hiv type 1 aspartate protease inhibitor, and ritonavir increases its plasma half-life through the inhibition of cytochrome p450 [28] . previous studies showed that lopinavir inhibits the 3-chymotrypsinlike protease, which is involved in viral replication and is highly conserved among members of different viral species [29] . lopinavir inhibited the replication of mers-cov and sars-cov in huh7 cells (human liver strain) in a dosedependent manner, with an ec 50 of 8.0 μm for both viruses [29] . moreover, lopinavir/ritonavir significantly reduced the mortality rate of mice infected with mers-cov, suggesting a strong in vivo antiviral effect [30] .little is known about the activity of lopinavir/ritonavir against sars-cov-2 and its effectiveness (table 1) . for instance, wang et al. [14] showed that the use of lopinavir/ ritonavir considerably improved the clinical condition of patients with covid-19. however, arbidol, a broad-spectrum antiviral with activity against several enveloped and non-enveloped viruses (e.g., influenza virus, adenovirus, avian coronavirus, and hepatitis b and c viruses) [31] , was also administered to the patients (n = 4). the combination of lopinavir/ritonavir with arbidol makes it difficult to associate the observed antiviral effect to lopinavir/ritonavir or to its synergistic effect with arbidol. in contrast, mo et al. [16] showed that the clinical improvement of patients with covid-19 was more associated with supportive measures, such as mechanical ventilation and oxygen supplementation, than with the use of lopinavir/ritonavir. likewise, a study of 199 hospitalized adult patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection showed that the use of lopinavir/ritonavir does not increase the effectiveness of the standard treatment [15] . these findings confirm that lopinavir/ritonavir has low clinical efficacy and is not a therapeutic option to treat covid-19. however, the efficacy related to the use of these antiretrovirals as a combination therapy with other drugs should be elucidated in future studies. arbidol (umifenovir) is an anti-influenza agent that has been used in china and russia for many years. it interacts with the viral hemagglutinin (ha) and inhibits the fusion of the viral particle with the plasma membrane [32] . this drug inhibited crucial stages of the sars-cov-2 replication cycle in vitro in a concentration ranging from 10 to 30 μm [26] . also, a study has indicated that arbidol significantly lessened pneumonia associated with covid-19 [14] . these results have stimulated the initiation of clinical trials with this medicine (table 4) . for instance, a chinese group of the ruijin hospital is currently conducting a phase iv study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of arbidol hydrochloride tablets in treating pneumonia in 380 patients with covid-19 (clinicaltrial.gov, nct04260594).previous in vitro studies have indicated that arbidol shows significant activity against other coronaviruses. herein, a research group showed that this compound negatively affects the early stages of viral replication of sars-cov at a concentration of 50 μg/ml. this study also highlighted the stronger antiviral activity of arbidol mesylate compared to arbidol as an alkaline preparation [33] . these preliminary results indicate that arbidol is a promising candidate for drug repositioning against sars-cov-2. however, further studies are required to assess the difference in the effectiveness of arbidol and arbidol mesylate in patients with covid-19.remdesivir is a broad-spectrum prodrug developed to treat infections caused by ebola virus and marburg virus. its active ingredient (gs-441524) decreases the production of rna by interfering with viral rna polymerase and evading proofreading by viral exonuclease [34] . recent studies have shown that remdesivir inhibits the replication of sars-cov and mers-cov in human lung cells [35] . wang et al. [18] showed that remdesivir has potent activity against sars-cov-2 in kidney cells, with an ec 50 of 0.77 μm. additionally, this drug induced the clinical remission of the symptoms of covid-19 in the first reported case in the usa (table 1 ) [17] . due to these promising results, a phase iii clinical trial has evaluated the antiviral activity of remdesivir and its safety in patients with severe covid-19. this study is assessing the ability of remdesivir to normalize body temperature and oxygen saturation in 400 hospitalized adult patients (clinicaltrial.gov, nct04292899). therefore, the results of this clinical trial can guide the prescription of remdesivir as an anti-sars-cov-2 agent in the future.chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are antimalarial agents widely used to treat rheumatic diseases and have also shown promising activity against covid-19 [36] . the first evidence of their antiviral effect against coronavirus was reported in 2004 when keyaerts and collaborators showed that chloroquine inhibited the in vitro replication of sars-cov on vero cells e6. in this study, chloroquine negatively affected sars-cov-2 at a concentration of 8 μm [37] . interestingly, chloroquine inhibited the virus when the cells were treated with the drug before or after exposure to sars-cov, suggesting prophylactic and therapeutic effects [38] . this drug also affects the entry and replication of sars-cov-2, with an ec 50 of 1.13 μm [18] . moreover, hydroxychloroquine, a less toxic derivative of chloroquine, is also able to inhibit the entry and replication of sars-cov-2 with an ec 50 of 4.51 μm ( table 2 ) [19] . additionally, the preclinical results have suggested that this antimalarial blocks the transport of sars-cov-2 from endosomes to endolysosomes, which is a process required to release the viral genome [18, 19] .the promising in vitro results of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have motivated the initiation of clinical studies of these substances ( table 4) . one of these studies evaluates the prophylactic effect of the oral use of chloroquine in 10,000 patients against sars-cov-2 (clinicaltrial. gov, nct04303507). additionally, several clinical trials have evaluated the prophylactic use of hydroxychloroquine (clinicaltrial.gov, nct04318015, and nct04318444), its therapeutic use in monotherapy (clinicaltrial.gov, nct04315896), or the effect of its combination with other antivirals (clinicaltrial.gov, nct04303299, nct04321278 and nct0430127, and nct0430127 and nct0430127) against covid-19.the rapid popularization of these preliminary results has led to a massive and irrational demand for chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. in brazil, for example, after the first reports of the clinical effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine against covid-19, this drug quickly sold out in pharmacies, which has compromised patients who use this drug continually to treat autoimmune diseases. this irrational demand caused the agência nacional de vigilância sanitária (anvisa) to include these two drugs in the list of controlled substances to prevent their use to treat covid-19 without prescription or proof of effectiveness. this situation highlights the importance of controlling the release of preliminary results, especially in the panic scenario created by the pandemic.although several studies have identified clinically available agents that are active against sars-cov-2 infections, supportive therapy remains essential. for instance, mechanical ventilation and oxygen supplementation have been critical to the survival of patients with severe covid-19. mo et al. [16] showed that that oxygen supplementation and noninvasive or invasive ventilation have generated similar results to the use of an antiretroviral with known in vitro activity against sars-cov-2. additionally, wang et al. [14] showed that the clinical recovery of patients with covid-19 is more associated with supportive therapies than with the use of antiviral agents. however, the identification of available drugs with anti-sars-cov-2 activity and their use in association with supportive therapies should be considered. also, the development of faster diagnostic tools to test for covid-19 might be crucial, since some of the candidates for drug repositioning must be administered early in the course of infection. thus, better testing methodologies could lead to the early administration of drugs and improve the treatment of covid-19.the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 worldwide has put pressure on research centers to develop effective therapies and vaccines for the treatment of sars-cov-2. drug repositioning is a promising short-term strategy in the fight against the novel coronavirus. however, supportive measures are essential mainly for severe covid-19 patients, and the implementation of drug repositioning should be done only if the efficacy of the drugs have been proven. although lopinavir/ ritonavir had low anti-sars-cov-2 activity, arbidol, remdesivir, and chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine showed promising effects against this coronavirus. therefore, the outcomes of the ongoing clinical trials are urgently needed to evaluate the best treatment options for covid-19. furthermore, additional studies of the antiviral activity of molecules that have shown a promising in silico effect may increase the therapeutic arsenal against the novel coronavirus.on march 18, 2020, the world health organization launched the solidarity trial and soon after an add-on trial, a european initiative of the reacting consortium, the discovery trial was announced (1, 2) . currently, there are no approved therapies specific for any human cov. trials are based on repurposed drugs that are already approved for other diseases, have acceptable safety profiles or have performed well in animal studies against the other two deadly coronaviruses, which cause sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). solidarity includes research looking at four possible therapeutics with direct antiviral actions: remdesivir, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir plus ritonavir, and lopinavir plus ritonavir and interferon-beta while chloroquine will not be included in the discovery trial. additionally, the discovery trial will include a placebo arm with standard of care while the solidarity trial will not be blinded and patients will know they received a treatment that would cause a placebo effect as stated by ana maria henao restrepo, a medical officer at the who department of immunization vaccines and biologicals. additional information regarding lung imaging and blood gases will be monitored in the discovery trial besides data on hospitalization length and requirement for oxygen or ventilation to be collected by the solidarity trial (3). sars-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), the etiologic agent of the new lung disease covid-19 (4) is closely related to sars-cov, and together with mers-cov are three new human coronaviruses that emerged in the last 20 years (5). the three viruses are associated with increased risk of acute lung injury (6) . as of april 15, 2020 more than 2 million people have been infected worldwide in 200 countries resulting in a death toll that surpasses 135,000 people in this ongoing pandemic (https:// www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). sars-cov-2 is an enveloped, positive sense, single stranded, non-segmented rna virus of the betacoronavirus family (7) . the copying and synthesis of novel viral genomes and viral mrnas for the expression of viral proteins. remdesivir incorporation in the nascent viral rna by the rdrp results in premature chain termination and because of the high conservation of the core rdrp enzyme among coronaviruses. it has a broad-spectrum antiviral efficacy against multiple genetically distinct coronaviruses including the sars-cov and mers-cov in vitro and in vivo (8) . furthermore, it has shown prophylactic action against infection of corona viruses in animal models (8) . notably remdesivir potently blocked sars-cov-2 infection at low-micromolar concentration and showed high selectivity index in vero e6 cells, a monkey epithelial cell line (ec 50 = 0.77 µm; cc 50 >100 µm; si >129.87) (9) . it should be noted that remdesivir resistance is already documented for sars-cov and other coronaviruses that lead to reduced viral inhibition (10) .the outcomes in a cohort of patients hospitalized for severe covid-19 who were treated with remdesivir on a compassionateuse basis were recently reported by grein et al (11) . fifty-three patients received 10-day course of remdesivir, consisting of a loading dose of 200 mg intravenously on day 1, plus 100 mg daily for the following 9 days. improvement in oxygen-support status was observed in 68% of patients, and overall mortality was 13% over a median follow-up of 18 days although no data on viral dynamics were documented throughout the study. clinical improvement was less frequent among patients receiving invasive ventilation than among those receiving noninvasive ventilation and among patients aged 70 years or older as compared with patients younger than 50 years.chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine a less toxic derivative, represent potential broad-spectrum example of inhibiting viral cell entry. chloroquine is a weak base that becomes entrapped in membrane-enclosed low ph organelles such as endosomes and lysosomes, and inhibits their acidification. low ph in the endosomes regulates the action of proteases that lead to conformational changes of the virus envelope proteins allowing for the fusion of cellular and viral membranes and the escape of the viral genome into the cytosol. attachment and entry of sars-cov-2 on host cells requires interaction of the spike protein subdomain 1 (s) with angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and its proteolytic cleavage by tmprss2 and to a lesser degree by the acid activated cathepsin b/l (12) . although the exact mechanism of sars-cov-2 entry is not completely understood and a new study has suggested that ph-dependent fusion of viral and cellular membranes is dispensable for viral genome entry into host cells, chloroquine, similarly to remdesivir, inhibited sars-cov-2 infection at low-micromolar concentration and showed high selectivity index in vero e6 cells (ec 50 = 1.13 µm; cc 50 >100 µm, si >88.50) (9) .chloroquine is also used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as sle and ra (13) . although the precise mechanism of action is not documented, inhibition of endosome acidification also interferes with innate immune response signaling from endosomal tlrs such as tlr 3, 7, 8 and 9, that mainly detect nucleic acid pamps and damps, and in this way reduce inflammatory responses. therefore, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine may also protect the host from overt inflammatory responses driven by the activation of immune cells such as macrophages by the increased load of viral rna or cellular nucleic acids released from infected cells.results from clinical trials using chloroquine have provided promising results despite the limitations of these studies and suggest that chloroquine may represent a line of defense in the protection of medical stuff and patients with increased risk for severe covid-19 symptoms. chen et al (14) , evaluated the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine (hcq) in the treatment of 62 patients with mild covid-19 from february 4 to 28, 2020 at renmin hospital of wuhan university. patients were randomized either in a control group, receiving standard treatment, or in the hcq group in which the patients received standard treatment plus hcq 200 mg/bid between days 1 and 5. the study focused on time to clinical recovery (ttcr), clinical characteristics of patients and pulmonary recovery as it was depicted on chest ct results one day before (day 0) and one day after (day 6). a beneficial effect of hcq in the treatment of covid-19 was pointed out, despite the small number of the cases. more specifically, body temperature recovery time and cough remission time were significantly reduced in the hcq treatment group. moreover, the study of the chest ct scans revealed larger proportion of patients with improved pneumonia in the hcq group (80.6%), compared with the control group (54.8%).gautret et al (15) from france conducted a single arm protocol from early march to march 16. patients received 600 mg of hydroxychloroquine daily. azithromycin was added to the treatment regimen as the clinical presentation required and the control group was represented by untreated patients from another center and cases refusing the protocol. patients' viral load in nasopharyngeal swabs was evaluated on daily basis. virus clearance at day-6 post-inclusion was the primary endpoint, while virus clearance during the study period, clinical parameters and occurrence of side-effects were considered secondary outcomes.regarding the effect of hydroxychloroquine on viral load, the study showed that a greater proportion of patients from the treated group had negative pcr results at days 3-6 postinclusion, compared with the control group. interestingly, at day 6 post-inclusion, the percentage of negative pcr patients in the treated group was 70%, while it was 12.5% in the control group (p=0.001). the addition of azithromycin in the therapeutic regimen enhanced the beneficial effect of hydroxychloroquine more intensely. patients treated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin were all (100%) clear of virus at day 6 postinclusion, comparing with 57.1% in the group that was treated with hydroxychloroquine only and 12.5% in the control group (p<0.001).the last two arms of solidarity and discovery trials include kaletra which is a combination of two antiviral drugs -lopinavir and ritonavir -normally used to treat hiv. lopinavir acts against the viral 3cl protease, responsible for the cleavage of the viral structural proteins from a polypeptide chain in order to produce new virions. lopinavir has modest antiviral activity against mers and is significantly less potent than remdesivir (16) , however, in combination with ritonavir and the antiviral immunomodulator interferon β it is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of mers (17) . the efficacy and safety of oral lopinavir-ritonavir for sars-cov-2 infection was tested through a randomized controlled trial in china, but found 'no benefit' beyond standard care (18) . kaletra with or without interferon β1 will be tested in the solidarity and discovery trials.favipiravir (brand name avigan) is a type of rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) inhibitor which acts through blocking the replication of rna viruses and is a potential antiviral agent against sars-cov-2 (19) . a prospective, multicenter, open-label, randomized superiority trial examined the efficacy of favipiravir (n=120) versus arbidol (n=120) for treating covid-19 (20) . there was no difference in the 7-day clinical recovery rate (primary endpoint) for favipiravir versus arbidol in the overall population (61.21% versus 51.67%; p=0.14). however, this difference existed for a subgroup of non-critical patients without hypertension or diabetes (favipiravir 71.43% versus arbidol 55.86%, p=0.02) (20) . three registered clinical trials are planned regarding the use of favipiravir against covid-19 (21) (22) (23) .several promising theurapeutic options are emerging such as a protease inhibitor specific for tmprss2 cell protease required for virus entry (12) , the broad spectrum orally bioavailable β-d-n4-hydroxycytidine (nhc, eidd-1931) that is incorporated in the viral genome by the rdrp leading to the accumulation of deleterious mutations and viral inactivation (24) .the four current regimens in solidarity and discovery focus on antiviral drugs rather than treating ards symptoms that are actually the cause of the virus morbidity and mortality. hyperinflammation in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) could be a driver of severity that may be managed with immunomodulatory therapeutic options (25, 26) . low-dose corticosteroid therapy ('shock-reversal'), over no corticosteroid therapy is suggested for adults with covid-19 and refractory shock. in mechanically ventilated adults with covid-19 and respiratory failure but without ards the routine use of systemic corticosteroids is not suggested. however, in mechanically ventilated adults with covid-19 and ards using systemic corticosteroids is suggested (27) (28) (29) . importantly, the use of hydroxychloroquine, with or without the co-administration of azithromycin, may not be beneficial for the treatment of critically ill patients admitted to the icu (30) and is not recommended (27, 31) .immunomodulatory drugs such as tocilizumab (actemra) 'anti-il6' have been tested during the pandemic, however, great caution in inhibiting host antiviral responses should be taken (26) . tocilizumab (actemra) is a recombinant humanized anti-human il-6 receptor monoclonal antibody currently used for rheumatoid arthritis (32) . xu et al demonstrated that giving tocilizumab in addition to routine therapy to patients diagnosed as severe or critical covid-19 is an effective treatment (33) . covacta is a newly initiated randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase iii study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of intravenous actemra/roactemra added to standard care in adult patients hospitalized with severe covid-19 pneumonia compared to placebo plus standard care. the primary and secondary endpoints include clinical status, mortality, mechanical ventilation and intensive care unit (icu) variables (34) .finally, the use of stem cell therapy to treat covid-19 is currently considered with multiple clinical trials from china registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov (35) . in a recently published clinical trial with a limited number of patients, 7 patients (1 critically serious, 4 serious and 2 common) infected with the coronavirus received one dose of stem cell therapy with 3 patients in the control group (3 serious) did not. all patients with stem cell therapy recovered whereas in the control group, one patient died while another patient developed ards and only one patient in the control group was stable (36) .important considerations in the successful testing and use of currently available and future therapies for covid-19 are the timing of the treatment, the viral load of the patient and markers predictive of lung injury. antiviral treatment is more efficient as a prophylactic measure and at earlier times during the infection, when virus replication is at its peak. conversely, immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory treatments may be more effective later and may be combined with careful monitoring of the patient viral loads.the emergence of zoonotic human viruses causing pandemics are probably not going to be limited to the sars-cov-2 and represent enormous threats to global health. pandemic preparedness in the future, broad-based vaccines and therapeutics, which are active against the higher risk virus families prone to emergence, are desperately needed, as well as global efforts to minimize their emergence.das is the editor-in-chief for the journal, but had no personal involvement in the reviewing process, or any influence in terms of adjudicating on the final decision, for this article. the other authors declare that they have no competing interests.sars-cov-2 also called 'severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2' abbreviated sars-cov-2 was recognized to be the causative of atypical pneumonia (joshi, 2020; pant et al., 2020) outbreak in wuhan, china (hasan, 2020; s. a. khan et al., 2020) . the virus belongs to the family known as 'coronaviruses' because of the crown-like appearance of spikes glycoproteins on the envelope under an electron microscope . world health organization (who) recently announced that the virus transforms from epidemic to pandemic, which requires urgent intervention to prevent the growing spread of the virus across the globe (chan et al., 2020) . the total confirmed cases 2,347,884 with 738,923 cases in the united state of america (usa) alone and the total death of 161,138 (as of april 19), with mortality estimated within 2% and about 3.4%, according to estimates of approved cases and death worldwide (n. . the most familiar is a virus that arose from the rhinolophus bat which is > 96% homologous with the modern sars-cov-2 virus and it is just 79% homologous with the initial sars-cov (fisher & heymann, 2020) . the fast-growing number of infected cases globally urged the world health organization to announce a state of global health emergency to correlate scientific and medical disciplines to develop rapidly an effective treatment for patients, (morse et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020) elderly patients and people with severe underlying health diseases like heart diseases, lung illness, and diabetic patients, for instance, appear to be at greater risk of revealing severe sars-cov-2 requires immediate intervention rather than waiting virus vaccine which may require 1 year to be available (enayatkhani, 2020) . while drug repurposing could be a short-term and fast resolution to handle sars-cov-2 patients (elfiky, 2020 ; r. j. kumar et al., 2019) , repurposing existing drugs can offer a good choice to overcome the virus and offer better risk-versus trade-off as compared with discovering new drug and can help overcome time waiting for new therapy rather than use the available resources (elmezayen, 2020; muralidharan, 2020) one successful repurposing drug story includes duloxetine which originally developed for depression and fda approved as the first-inclass choice for stress urinary incontinence (sweeney & chancellor, 2005) , duloxetine initially created as antidepressant also is now passed to phase iii clinical trials as a first-in-class treatment for premature ejaculation (mcmahon, 2012) and thalidomide, which had a tragic start as an over-the-counter sedative for morning sickness in pregnancy is now being applied to manage leprosy and multiple myeloma (hideshima & anderson, 2002) .as a result of, a newly issued x-ray crystal of sars-cov-2 main protein (mpro), we planning to use computational approaches (cameron et al., 2013) to contribute to find an effective treatment for sars-cov-2.thereby, computational analyses speed up these approaches since they allow to handle millions of data simultaneously (gupta et al., 2020) . molecular docking includes a set of computational methods and algorithms that aimed to identify novel relationships between chemical ligands and targets through using the modelling of their direct physical interaction (aanouz, 2020; ekins et al., 2007) . in present study, we attend to evaluate some of approved drugs to be as covalent binders, irreversible interactions, which can provide a powerful strategy to fight against epidemic viruses. and molecular dynamics simulations can give a more detail for the image which got from molecular covalent docking.the crystal structure of fda-available covalent drugs which available in table 1 were selected based on the review of kumalo et al. (2015) and some of the antiviral drugs that can form a covalent bond to the target protein. and we aim also here to redirect them for other indications specially to see their possibility to fight against sars-cov-2. thence, we searched about the chosen drugs in pubchem (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) to identify the possibility of the selected drugs to be as covalent binders toward sars-cov-2 mpro. where, pubchem provides detailed information about the selected drugs rather than other repositories, especially, the property of drug to form covalent bond. before starting covalent docking, we downloaded the selected drugs one by one and optimize them by using the ligprep (lim et al., 2020) based on the opls_2005 force field and generated possible state employing epik in the schrodinger 2020 (elfiky 2020; s. a. khan et al.,2020) . in the next step, the structure of sars-cov-2 mpro (6lu7) was downloaded from protein data bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) (jin et al. , 2020) . the protease structure was optimized by adding hydrogens, removing water molecules and optimizing charge using the protein preparation wizard module (kumalo et al., 2015) in schrodinger suite 2020-1. the covalent docking protocol was preferred since the cysteine 145 residue which is available in the binding site of sars-cov-2 mpro considered as a vital residue that can form a covalent bond with the drug if it can interact covalently. the different mechanisms for the cys145-fda drug were mentioned in table 1 based on the nature of the drug so that the reactive functional group on the ligand and receptor residue are identified and the bond is formed between the correct atoms. these covalently docked complexes were created using covdock in schrodinger suite 2020-1. finally, we selected the lowest the mmgbsa value for each drug as a propriate conformation of the drug inside the binding pocket.the chosen drugs binding energies were calculated using prime mm-gbsa modules (vijayakumar et al., 2014) in the schr€ odinger (2020). the best poses of selected drugs-sars-cov-2 mpro-were chosen to obtain the binding free energy calculation. prime mmgbsa is a method that combines optimized potential for liquid simulations-all atoms (oplsaa) force field, molecular mechanics energies (emm), an sgb solvation model for polar solvation (gsgb), and a non-polar solvation term (gnp) composed of the non-polar solvent accessible surface area and van der waals interactions. the total binding free energy:molecular dynamics simulations are a decision-making process for inspections of protein-drug complexes' stabilities (al-khafaji & taskin tok, 2020b) . it is used to clarify the dynamic behavior at an atomic level of biological systems, which is hard to handle in labs (shukla et al., 2019) . in the current study, we conducted molecular dynamics simulations for the top three drugs based on mmgbsa values. the got protein-drug complex structures from covalent docking were submitted to md simulations (saquinavir, ritonavir, and remdesivir with sars-cov-2 mpro). we hired gromacs 2018.1 to run 50 ns md simulations (abraham et al., 2015) . charmm 27 force field for all atoms were chosen to run md simulation (bjelkmar et al., 2010) . we used swiss param to produce the topologies of drugs (zoete et al., 2011) . all protein-drug systems were solvated with three-point transferable intermolecular potential (tip3p) and their charges were neutralized via adding na or cl ions. in the following step, the protein-drugs systems were energetically minimized through the steepest descent algorithm at a tolerance value of 1000 kj/mol.nm. then the equilibration with position restraint on the protein molecules for 0.1 ns using nvt and npt ensembles were done. electrostatic interactions were evaluated by particle mesh ewald summation (darden et al., 1993) . we performed the molecular dynamics simulation with no restraint on the protein molecules or ligand to determine the stability in the final step (time step of 0.015 ns). rmsd, rmsf, rg, and number of hydrogen bonds were chosen to analyze md trajectories by using gromacs utilities.the principal component analysis (pca) approach was employed to calculate eigenvectors and eigenvalues and their projection along with the first two principal components (al-khafaji & taskin tok, 2020a). this approach is based on the protocol of gromacs 2018.1 (abraham et al., 2015) . it is used to simplify the effect of drugs on the dynamic motion of the targeted protein where it extracts the dynamic motions in simulations that are required for their biological function (amadei et al., 1993) . we got the principal component analysis from the md trajectories. a series of eigenvectors and eigenvalues were generated by diagonalizing the matrix. we chose trajectories of the protein backbone of the complexes to get 2 d-projection of motion of trajectory.to assess the possibility of selected fda drugs to work as treatment of sars-cov-2, the covalent docking was utilized to screen the selected library and rank them according to their binding affinities. the calculated binding free energies of some available drugs using docking score, glide gscore, and ensemble-average mm/gbsa are shown in table 1 .to validate our covalent docking results, the correlation between mmgbsa and docking score was constructed ( figure  1 ). the binding energy mmgbsa-docking score correlation shows a good correlation (r 2 ¼ 0.6299). based on this correlation, we chose the top three ranked-mmgbsa and docking score values of fda drugs for dissection their binding modes inside the binding site. covalent docking showed that saquinavir, ritonavir, remdesivir, delavirdine, cefuroxime axetil, oseltamivir, and prevacid have à72.17, à72.02, à65.19, à57.65, à54.25, à51.8, and à51.14, respectively. where all the topeight fda drugs show a higher affinity to form a covalent, irreversible bond with cys145 of sars-cov-2 mpro. here we investigated the role of molecular weight upon the affinity of selected drugs to bind covalently to cys145, whereas 57% of selected drugs which have molecular weight over than 600 g/ mol ( figure 2 ). and have higher free binding energy mmgbsa than à50 kcal/mol. while the ratio of selected drugs decreased to be 16% of drugs which can form covalent bonding with over than à50 kcal/mol. surprisingly, none of the selected drugs which have a molecular weight below than 300 g/mol can form a good affinity of binding energy. this indicates that higher molecular weight covalent warheads can form stable and efficient binding energy.what stands out in the table 1 is saquinavir has the highest binding affinity (lowest binding energy mmgbsa of 72.17 kcal/mol). therefore, the deep examination of saquinavir is needed. figure 3 shows that saquinavir not only formed covalent bond of 1.81 å with cys145 but also formed five hydrogen bonds inside the pocket of sars-cov-2 mpro. in the second rank ritonavir as presented in table 1 has à72.02 kcal/mol. this high affinity resulted from covalent bond between ritonavir and cys145 of 1.82 å (figure 4 ) through nucleophilic addition to double bond reaction besides it interacted within binding site by forming three hydrogen bonds. despite remdesivir formed covalent bond with cys145 of 1.82 å and three hydrogen bonds ( figure 5 ) and this is similar to ritonavir, but the mmgbsa value is lower than that of ritonavir this may due to nature of reaction which in remdesivir nucleophilic addition to triple bond.the effect of drug-protein interactions upon dynamics of biological system is a fundamental in drug discovery thereby we used rmsd to investigate the influence of saquinavir, ritonavir, and remdesivir upon the stability of sars-cov-2 mpro. we utilized gromacs to execute the md simulations of 50 ns for three drug-protein systems besides of apo protein.rmsd fluctuations for both apo and hollo forms were measured and presented. the rmsd was calculated to assess the overall dynamics, stability, and convergence of the various systems and the results are presented in figure 6 (a). figure 6 (a) shows there is a significant decrease in the rmsd value when sars-cov-2 main protease whether it bound to saquinavir, ritonavir, or remedisivir. further analysis revealed that the rmsd average of apo sars-cov-2 main protease was 0.294 nm but when it bound to saquinavir, ritonavir, and remedisivir the rmsd averages were.01865, 0.2130, and 0.2053 nm, respectively. another significant aspect of md simulation is the flexibility of protein's backbone which can be assessed through measuring rmsf value. the results of the comparative analysis between these drugs and their effects upon sars-cov-2 main protease are illustrated in figure 6 (b). closer scrutiny of figure 6 (b) exhibits the binding of saquinavir diminished the fluctuations of the protein's backbone. and behavior is also can be seen from figure 6 (b) where the binding of both ritonavir and remedisivir led to reducing the flexibility of the protein. the radius of gyration (rg) is a definition of system's density, and substantially influences the folding rate and stability of proteins. rg was employed to assess the compactness of all complexes. in this work, rg values are in agreement with rmsf values where there are no significant differences between apo form and hollo forms as presented in figure 6 (c). this reveals that protein remained stable and compact all through the 50 ns time. the number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds is a vital aspect to give an impression about the stability of drug and protein. also, the number of hydrogen bonds is relevant to the binding scores of molecular docking process. we calculated the hydrogen bonds over time to validate the stable interactions between top three drugs and their corresponding target. as seen in the figure 6 (d) the ritonavir has highest order of hydrogen bonding (the average ¼3.35), while saquinavir has an average of 1.68.the essential dynamic method is a tool to explore the dynamical behavior in the space of sars-cov-2 main protease combined with saquinavir, ritonavir, and remedisivir. basically, the comparison of the drug-bound sars-cov-2 mpro and drug-unbound was made as reference. in order to further understand the configurational space, we selected the first two principal components (pc1, pc2) to analyze their projection of trajectories during the simulations of ligand free and ligand bound sars-cov-2 mpro of the phase space (shown in figure 7) . during the four system simulations, the results clearly show that the unbound ligand protein covered a wider region of phase space, while all three drug-protein system occupied a smaller region of phase space. especially, saquinavir reduced the essential dynamics to lowest degree of functional motions as compared with another drugs. moreover, the pca results suggest that the drug-bound sars-cov-2 mpro is more stable than ligandunbound sars-cov-2 mpro form of sars-cov-2 mpro. in short, the pca results are also in agreement with the rmsd and rmsf results, which enhance the validity of the performed analysis.sars-cov-2 causes major pandemic health issue since its spread across the world and can infect humans mainly respiratory system causing severe pneumonia with no vaccine and drug treatment available. prior study that have referred to the significance of molecular docking to determine effective treatment in short time (wu, et al., 2020) . in reviewing the literature, we took the advantage of possibility of fda available drugs that can be as a covalent warhead to inhibit the sars-cov-2 mpro with cys145. an initial objective of the project was to identify effective and applicable treatment. the present study focused on the main protease (mpro), especially pdb id (6lu7) as a potential target for several marketed drugs as possible therapeutic option to combat the virus to see the capability of these drugs to bind with the cysteine 145 residue which is available in the binding site of sars-cov-2 main protease. the mpro in sars-cov-2 is necessary for the proteolytic maturation of the virus targeting this protein to limit the expansion of infection by hindering the cleavage of the viral polyprotein. the most interesting finding was that the both saquinavir and ritonavir have the same affinity (binding energy mmgbsa % à72 kcal/mol) to block binding site of sars-cov-2 with irreversible interactions. this study supports evidence from previous observations that lopinavir/ritonavir can inhibit sars-cov-2 (lim et al., 2020) . another important outcome was that the remdesivir comes in second rank with binding affinity (mmgbsa ¼ à65 kcal/mol ). whereas previous research has established that remdesivir can inhibit sars-cov-2 m proenzyme through docking results. another significant finding, delavirdine computationally showed the ability to form irreversible covalent bond of à57.65 kcal/mol mmgbsa binding energy. moreover, indinavir and cefuroxime axetil exhibited the possibility to halt the pocket of sars-cov-2 mpro by forming stable interaction through covalent bonding and hydrogen bonding (mmgbsa binding energies % à54 kcal/ mol). furthermore, oseltamivir and prevacid exhibited same affinity to bind with sars-cov-2 protease through one covalent bond and one hydrogen bond (% à51 kcal/mol), which is a good explanation for the activity of oseltamivir (peeri et al., 2020) . in this study, results obtained show the binding affinity of drugs to an active site depends on several factors mainly the ability of a compound to form a covalent bond with amino acid residues of the mpro (cys145) and length of a covalent bond, the number of h-bonds that can form with a pocket of the active site and type of nucleophilic addition of unsaturated bonds. in this concept, the structural features in saquinavir and ritonavir like free amine group (-nh2), hydroxyl groups (-oh), carbonyl groups (c¼o) in addition to ether group play key structural feature to form h-bond. results show the promising activities for antiretroviral drugs saquinavir that used for hiv/aids more than ritonavir and remdesivir followed by lopinavir as the best drugs to bind covalently toward sars-cov-2 mpro with lowest energy of binding. as discussed above, saquinavir, ritonavir, remdesivir, delavirdine, cefuroxime axetil, oseltamivir, and prevacid showed the ability to block the binding site of sars-cov-2 mpro by forming covalent bond and stabilized with hydrogen bonding.these outcomes are contrary to that of kandeel and al-nazawi (2020), they found that ribavirin, telbivudine, vitamin b12, and nicotinamide can be can form non-bonding interactions. whilst our results showed that, saquinavir, ritonavir, and remdesivir can form irreversible interactions, which are considered an effective way for viral infections.in the present work, comparative molecular dynamics simulations were conducted to evaluate the effects of saquinavir, ritonavir, and remdesivir on the conformational and dynamical demeanor in either apo or hollo forms to understand the inhibitory possibility at atomic level. an initial mission of the project was to identify rapid, effective, safe, and available for large proportions of people, so we run covalent docking and mmgbsa to sift the possibility of these drug to form irreversible interactions. therefore, we had chosen these drugs because they carry covalent warheads that can bind covalently to the target. but the docking results are not adequate, so we run md simulations examine how much these drugs are able to form stable interactions with targeted protein. one interesting finding is the rmsd of protein backbone in apo status has higher average value, whereas the binding with top three drugs diminished these rmsd average. another important finding was that the rmsf of protein's backbone be less flexible when it compared to apo form of sars-cov-2 main protease. it is somewhat surprising that the binding of three drugs have not noted in rg values. it is not yet clear whether the top three drugs can show an evidence to inhibit the targeted protein, thereby we lean on the principal component analysis to analyze the md trajectories to judge without dispute. the most obvious finding to emerge from 2d pca analysis is that the binding of under investigated drugs caused stately impact on essential dynamics of protein by reducing its essential dynamics to its least possible motions. these results seem to be consistent with rmsd results. a possible explanation for this might be that binding of the drugs make the binding site much narrower due to hydrogen bindings this makes the 3d structure of targeted protein more rigid so it will lose its biological functions. it is possible, therefore, that using these available drugs in two ways: either alone or in combined way. these findings suggest the possible use of nominated drugs against sars-cov-2 in short time as approved by covalent docking screening. also, the present results are significant in at least directing the clinicians to use these safe drugs to stop development of corona virus and second giving hope that available drugs that can be efficient treatment.coronavirus today emphasizes as a potential threat to all people worldwide. although extensive researches have been directed to stop sars-cov-2, but till now there is no medication. meanwhile, the spreading with complicated crisis requires immediate therapy to overcome the spread and minimize mortality of sars-cov-2. the aim of the present study was to discover effective treatment through repurposing some of available fda-approved drugs against sars-cov-2 mpro. where, they can provide covalent warheads in virtual screening. the most prominent finding to emerge from this study is that the affinity of covalent binder toward sars-cov-2 mpro is ranked: saquinavir > ritonavir > remdesivir > delavirdine > cefuroxime axetil > oseltamivir ¼ prevacid. one of the more noteworthy findings in this study is that md simulation analysis that saquinavir, ritonavir, and remdesivir can form stable interaction inside the binding site of sars-cov-2 mpro. also, they restricted the essential motions of protein. overall, the results of screening toward mpret encourage for further clinical evaluations. they can be easy to reach and exploit as persuasive treatments for sars-cov-2.the first cases of pneumonia due to a novel betacoronavirus were first identified in december 2019 in wuhan, china. 1 later named, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , has infected hundreds of thousands across 6 continents. 1 the overall case-fatality rate of covid-19 remains in flux but was initially reported to be 2.3% in mainland china, while italy has reported a casefatality rate of 7.2%. 2, 3 of note, case-fatality rates have been reportedly higher in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease. 2 the transmission of sars-cov-2 occurs by person-to-person spread through respiratory droplets and self-inoculation after contact with virus on contaminated surfaces. the disease has an incubation period of approximately 5 days. 4 the most common signs and symptoms of covid-19 include fever, dry cough, shortness of breath, and myalgia; however, some patients present with gastrointestinal (eg, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting) or neurological (eg, headache, hypogeusia, and hyposmia) symptoms. 5, 6 cardiovascular complications, such as myocarditis, acute myocardial infarction, and heart failure have been reported, as has been previously observed with other acute upper respiratory infections (eg, influenza). 7 an extensive discussion of these complications and their relationship to covid-19 has been described elsewhere. 8 currently, there is no established treatment or vaccine against sars-cov-2. several antiviral and immunomodulating therapies have been used and are under clinical investigation. sars-cov-2 infection seems to lead to a more severe disease in patients who are elderly or have comorbidities. 9 in this review, we provide an overview of the pharmacology and cardiovascular considerations with the most promising therapies being investigated for use in patients with covid-19 with a particular consideration on how the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection may be particularly challenging in patients with, or at risk for, cardiovascular diseases (fig. 1 ).while a complete understanding of covid-19 is lacking, reports from china and italy describe 2 phases of the disease. 10, 11 the initial phase is primarily an infection characterized by predominantly lower respiratory symptoms, of which most patients recover. however, some patients progress to an immune-mediated respiratory failure leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple organ failure, which is associated with a very high mortality rate. 9 early approaches to treatment have involved antiviral therapies aimed at reducing viral replication, representing the main pathogenetic mechanism, at least in the early phase. immunomodulatory therapies targeting the inflammatory response that leads to ards are also being explored. it is important to recognize that, at this time, there are only lowquality data to support the use of any therapy for covid-19, and the field is evolving rapidly. therefore, this review should not be considered to be comprehensive. a summary of the current approaches to prevention and treatment is described in figure 2 .it is important to consider that the patients at greatest risk for covid-19-related mortality, and in whom aggressive treatment should be considered, are also receiving concomitant cardiovascular therapies. therefore, drug-drug interactions must be considered and accounted for when managing cardiovascular patients with covid-19 (table 1) .sars-cov-2 is an rna betacoronavirus that uses a glycosylated spike protein to gain host cell entry. 12 a single region of spiked protein, the receptor-binding domain, binds in patients with covid-19, an increase in metabolic demand occurs along with a progressive decrease in cardiac contractility and cardiac reserve, which are responsible for the acute cardiovascular complications, or decompensation, of chronic cardiovascular disorders. as well, covid-19 is characterized by a severe systemic inflammation, which has a procoagulant effect and may pave the way to thrombotic events or impair the immune response leading to myocardial injury. interestingly, individuals with a history of cardiovascular disease, hypertension, or diabetes are at higher risk to develop a more aggressive, potentially lifethreatening disease.currently, available drugs that are under evaluation may have important implications for cardiovascular health care providers as many of these agents have significant drugdrug interactions and cardiovascular-related side effects, both acute and chronic. this figure has been partially created using servier medical art templates, which are licensed under a creative commons attribution 3.0 unported license; https://smart. servier.com. cv, cardiovascular; doac, direct oral anticoagulants.investigational approach to covid-19 management. it is important to recognize that, at this time, there are no approved therapies for covid-19. preventative approaches are critical to prevent person-to-person spread and include social and physical distancing and proper hygiene. patients who are covid-19 positive but are either asymptomatic or have mild symptoms should self-quarantine for 2 weeks and receive supportive care at home so as not to overburden the health care system. patients with more severe illness (eg, worsening shortness of breath) may receive one of several investigational therapies and oxygen therapy. a minority of patients will require intensive care and ventilation and may be appropriate candidates for therapies aimed at preventing cytokine storm to blunt the inflammatory response. the host-cell receptor. a host protease cleaves the spike, which allows virus entry into the host cell. in humans, sars-cov-2 uses the angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2) as its entry receptor. 13 thus, antiviral therapies that either interrupt the replication of sars-cov-2 14 (eg, remdesivir) or prevent virus/cell fusion and glycosylation of cellular receptors of sars-co-v-2 necessary for binding to ace2 15 (eg, chloroquine) are being investigated as potential treatments.the antimalarial agents, hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, are commonly used to treat autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, and disrupt immune activation at the cellular level by inhibiting both innate and adaptive immune responses. in addition, by impairing endosomal and lysosomal acidification, which is required for virus/cell binding, these therapies may exert antiviral activity. 16 in vitro studies suggest that chloroquine may be more potent at inhibiting sars-cov-2 than hydroxychloroquine, but hydroxychloroquine seems to be less toxic. 16 hydroxychloroquine is administered orally in a loading dose of 400 mg twice daily, followed by a maintenance dose of 200 mg twice daily for 4 days. 17 electrocardiogram (ecg) monitoring is recommended to watch for cardiac arrhythmias, including qt prolongation, torsade de pointe, and atrioventricular block. 8 a reduction in the dose or discontinuation should be considered with qtc .500 ms or an increase in qtc .60 ms, and caution is advised if used together with other therapies that prolong qtc, especially antiarrhythmics. an antimalarial-induced hypertrophic, restrictive cardiomyopathy can also occur, but this is exceedingly rare and occurs with prolonged use, which is not a concern given the short duration (5 days) of treatment required for covid-19. 18 chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine also inhibit cyp2d6, which may increase beta-blocker exposure and risk of bradycardia, pr interval prolongation, and atrioventricular block. other potential adverse effects include severe hypoglycemia, erythroderma, hematological, and psychiatric disturbances. thus, routine monitoring should include a complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel.a small pilot study 19 randomized 30 patients to either the intervention (hydroxychloroquine 400 mg daily for 5 days) or conventional therapy only. on day 7, patients were tested through respiratory pharyngeal swab for evidence of covid-19 nucleic acid. there was no difference in the number of negative swabs between the hydroxychloroquine (n = 13) and control (n = 14) groups (p . 0.05). no favorable trends were observed in other secondary measures, including duration of hospitalization, body temperature regulation, or radiological progression.in another small, single-arm study, the effects of hydroxychloroquine 600 mg daily in hospitalized patients on the presence or absence of virus at day 6 were studied. 20 twenty-six french subjects received the protocol and 16 served as controls. six stopped hydroxychloroquine therapy early due to either being transferred to the intensive care unit (n = 3), leaving the hospital (n = 1), death (n = 1), or nausea (n = 1). on day 6 of treatment, 70% of hydroxychloroquinetreated patients were virologically cured compared with only 12.5% in the control group (p = 0.001). the addition of the macrolide antibiotic, azithromycin, to hydroxychloroquine was significantly more effective for virus elimination with a 100% cure rate, suggesting this combination may be superior to hydroxychloroquine alone. the same authors have published a preprint 21 of a larger sample (n = 80) of patients who received the combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin showing clinical improvement in all but 2 patients. the authors report that only 15% of subjects required oxygen therapy, 93% had a negative nasopharyngeal viral load on day 8, and the length of stay was limited to an average of 5 days. despite the favorable outcomes reported in these observational studies, a proper randomized controlled trial is warranted before any definitive decisions can be made regarding the role of these therapies in treating covid-19.although the mechanism of how azithromycin would be effective in patients with covid-19, azithromycin has been found to have antiviral and anti-inflammatory effects in both in vivo and in vitro studies. 20, 22, 23 azithromycin also has activity against proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin [il]-6 and il-8), which may reduce the development of cytokine storm, but this warrants further study. 22 one potential concern, however, with concomitant antimalarial therapy with azithromycin is the potential for qtc prolongation warranting daily ecg monitoring. 24 although other macrolides have demonstrated similar effects, azithromycin minimally inhibits cyp3a4, while others (eg, erythromycin and clarithromycin) are strong inhibitors of cyp3a4 and not as well tolerated as azithromycin. at this time, the data supporting the combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin for covid-19 are very limited; given the potential for significant toxicity, use of this regimen should be considered with caution.some have also suggested there may be a role for hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine to be used for prophylaxis in high-risk individuals, such as health care workers. therefore, chloroquine is being studied as a potential preventative measure against covid-19 in health care workers and other individuals in high-risk environments (nct04303507). participants will be randomized to placebo or chloroquine (loading dose of 10 mg/kg followed by 150 mg daily) for 3 months. the primary outcome will be the number of covid-19 cases at 100 days. at this time, however, there is little evidence for pharmacological measures to reduce the transmission of sars-cov-2 in health care workers or other high-risk individuals.remdesivir (gilead sciences, inc., foster city, ca) is a nucleotide analog prodrug with broad antiviral activity initially used against ebola. 25 in vivo and in vitro testing has shown to inhibit human coronavirus replication, including sars-cov and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). 15, 26, 27 remdesivir was initially only available for compassionate use but received orphan drug status from the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) on march 23, 2020. the recommended dosing is an initial single dose of 200 mg intravenously followed by 100 mg every 24 hours for the duration of the hospitalization up to 10 days. 25 several phase 3 clinical trials are underway in the united states, south korea, china, and europe (nct04302766, nct04280705, nct04292899, nct04292730, 2020-000936-23). two of the larger ongoing multicenter clinical trials (nct04292899, nct04292730) are evaluating remdesivir in hospitalized patients with moderate (n = 600) or severe (n = 400) symptoms not yet requiring mechanical ventilation. patients in these studies are randomized to 5 or 10 days of remdesivir (or to an additional standard of care arm in the moderate disease trial) with a focus on discharge, fever, and oxygen saturation at 14 days. patients with more severe symptoms requiring mechanical ventilation must pursue individual compassionate use protocols in to receive access to remdesivir. importantly, these trials have no cardiovascular-specific reasons for exclusion.overall, remdesivir is generally well tolerated, but selflimiting hepatotoxicity has been observed. nephrotoxicity is also possible; thus, its use is not recommended in patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate ,30 ml/min/1.73 m 2 or those on dialysis. monitoring recommendations include a complete blood count with differential and a comprehensive metabolic panel. there is limited information available at this time regarding the potential for drug-drug interactions with remdesivir. information from a clinical trial protocol (nct04280705) suggests that "remdesivir is a prodrug that is metabolized to its active form as a substrate of cyp3a4" and "remdesivir is a substrate for cyp2c8, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4 in vitro," yet it also states that coadministration with drugs that affect these cyp isoforms is unlikely to significantly affect the metabolism of remdesivir.lopinavir is a protease inhibitor primarily used for the treatment of hiv that is combined with ritonavir, and another protease inhibitor that also inhibits cyp3a4 and is combined with lopinavir to enhance its potency. 28 from a cardiovascular perspective, lopinavir/ritonavir does not induce endothelial dysfunction or insulin resistance; however, it can cause hypertriglyceridemia. 29, 30 a retrospective, single-center study suggests that ritonavir-boosted regimens may worsen cardiovascular outcomes in patients with hiv and heart failure. 31 importantly, these data are not sufficient to restrict the use of lopinavir/ritonavir in patients with cardiovascular disease or heart failure given the life-threatening potential of covid-19 and short-term (2 weeks) duration of treatment.there are notable drug-drug interactions with lopinavir/ ritonavir and select cardiovascular therapies because ritonavir is a potent inhibitor of cyp3a4 and p-glycoprotein (mdr1). 32 this may result in increased concentrations of cardiovascular therapies metabolized through cyp3a4, such as rivaroxaban, apixaban, simvastatin, and lovastatin, all of which should not be used in combination with ritonavir. 33, 34 likewise, ritonavir inhibits the bioactivation of clopidogrel and prasugrel, which may decrease antiplatelet activity; however, this may not affect the antiplatelet activity of prasugrel making it still a reasonable option. 35, 36 ticagrelor should not be used with strong inhibitors of cyp3a4, such as ritonavir, due to an increased risk of bleeding. 35, 36 the use of p2y12 platelet function assays may be appropriate to ensure adequate antiplatelet activity. gastrointestinal symptoms (eg, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) and elevations in hepatic transaminases can also occur. routine monitoring includes complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, and a baseline ecg is recommended when used with concomitant agents (eg, antiarrhythmics) that prolong the qt interval.recently, 199 hospitalized patients with severe covid-19 disease were randomized to either a fixed dose of lopinavir/ritonavir (400 and 100 mg, respectively) twice daily for 14 days or standard of care. 28 the intervention did not improve time to clinical improvement or mortality, although the study was underpowered to detect a mortality benefit. gastrointestinal complaints (nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) were also common, and 13.8% of patients discontinued therapy due to adverse events. additional clinical trials are ongoing, including one clinical trial comparing lopinavir/ ritonavir with hydroxychloroquine (nct04307693) and another clinical trial comparing lopinavir/ritonavir with remdesivir (2020-000936-23) in patients with covid-19. of note, interferon-beta may also be used in combination with lopinavir/ritonavir, which has been shown to improve pulmonary function and reduce viral loads in marmosets and mice with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus, but this has not yet been evaluated in humans. 26, 37 immune modulatorspatients with severe infection may progress to severe respiratory failure due to ards mediated by a catastrophic inflammatory cascade. 38, 39 early observations in china and italy led to widespread use of tocilizumab, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody against the interleukin-6 receptor (il-6r). 40, 41 although originally fda approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis, tocilizumab is routinely used in the treatment of cytokine release syndrome secondary to chimeric antigen receptor t-cell therapy in hematologic malignancies. 42 an observational series of patients with severe respiratory symptoms in china showed recovery in 19/21 (91%) after treatment with tocilizumab 4 mg/kg iv (maximum dose of 400 mg). 43 other emerging treatment protocols recommend more aggressive doses (8 mg/kg up to 800 mg) and repeated doses at 12 and 24 hours for patients showing inadequate responses. the primary risks of tocilizumab relate to immunosuppression through neutropenia and interruption of t-cell-mediated immunity. infusion reactions and transient transaminase elevations may also occur frequently. although tocilizumab significantly increases cholesterol levels and blood pressure, a recent network meta-analysis found the cardiovascular risk with tocilizumab was comparable with other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. 44 regardless, given the high mortality rate among patients with covid-19-mediated ards (.50%), the potential benefits of short-term tocilizumab use seem to outweigh risks of treatment for most patients.the parallels in inflammatory pathophysiology between chimeric antigen receptor t-cell therapy-mediated cytokine release syndrome and covid-19-mediated ards suggest that il-6 suppression is a key advancement in treatment of severe covid-19 infection. sarilumab (regeneron pharmaceuticals, inc., tarrytown, ny) is the only other il-6 blocker currently on the market if tocilizumab is unavailable; however, there is limited evidence to guide the selection and dosing of these agents at this time.an urgent public health priority to combat covid-19 in the future is to develop a safe and effective vaccine. widespread vaccination could also play a role in modulating the cardiovascular risk similar to what has been observed with influenza, thus, the importance of identifying a safe and effective vaccine. 45 the first phase 1 clinical trial (nct04283461) evaluating a vaccine for covid-19, mrna-1273, began on march 19, 2020, and is being sponsored by the national institutes of health. the open-label study will enroll 45 healthy adults between 18 and 55 years over 6 weeks. although 40 vaccine candidates are in the pipeline, it is unlikely a vaccine will be available until at least 2021.there has been increased concern regarding the use of ace inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) in patients with this is due to the potential of ace inhibitors and arbs to upregulate ace2 receptors, which are found in vascular endothelial cells of the heart, kidneys, and lungs, and have been shown to be the host cell entry point for sars-cov-2. 47 thus, there is a theoretical increased risk for covid-19 in patients taking these medications. it also seems that sars-cov-2 consumes ace2 and increases angiotensin2 (at2) activity, which activates an inflammatory response resulting in microvascular constriction and ischemic injury. 48 moreover, the sars-cov led to downregulation of ace2 and more severe lung injury in mice, which could theoretically be attenuated by administration of an arb. 49 mice lacking ace2 have also been shown to have worse outcomes with influenza h7n9 infection. 50 observational evidence suggests that ace inhibitors, but not arbs, may reduce the risk of pneumonia. 51 given the limited data available supporting either harm or benefit, multiple professional organizations have released statements to provide guidance. a joint statement from the heart failure society of america, american heart association, and american college of cardiology recommends, "not to add or remove any raas-related treatments, beyond actions based on standard clinical practice," and calls for further research in this area. 52 likewise, the council on hypertension of the european society of cardiology also released a position statement recommending, "physicians and patients should continue treatment with their usual antihypertensive therapy because there is no clinical or scientific evidence to suggest that treatment with acei or arbs should be discontinued because of the covid-19 infection." 53 to help determine the potential role, or harm, of ace inhibitors and arbs, 2 randomized, multicenter, clinical trials are underway. patients with a presumptive positive test for covid-19, who require hospitalization and are not already taking an ace inhibitor or arb, will be randomized to either losartan 25 mg daily or placebo (nct04312009). the primary outcome of this study is the sequential organ failure assessment respiratory score, which is used to determine the risk of mortality from respiratory failure. a similarly designed study (nct04311177) will compare losartan 25 mg daily to placebo in patients who test positive for covid-19 but do not require hospitalization. the primary outcome of this study will be hospitalization rates at 28 days.in addition to ace inhibitors and arbs, ibuprofen was purported in a recent correspondence to also increase ace2 and, potentially, the risk of worsening covid-19. 46 despite no definitive evidence supporting this claim, it was promoted by the french health minister on social media. 54 although the world health organization originally backed the claim, they later retracted that advice and now do not recommend against nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (nsaid) use. 55 the european medicines agency 56 and fda 57 have also confirmed the lack of evidence to support a link between nsaids and worsening covid-19. regardless, nsaids should still be avoided in patients with cardiovascular disease, especially those with heart failure, and renal disease, because they can increase bp and cause fluid retention.it is well established that statins have vascular and myocardial anti-inflammatory effects, which may exert some potential benefit in patients with acute viral respiratory infections. 58 observational studies have reported an improvement in cardiovascular outcomes, and even mortality, in statin-treated patients with influenza or pneumonia; however, a healthy user bias could be a contributing factor to these findings. 59, 60 the randomized controlled trial data are very limited and has found conflicted results. 61, 62 importantly, there has been no reported harm associated with statin use in these patients, which supports the continued use of statins in patients with an indication for statin therapy, such as those with established cardiovascular disease, diabetes, or other high-risk features. this is particularly true given the higher mortality rates observed in covid-19 patients with cardiovascular and cardiometabolic comorbidities. as previously discussed, however, dose reductions or therapy substitutions may be warranted if patients receive lopinavir/ritonavir treatment while on statin therapy (table 1 ). in rare instances, patients with covid-19 may develop rhabdomyolysis or acute liver injury, which would require prompt statin discontinuation.the spectrum of covid-19 disease ranges from mild to severe, and it has been well described elsewhere. 8 patients with, or at risk for, cardiovascular disease are at particular high risk of severe illness and mortality. 9 myocardial injury, as witnessed by elevation in troponin levels, is common in patients with covid-19, 38, 63 and is likely to reflect demand/ supply mismatch (type ii) myocardial infarction or septic cardiomyopathy for which no specific therapy is recommended, other than attempting to optimize oxygen supply, delivery, and demand as much as possible by intervening on the pulmonary, hematologic, cardiac, and vascular systems. increased troponin i identifies patients with severe covid-19 and is associated with very high mortality, but whether myocardial injury reflects a specific pathologic mechanism of disease or a subgroup of patients with more severe disease is unclear. 64 anecdotal cases of myocarditis have been reported, 65, 66 but they seem to be rare.an elevation in d-dimer levels 38 suggests an activation of the coagulation cascade in patients with covid-19; however, an increase in thrombosis or disseminated intravascular coagulation has not been widely reported. regardless, anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin or enoxaparin in patients with markedly elevated d-dimer levels should be considered, although precise recommendations are challenging given the lack of evidence. recently, the international society on thrombosis and haemostasis released a pragmatic statement recommending clinician's measure d-dimers, prothrombin time, and platelet count in all patients with covid-19. 67 furthermore, they also recommend a prophylactic dose of low molecular weight heparin in all patients, including those who are not critically ill, barring any contraindications. additional study is warranted to understand the anticoagulation needs of patients with covid-19.for patients with covid-19 who experience an acute coronary syndrome, access to emergency coronary angiography can become restricted in some instances, and fibrinolysis can become first-line therapy for lower risk st-segment elevation patients to preserve personal protective equipment and prevent spread of the infection across different areas of the hospital. hospitals should also develop protocols for stsegment elevation management for patients with covid-19 in collaboration with their infection prevention departments to optimize patient management while reducing the risk for patient and health care worker transmission.in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction, a careful review of medical treatments should be considered in case of the initiation of the aforementioned investigational drugs to treat covid-19. when possible, guideline-directed medical therapy should be continued, but additional monitoring is warranted. lopinavir/ritonavir may only modestly affect ace inhibitors and arbs, while sacubitril/valsartan levels can increase, warranting close monitoring of bp. lopinavir/ritonavir can increase levels of beta-blockers warranting ecg monitoring and, potentially, dose downtitration, while hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine may reduce levels of beta-blocker and require a dose uptitration. 68 among mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, spironolactone can be safely used with lopinavir/ritonavir, whereas eplerenone, which is mainly metabolized by cyp3a4, should not be coadministered. for the same reason, coadministration of ivabradine and lopinavir/ritonavir should be avoided. digoxin levels should be followed closely in patients on lopinavir/ritonavir, hydroxychloroquine, or chloroquine.limited contact with others to minimize the spread of sars-cov-2 during the epidemic phase of the disease is advised. this usually implies rescheduling routine follow-up visits. options include the use of telehealth to conduct brief, focused remote visits, or postponement of visits for more stable patients. regardless, there are some additional considerations for managing these patients. home blood pressure monitoring devices, weight scales, heart failure telemonitoring, and other remote equipment should be offered, when possible, to augment telehealth visits. such equipment may require training of the patients and health care providers but also may reveal unequal access to such resources. reinforcing heart healthy lifestyle and stress management are also important given the inherent impact of social distancing and quarantine during a pandemic on daily routines and mental health. additional medication-related considerations include ensuring patients have sufficient refills and prescribing a longer supply for maintenance medications. these represent some of the potential challenges of social isolation during the pandemic.in closing, sars-cov-2 is a novel virus that has spread rapidly throughout the world causing a potentially lifethreatening disease, covid-19, causing disproportionally high mortality among elder patients with concomitant pulmonary and cardiovascular diseases. although no approved therapies currently exist, multiple collaborative efforts are underway to identify effective therapies and a vaccine to prevent future infection. cardiovascular clinicians, however, may not be accustomed to the concomitant use of antivirals and immunomodulators in their patients; thus, the need to understand how these therapies might impact underlying cardiovascular conditions and medications. despite the significant morbidity and mortality associated with covid-19, there is an immense opportunity to enhance our understanding of how to prevent and treat such emerging infections as well as improve our understanding of the relationship between infection, immune response, and cardiovascular disease.the ongoing outbreak of the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) has posed significant threats to international health and the economy [1] . in late december 2019, a cluster of patients were admitted to hospitals with an initial diagnosis of pneumonia of an unknown etiology. these patients were epidemiologically linked to the seafood and wet animal wholesale market in wuhan, hubei province, china [2] .analysis of the viral genome has revealed that the new coronavirus (cov) is phylogenetically close to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), the causative agent of a viral outbreak in 2002. thus, the new cov has been named sars-cov type 2 by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) and other virologists [3] . on february 11, 2020, the world health organization (who) director-general announced that the disease caused by this new cov was called as coronavirus disease 2019 .this new virus seems to be very contagious and has quickly spread globally. on march 11, 2020 , as the number of 2019-ncov cases outside china has increased 13 times and the number of countries involved has tripled with more than 118,000 cases in 114 countries and over 4,000 deaths, who declared the 2019-ncov a pandemic [4] . as of may 5, 2020, there is around 1,171,510 total number of both confirmed and probable 2019-ncov cases in the united states (us), the highest in the world, and the total number of deaths is approximately 68,279, the majority caused by pneumonia [5] .person-to-person transmission of sars-cov-2 occurs primarily through close contact with an infected person, mainly via respiratory droplets and after touching contaminated objects. additional routes of transmission are currently under investigation, including fecal viral shedding [6] . the most common presenting symptoms are fever, cough, sore throat, breathlessness, fatigue, and malaise. the disease is mild in most people; in some (usually the elderly and those with comorbidities), it may progress to pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and multiorgan dysfunction [7] .in this systematic review based on findings of previously published case reports on pneumonia in 2019-ncov, we have broadly summarized the transmission and pathology of 2019-ncov, and demographics, clinical presentation, laboratory, and chest imaging findings, along with treatment and outcomes in 2019-ncov pneumonia patients.the medline database from the national library of medicine (nlm) was used to identify case reports published in english from december 1, 2019 to april 6, 2020. the search strings in title/abstract were 'covid-19' or 'coronavirus' or '2019-ncov' and 'pneumonia' that yielded 17 articles. all searches and screening were done independently by two authors (r patel, j patel) using the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses statement (prisma) recommendations. the titles and abstracts were screened, based on the purpose of our review, and resulted in the exclusion of one article. a total of 16 case report articles met the criteria for our systematic review and were included as shown in figure 1 . cases of covid-2019 pneumonia are caused by a cov called sars-cov-2, which is a novel type of beta-cov. the 2019-ncov is the seventh member of the cov family that includes middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov) and sars-cov [8] . most early patients had a history of exposure to the south china seafood market in wuhan. the source of infection is proposed to be the chinese rufous horseshoe bat, yet the exact source of the virus is still unknown [8] [9] [10] .one study of two patients highlights the use of a low-input metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mngs) approach on ribonucleic acid (rna) extracted from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. it rapidly identifies the 2019-ncov, which was the sole pathogen in the sample, with a very high abundance level (1.5% and 0.62% of total rna sequenced). based on the results of genome mapping, data revealed extremely active cov replication in the lungs of patients [10] .transmission of 2019-ncov is mainly via droplets, but it can also be through contact with one another (within six feet distance). in an analysis of 75,465 2019-ncov cases in china, the airborne transmission was not reported [11] . the incubation period of 2019-ncov is generally no longer than 14 days, with a median time of four to five days from exposure to onset of symptoms, and the patient is infective during the incubation period [8] .elderly patients or those with underlying diseases are more seriously affected during the 2019-ncov pandemic, whereas low infection rate and mild symptoms have been noted in the pediatric population, which could potentially be explained by greater innate immunity early in life and less exposure compared to adults [12] . elderly 2019-ncov infected patients are more likely to have bacterial infections, which can be a contributing factor to a higher case fatality rate in the elderly [13] . asymptomatic individuals may transmit 2019-ncov to other people, but it remains to be determined how common are such transmissions. transmission dynamics and the full spectrum of clinical illness are yet to be fully understood [14] .pathophysiology 2019-ncov is comprised of a single-stranded rna structure that belongs to the coronavirinae subfamily. sequence analysis of sars-cov-2 has shown a structure typical to that of other cov and its genome has been likened to a previously identified cov strain that caused the sars outbreak in 2003 [15] . 2019-ncov shared 98.7% nucleotide identity to bat cov strain btcov/4991 and 87.9% nucleotide identity to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 strains, indicating that it was quite divergent from the currently known human cov, including sars-cov [10] .sars-cov-2, a single-stranded rna-enveloped virus, targets cells through the viral structural spike (s) protein that binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor. following receptor binding, the virus particle uses host cell receptors and endosomes to enter cells. a host type 2 transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) facilitates cell entry via the s protein [16] . ace2 is predominantly expressed by epithelial cells of the lung, intestine, kidney, heart, and blood vessels. a recent study by liu et al. showed that serum angiotensin ii levels in patients with 2019-ncov pneumonia was significantly higher compared with healthy individuals and were linearly associated with viral load and lung injury [13] . based on this, it can be postulated that sars-cov-2 binding to ace2 may attenuate residual ace2 activity, skewing the ace/ace2 balance to a state of heightened angiotensin ii activity leading to pulmonary vasoconstriction and inflammatory and oxidative organ damage, which increases the risk for acute lung injury [17] .microscopic findings included diffuse alveolar damage with exudates [18] . the inflammation was predominantly lymphocytic, and multinucleated giant cells were seen alongside large atypical pneumocytes, although no definitive viral inclusions were noted [19] .this study included published 16 case reports (n = 22), patients were from china, korea, taiwan, canada, and the us. all patients with 2019-ncov were studied for the development of pneumonia. patients were males (n = 13) and females (n = 9) with an age range from 10 to 75 years.the most common clinical presentation of 2019-ncov infection includes fever, fatigue, and dry cough; some patients present with nasal congestion, runny nose, myalgia, and chills. headache, confusion, chest tightness, pleuritic chest discomfort, rhinorrhea, sore throat, hemoptysis, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, constipation, and diarrhea have been reported but are less common [9, 10, [20] [21] [22] . some patients with 2019-ncov have experienced gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea and nausea, prior to developing fever and lower respiratory tract signs and symptoms [14] . in one case report, the patient complained of psychiatric symptoms, such as depression, insomnia, and suicidal thoughts after isolation, due to stress regarding people's reactions from the media reports about the 2019-ncov patients [23] .most patients came to visit the outpatient clinic and/or emergency department (ed) after three to five days of onset of symptoms. in some patients' symptoms gradually worsened with exertional dyspnea, high-grade fever, and type i respiratory failure [10, 20, 24] . in severe cases, dyspnea usually occurs one week after the onset of symptoms, and some patients can rapidly progress in 8-12 days to ards. the disease course of 2019-ncov pneumonia was similar in most cases with the exception of two patients with severe 2019-ncov pneumonia who developed complications such as ards, septic shock, and multiple organ dysfunction syndromes (mods) requiring non-invasive ventilation [22, 25] . there was one case from korea of a 10-year-old girl, who was in close contact with her uncle and mother who were confirmed to have 2019-ncov. she presented with mild pneumonia on chest ct and recovered completely by only placing her in a negative isolation unit [12] .in patients with a history of fever, cough, or contact with the epidemic area combined with significant chest ct findings, timely detection of the 2019-ncov is required to ensure early diagnosis, isolation, and treatment [8] . during the early stages of infection, one cannot predict progression from upper respiratory infection to severe 2019-ncov pneumonia. considering this, it is safer to do a 2019-ncov screening test for all symptomatic patients with epidemiological risk than to wait until full-blown pneumonia develops [9] .chest ct scan is a highly sensitive diagnostic tool to detect pneumonia because the chest x-ray (cxr) could be normal in those patients with mild or no symptoms. the most common finding on chest ct was ground-glass opacities, involving bilateral lungs with peripheral distribution noted in most patients; interlobular septal thickening and consolidation are common associated findings. as 2019-ncov pneumonia progresses, an increase in size and density of the ground-glass opacities or crazy-paving patterns were reported [24] . one case demonstrated that the ground-glass opacities and consolidations will decrease in size as a patient recovers, though the fibrotic changes may remain as a sequela after recovery [20] . subpleural opacities were also observable with lesions limited to lower lobe lung [8, 9, 12, [26] [27] [28] . with a highresolution chest ct, it will be easier to find ground-glass opacities in the early stage [26] .a few cases reported abnormalities on chest ct when cxr was normal, which led to an early diagnosis [9, 23, 26] . however, the chest ct imaging pattern is non-specific and overlaps with other infections, making the diagnostic value of chest ct imaging for 2019-ncov low and dependent upon interpretations from individual radiologists [29] . chest ct should not be used as a first-line test for screening or diagnosis and should be reserved for hospitalized, symptomatic patients with specific clinical indications. given the variability in chest imaging findings, chest radiograph or chest ct alone is not recommended for the diagnosis of 2019-ncov [22] . confirmation with the viral test is required, even if radiologic findings are suggestive of 2019-ncov on cxr or chest ct [30] .in throat-swab specimens from the upper respiratory tract that were obtained from all patients, 2019-ncov was confirmed by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) [10] . detection of sars-cov-2 rna in the blood may be a marker of severe illness [31] . sars-cov-2 rna has also been detected in stool samples. test for respiratory panel (including respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, rhinovirus, adenovirus, metapneumovirus, mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila, and cov strains like hku1, nl63, 229e, oc43) and influenza a and b were all negative [8, 10, 14, 21, 26] .lymphopenia is the most common lab finding in 2019-ncov patients. in one case, a detailed laboratory investigation revealed lymphopenia and elevated aspartate aminotransferase (ast), alanine aminotransferase (alt), c-reactive protein (crp), and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), which may be associated with greater illness severity [20, 22] . laboratory findings in one of the patients showed that there were elevated blood levels of crp, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), and d-dimer level [27] . some other findings on laboratory results were elevated creatine kinase (ck), elevated alkaline phosphatase (alp), increased level of hematocrit, increased neutrophil count, decreased lymphocyte count, increased lymphokine, and thrombocytopenia [14, 21, 24, 26] .the milder spectrum of pneumonia caused by 2019-ncov suggests that the identification of individuals who could be managed by being quarantined at home, rather than in a hospital, might be an important strategy for containing the 2019-ncov pandemic [21] . patients who have mild illness usually recover at home, with supportive care and isolation in accordance with guidelines. patients who have moderate or severe diseases are usually monitored in the hospital [32] . treatment modalities for all the patients included isolation in a negative pressure room and supportive care. such isolation rooms can control airflow to prevent viruses from escaping into the rest of the hospital. preferred empirical antibiotics were ceftriaxone, amoxicillin/clavulanate, and tabaxin, meropenem and linezolid, and antiviral medications included oseltamivir and ganciclovir, and interferon inhalation [20, 26, 27, 33, 34] .one of the cases that was tested positive for 2019-ncov was isolated in negative pressure room and treated with antiviral medication: lopinavir (lpv): 200 mg/capsule, ritonavir (rtv) 50 mg/capsule twice a day (bid). interestingly, the next day cov load monitored by quantitative real-time rt-pcr decreased significantly to no detectable titers [23] . one study found that four 2019-ncov positive patients were administered antiviral treatment, including lpv/rtv, arbidol, and shufeng jiedu capsule (sfjdc, a traditional chinese medicine) and supplemental oxygen. after the treatment, three patients gained significant improvement in pneumonia symptoms, and routine blood analysis revealed that leukocytes and lymphocytes were increased indicating restoration of the immune system, and they were confirmed 2019-ncov negative and discharged. only one of the four patients developed severe pneumonia and received immunoglobulin therapy with intubated ventilator-assisted breathing therapy due to refractory low blood oxygen pressure, and this patient also showed signs of clinical improvement [22] .one of the cases received supportive treatment initially and later on received vancomycin and cefepime. this patient developed severe pneumonia with high 2019-ncov viral load, and so received antiviral therapy with intravenous remdesivir (a novel nucleotide analog prodrug in development) on day 7, and the next day, patient's clinical condition significantly improved [14] . when lpv/rtv was used in high-risk groups of 2019-ncov pneumonia, it showed reduced viral loads and improvement in clinical symptoms during the treatment [23] . lpv/rtv regimen has shown substantial clinical benefit in china and is currently recommended along with sfjdc by national health commission of the people's republic of china [35] . however, observational studies done during an epidemic often do not have concurrent controls, have a significant risk of bias, and use surrogate outcomes like viral clearance rather than patientimportant outcomes [36] . most of the patients in our systematic review demonstrated a good prognosis with no complications. however, two patients had developed ards and mods. all the patients, at the end of hospitalization, were cured and discharged in stable condition.currently, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) panel recommends against the use of combination of lpv/rtv or other human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) protease inhibitors for the treatment of 2019-ncov pneumonia, except in the context of a clinical trial [37] . on the contrary, remdesivir has been recently recognized as a promising antiviral drug against a wide array of rna viruses (including sars/mers-cov5) infection in cultured cells, mice, and non-human primate models [38] . in vitro studies showed that remdesivir can inhibit sars-cov and mers-cov replication, and in an in vitro test utilizing epithelial cell cultures of a primary human airway, remdesivir was effective against bat-cov, pre-pandemic bat-cov, and circulating contemporary human-cov in primary human lung cells. remdesivir improved pulmonary function, reduced lung viral loads, and ameliorated severe lung pathology [39] . in contrast, prophylactic lpv/rtv-interferon-β (ifn-β) reduced viral loads and did not impact other disease parameters, and therapeutic lpv/rtv-ifn-β improved pulmonary function but did not reduce virus replication or severe lung pathology. overall, these results indicated that remdesivir showed more potential than lpv/rtv-ifn-β for treating mers-cov infections [40] . also, a systematic review on acute respiratory distress patients, who were positive for 2019-ncov, was managed with lpv/rtv with or without oseltamivir, out of which the majority of them showed significant improvement [41] .patients with advanced 2019-ncov pneumonia who received remdesivir recovered faster than similar patients who received a placebo, according to a preliminary data analysis from the first randomized controlled trial (rct) involving 1,063 patients in the us [42] . recently, the us food and drug administration (fda) issued an emergency use authorization (eua) allowing for remdesivir to be distributed in the us and administered by healthcare providers, as appropriate, to treat suspected or confirmed 2019-ncov positive adults and children with severe disease [43] .an overview of the included case reports is shown in table 1 .park et al. [12] 10-year-old qin [27] 46-year-old the results of our systematic review of published case reports of pneumonia in 2019-ncov positive patients will help healthcare professionals to understand the pathophysiology and transmission, clinical presentation, imaging and laboratory findings, and treatment. most patients presented with fever, fatigue, and dry cough; some present with nasal congestion, runny nose, myalgia, and chills. the most common finding on chest ct was ground-glass opacities, involving bilateral lungs with the peripheral distribution. lymphopenia was the most common lab finding, and along with other inflammatory markers in patients with greater illness severity. the use of lpv/rtv and remdesivir was associated with significant clinical improvement in severe pneumonia. nonetheless, we need more rcts and treatment guidelines for developing effective management of the 2019-ncov and improve patient outcomes by reducing mortality in high-risk patients.is the remdesivir a definitive treatment regimen for covid-19?regrettably, the current assessment of remdesivir does not seem to be entirely positive.the first full-scale clinical trial of remdesivir was conducted in china from february to march 2020, and the results were very disappointing. it did not significantly reduce covid-19 disease duration and mortality. moreover, a number of serious side effects occurred quite a bit, and the clinical trial had to be terminated early. 2 on the other hand, a clinical trial conducted in the united states produced relatively favorable result. 3 in remdesivir group, time to recovery was shortened compared with that of the placebo group. however, the mortality was not significantly different between the two groups.taken together, the results suggest that remdesivir shortens the duration of the disease, but does not affect prognosis significantly.then, is the remdesivir less valuable as a covid-19 treatment?i cannot conclude that it is.from a practical standpoint, covid-19 pandemic is still not suppressed, so it is inevitable to try drugs that could work.several drugs have been suggested, but at this point remdesivir is worth trying as a solution.remdesivir is undergoing clinical trials in a few medical institutions in korea, and recently received emergency approval by the korean ministry of food and drug safety.unlike the precedent of oseltamivir used during the swine flu pandemic in 2009, however, remdesivir is not expected to have the effect of lowering the rate of propagation and reducing the incidence by administering to all patients in the early stage of covid-19 pandemic.it should not be forgotten that remdesivir was not originally designed to target covid-19. it is an antiviral drug originally designed to treat hepatitis c, ebola, and marburg virus.since there is no specific targeting drug to use right now, it is only a repurposed drug used on the basis of the mechanism of action. therefore, don't expect miracles about remdesivir's performance and lower expectations.in a word, at least now remdesivir is not a magic panacea. even if remdesivir has a strong effect, we will need to find a partner or partners with something synergistic. eventually, a definite antiviral treatment strategy for covid-19 should be an appropriate and effective combination regimen.until the regimen is established, optimism for remdesivir should be avoided for the time being.the pandemic of corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by sars-cov-2 has become a global crisis. the replication of sars-cov-2 requires the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), a target of the antiviral drug, remdesivir. here we report the cryo-em structure of the sars-cov-2 rdrp either in the apo form at 2.8 å resolution or in complex with a 50-base template-primer rna and remdesivir at 2.5 å resolution. the complex structure reveals that the partial double-stranded rna template is inserted into the central channel of the rdrp where remdesivir is covalently incorporated into the primer strand at the first replicated base pair and terminates chain elongation. our structures provide critical insights into the mechanism of viral rna replication and a rational template for drug design to combat the viral infection. polymerization activity on a poly-u template upon addition of adenosine triphosphate (atp) (fig. 1 , b and c). this rna polymerization activity was effectively inhibited by the addition of the active triphosphate form of remdesivir (rtp) (fig.  1d) . even in the presence of 10 mm atp, 1 mm rtp completely inhibited rdrp polymerization activity. in contrast, remdesivir, as a prodrug, at 5 mm concentration, did not have any inhibitory effect on the polymerization activity of the purified enzyme ( fig. s1f ), neither did remdesivir in its monophosphate form (rmp) (fig. s1g ).the purified rdrp complex is relatively thermostable with a melting temperature of 53°c ( fig. s1h ). negative-stain em visualization of the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex displayed monodispersed particles with excellent homogeneity (fig. s1i). for the apo nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex, we vitrified the sample in the presence of the detergent ddm. the initial attempt at image processing revealed that the particles are preferentially oriented ( fig. s2a ). therefore, we collected over 7,400 micrograph movies of more than 5.7 million particle projections to increase the number of projection from the non-preferential orientation. of these, 81,494 particles were used to yield a density map of 2.8 å resolution ( fig. s2 , b and e). cryo-em studies of the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 complex bound with the template-primer rna and rtp (termed as the template-rtp rdrp complex) faced two challenges ( fig. s3 ). first, most particles were adsorbed to cryo-em grid bars rather than staying in the vitreous ice. second, the rna duplex were dissociated from the template-rtp rdrp complex likely due to conditions of cryo-em specimen preparation. eventually, we prepared the cryo-em specimen of the template-rtp rdrp complex at 15 mg/ml, much higher than normal concentrations used for em studies of soluble protein complexes. the high concentration of the complex has a mass action effect to stabilize the rna-protein complex and has excess amount of the complex to escape the absorption of cryo-em grid bars to enter the vitreous ice ( fig. s3 ). we collected 2,886 micrograph movies, which yielded a 2.5 å resolution structure using 130,386 particle projections. because of the relatively high resolution of our structure, the em map is clear for key structural features across the complex ( fig. s4 , a to f).the structure of the apo rdrp complex contains one nsp12, one nsp7 and two nsp8, with an overall arrangement resembling those seen in sars-cov and the recently solved structure of sars-cov-2 (15, 23) (fig. 2, a and b) . different from the sars-cov rdrp structure but similar to the recent sars-cov-2 rdrp structure, our structure reveals that nsp12 also contains an n-terminal β-hairpin (residues 31-50) and an extended nidovirus rdrp-associated nucleotidyl-transferase domain (niran, residues 115-250) (24) , with seven helices and three β-strands (15, 23) . following the niran domain is an interface domain (residues 251-365) composed of three helices and five β-strands, which is connected to the rdrp domain (residues 366-920) (figs. 1a and 2b). the nsp12 rdrp domain displays the canonical cupped right-handed configuration (25) , with the finger subdomain (resides 397-581 and residues 621-679) forming a closed circle with the thumb subdomain (residues 819-920) (fig. 2, a and b) . the closed conformation is stabilized by the binding of nsp7 and nsp8, with one nsp8 molecule sitting on the top of the finger subdomain and interacting with the interface domain. the closed conformation of nsp12 is further stabilized by the nsp7-nsp8 heterodimer, which is packed against the thumb-finger interface (fig. 2, a and b ). in addition, we were able to assign two zinc ions in the conserved metal binding motifs composed by h295-c301-c306-c310 and c487-h642-c645-c646 (fig. 2c) , which are also observed in the sars-cov rdrp structure (15) . these zinc ions likely serve as conserved structural components in maintaining the integrity of the rdrp architecture.the structure of the template-rtp rdrp complex contains one nsp12, one nsp7 and one nsp8 (fig. 3 , a and b). the second nsp8 was largely invisible in the em map of the template-rtp complex ( fig. s4c ), therefore it was not included in the final model. in addition, the template-rtp rdrp structure contains 14-base rna in the template strand, 11-base rna in the primer strand, and the inhibitor remdesivir in its monophosphate form (rmp) (fig. 3 , c and d), which is covalently linked to the primer strand, as well as a pyrophosphate and three magnesium ions that may serve as catalytic ions near the active site ( fig. 3d and fig. s4 , d to f) (26) .the overall structure of the template-rtp rdrp complex is similar to the apo rdrp structure, with nsp12 in a closed conformation (figs. 2a and 3a). the double-stranded rna helix, formed by 11 base-pairs from the template-primer rna (figs. 3c and 4, a to e), is held by the finger-palm-thumb subdomains. extensive protein-rna interactions are observed between the template-primer rna and nsp12, with a total of 29 residues from nsp12 directly participating in the binding of the rna (fig. 4e) . surprisingly no rna interactions are mediated by nsp7 or nsp8 although these two proteins are required for rna binding by rdrp. most protein-rna interactions involve the rna phosphate-ribose backbones, with many interactions directly to 2′-oh groups (fig.  4e ), thus providing a basis to distinguish rna from dna. there are no contacts from nsp12 to any base pairs of the template-primer rna, suggesting a sequence independent binding of rna by rdrp. this is consistent with the fact that no specific sequence is required for the enzymatic activity of rdrp at the elongation step.at the 3′ end of the primer strand is remdesivir monophosphate (rmp) (figs. 3d and 4, d and e, and fig. s4 , e and f), which is covalently incorporated into the primer strand at the +1 position (fig. 4e) . additional nucleotides at the +2 and +3 positions of the template strand interact with residues from the back of finger subdomain (fig. 4, a the presence of excess rtp in complex assembly, only a single rmp is assembled into the primer strand as observed in the structure. thus, remdesivir, like many nucleotide analog prodrugs, inhibits the viral rdrp activity through non-obligate rna chain termination, a mechanism that requires the conversion of the parent drug to the active triphosphate form (27, 28) . the rmp position is at the center of the catalytic active site (fig. 3d) . as an adenosine monophosphate analog, rmp forms base-stacking interactions with upstream base from the primer strand and two hydrogen bonds with the uridine base from the template strand ( fig. 3d and fig. s5 ). in addition, rmp also forms interactions with side chains from k545 and r555. near the bound rmp are two magnesium ions and a pyrophosphate. both magnesium ions interact with the phosphate diester backbone and they are part of catalytic active site. the pyrophosphate is at the gate of the nucleotide entry channel to the active site and may block the entry of nucleotide triphosphate to the active side (fig. 3, c and d) .the catalytic active site of the nsp12 rdrp is constructed by seven conserved motifs from a to g (figs. 1a and 3e and  fig. s6 ). motifs abcd are from the palm subdomain with an sdd sequence (residues 759-761) in motif c forming the catalytic active center (fig. 3d) . both d760 and d761 are involved in coordination of the two magnesium ions at the catalytic center. motifs f and g are located within the finger subdomain and they interact with the template strand rna and direct this strand into the active site (fig. 3e) . motif f also interacts with the primer strand rna with the side chains of k545 and r555 contacting the +1 base (fig. 3d) , thus stabilizing the incoming nucleotide in the correct position for catalysis. the orientation of template-primer rna in the active site is similar to the orientation of template-primer rna in the poliovirus rdrp elongation complex (29) and the hcv ns5b rdrp inhibitor complex (30) (fig. s7 ). the residues involved in rna binding as well as residues comprising the catalytic active site are highly conserved (31, 32), highlighting the conserved mechanism of genome replication by rdrp in these diverse rna viruses, and suggesting it may be possible to develop broad spectrum antiviral inhibitors such as remdesivir (18) and galidesivir (bcx4430) (33) .structural comparison reveals several interesting differences between the apo and complex structures (fig. 3, e and  f, and fig. s8, a and b) . first, nsp7 moves toward the rdrp core by 1.5 å (as measured by nsp7 residue f49, fig. s8, a and  b ), leading to a rearrangement of the interface, which results in weaker association of the second nsp8 in the complex. second, the loop that connects the first and second helix of the thumb subdomain moves outward by 2.8 å (as measured by nsp12 residue i847) to accommodate the binding of the double stranded rna helix (fig. 3f) . third, motif g residues k500 and s501 also move outward by 2.0 å to accommodate the binding of the template strand rna. outside of these changes, the apo nsp12 and the rna-complex nsp12 are very similar, with an rmsd of 0.52 å for all cα atoms across the whole protein. in particular, the structural elements that make up the catalytic active site can be exactly superimposed (fig. 3e) , suggesting that the sars-cov-2 rdrp is a relatively stable enzyme that is ready to function as a replicase upon binding of rna template. viral rdrp is a highly processive enzyme with a rate of replication up to 100 nucleotides per second (34) . no significant conformational changes between the apo and the active enzyme structures are consistent with the high processivity of the viral rna polymerase, which does not need to consume additional energy for conformational changes in the active site during the replication cycle.besides remdesivir, several nucleotide analog drugs, including favipiravir, ribavirin, galidesivir, and eidd-2801, efficiently inhibit sars-cov-2 replication in cell-based assays (35, 36) . like remdesivir, these nucleotide analogs are proposed to inhibit the viral rdrp through non-obligate rna chain termination, a mechanism that requires the conversion of the parent compound to the triphosphate active form (33) . the structure of the template-rtp rdrp complex provides an excellent model to rationalize how these drugs inhibit the sars-cov-2 rdrp activity ( fig. s8c ). in particular, eidd-2801 has been shown to be 3-10 times more potent than remdesivir in blocking sars-cov-2 replication (36) . the n4 hydroxyl group off the cytidine ring forms an extra hydrogen bond with the side chain of k545 and cytidine base also forms an extra hydrogen bond with the guanine base from the template strand. these two extra hydrogen bonds may explain the apparent higher potency of eidd-2801 in inhibiting sars-cov-2 replication.the covid-19 pandemic has inflicted emotional pain and economic burden across the globe. enzymes that are vital for the viral life cycle are excellent antiviral drug targets as they are different from the host proteins. among viral enzymes, rdrp is the major target of many existing nucleotide drugs. in this paper, we report the structure of the sars-cov-2 rdrp complex in the apo form and in the complex with a template-primer rna and the active form of remdesivir. the structures reveal how the template-primer rna is recognized by the enzyme and how chain elongation is inhibited by remdesivir. structure comparison and sequence alignment suggest that the mode of substrate rna recognition and remdesivir inhibition of rdrp is highly conserved in diverse rna viruses, providing a basis for designing broad spectrum antiviral drugs based on nucleotide analogs. moreover, our structures provide a solid template for modeling and modifying the existing nucleotide drugs, including the highly potent eidd-2801. together, these observations provide a rational basis to design even more potent inhibitors to combat the vicious infection of sars-cov-2. to view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. this license does not apply to figures/photos/artwork or other content included in the article that is credited to a third party; obtain authorization from the rights holder before using such material. andrea j pruijssers 1,2 and mark r denison 1, 2, 3 recent outbreaks of sars-coronavirus and mers-coronavirus (cov) have heightened awareness about the lack of vaccines or antiviral compounds approved for prevention or treatment of human or potential zoonotic covs. anti-cov drug development has long been challenged by the activity of a 3 0 to 5 0 proofreading exoribonuclease unique to covs. recently, a promising nucleoside analogue with broad-spectrum activity against covs has been identified. this review will discuss progress made in the development of antiviral nucleoside and nucleotide analogues targeting viral rna synthesis as effective therapeutics against cov infections and propose promising strategies for combination therapy.coronaviruses (covs) are a family of enveloped viruses containing a positive-sense rna genome. covs belong to the family coronaviridae within the order nidovirales. the coronaviridae, henceforth referred to as covs, infect a broad range of vertebrates including mammals and birds. of the six cov strains isolated from humans, four strains (hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, and hcov-oc43) cause a usually mild self-limiting upper respiratory infection accounting for an estimated 15-29% of common colds [1] . two other human cov strains have produced more serious respiratory disease epidemics in recent years. severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov originated in china in 2002 and 2003 and spread to a total of 37 countries, causing more than 8000 cases of sars with an estimated fatality rate of 9% [2] . the cause of an ongoing epidemic of middle east respiratory syndrome, mers-cov was first identified in saudi arabia in 2012 and to date has caused more than 2374 cases in 27 countries with a fatality rate >34% [3, 4] . the use of human host cell receptors by both human and bat covs supports predictions of significant risk for emergence of new potential pandemic zoonotic covs [5, 6] . notably, no vaccines or antiviral compounds are approved for prevention or treatment of human or potential zoonotic covs. emerging covs have been accorded priority status by who and government agencies for development of prevention and treatment strategies due to severity of these infections and credible pandemic potential [7] [8] [9] . this review will focus on opportunities for and challenges to development of antiviral nucleoside and nucleotide analogues targeting viral rna synthesis as effective therapeutics against cov infections.drugs currently under investigation for use against cov disease include monoclonal antibodies; direct-acting antivirals (daas) including as protease, helicase, and polymerase inhibitors; and immunomodulators such as interferons and corticosteroids. challenges to cov antivirals development are both general to rna viruses and specific to covs. the replication of positive-sense rna virus genomes is generally characterized by high error rates, high viral yields, short replication times, and abundant homologous and nonhomologous recombination [10] . in consequence, 'viral swarms' are generated which consist of a diverse population of genome mutants with varying degrees of fitness. this genetic plasticity challenges development of broadly useful antivirals by enabling rapid development of drug resistance while preserving overall viral fitness.development of nucleoside analogue inhibitors of covs is further hampered by the novel rna-dependent rna proofreading activity of cov nonstructural protein 14, a 3 0 to 5 0 exoribonuclease (nsp14-exon), which confers up to 20-fold increase in replication fidelity compared with other rna viruses. the nsp14-exon activity is responsible for native cov high resistance to many nucleoside analogues including ribavirin and 5-fluorouracil [11] [12] [13] . nevertheless, the recent development of nucleotide and nucleoside analogue inhibitors with a high barrier for resistance, broad-spectrum activity against multiple covs, and the ability to inhibit wt covs in the presence of nsp14-exon holds promise for the treatment of cov disease.nucleotide and nucleoside analogue inhibitors, hereafter abbreviated ni, are chemically synthesized analogues of purines and pyrimidines in which the heterocyclic ring or sugar moiety has been altered. currently used to treat both chronic and acute viral infections, nis are administered as nucleotide or nucleoside precursors or prodrugs, which are metabolized by host or viral kinases to their active triphosphate once inside the cell.nis exert inhibitory effects on viral replication by one or more non-mutually exclusive mechanisms ( figure 1 ). first, mis-incorporation of foreign nucleotides in replicating viral genomes may cause chain termination and disrupt subsequent replication or transcription. chain termination may be immediate (obligate) or may occur following a limited extent of continued rna or dna synthesis (non-obligate). second, nis may incorporate into elongating nucleotide chains, mispairing with and/or substituting natural nucleotides, thereby introducing mutations that potentially impair rna synthesis, structure, or rna-protein interactions or protein functions. accumulation of mutations and loss of virus viability are referred to as lethal mutagenesis and error catastrophe [14] . through these mechanisms, nis alter the genetic makeup of the virus, leading to a decrease in viral fitness with every consecutive replication cycle. finally, nis may cause depletion of pools of naturally occurring nucleotides by mimicking [15] .nis demonstrate a relatively high barrier to resistance emergence because the structural conservation of the binding site of their polymerase targets is high among virus families, and resistance mutations generally incur a fitness cost for the enzyme and the virus [16] . for covs, amino acid conservation of the viral rdrp ranges from 70 to near 100% and is maintained across genera, suggesting nis could potentially serve as broad-spectrum inhibitors of cov infection [17 ] . however, proofreading activity of nsp14-exon activity protects covs from many nis effective against other rna viruses [12, 18] . to effectively inhibit covs, an ni needs to either evade recognition by 58 antiviral strategies mechanisms of inhibition by nucleoside and nucleotide analogues. schematic representation illustrates normal replication by the rdrp (blue sphere), premature chain termination caused by an obligate chain terminator, reduced replication fidelity due to mutagen incorporation, and depletion of pools of naturally occurring nucleotides.exon or undergo uptake into the elongating strand at a rate exceeding exon excision kinetics. we will next discuss several antiviral nis described in the literature and evidence supporting their efficacy against covs.ribavirin (1-b-d-ribofuranosyl-1, 2,4-triazole-3-carboxyamide) is a guanosine analogue with broad-spectrum antiviral activity against rna viruses. it is used to treat hepatitis c and e virus, respiratory syncytial virus, lassa virus, and hantavirus infections. in its monophosphate form, ribavirin interactions with inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (impdh), a host enzyme vital to nucleotide biosynthesis, result in decreased guanosine production leading to inhibition of viral rna synthesis though depletion of cellular gtp pools [19] . furthermore, incorporation of its triphosphate form by the viral polymerase leads to lethal mutagenesis [20] . the proofreading activity of exon leaves covs impervious to doses of ribavirin that inhibit other viruses effectively [12] . although high dose ribavirin showed partial inhibition of sars-cov and mers-cov replication in vitro (table 1) [18, 21] , drug treatment increased viral load and exacerbated disease in a mouse model of sars-cov disease [22] . ribavirin treatment did not improve the clinical outcome of sars-cov disease in human subjects and caused significant toxicity [23, 24] . synergistic activity against mers-cov of ribavirin combined with ifna2b was observed in vitro and in rhesus macaques, suggesting that ifn increases the potency of ribavirin at lower, more tolerable concentrations [25, 26] . however, five critically ill mers-cov-positive patients who were treated with a combination of ribavirin and ifna2b showed no clinical improvement [27] . treatment of 20 mers patients with a combination of ribavirin and ifna2a showed significantly improved survival at 14 days but not at 28 days [28] , whereas treatment of mers patients with a combination of ifna2a or ifnb1a and ribavirin yielded no survival benefit in another study [29] . thus, although ribavirin shows some efficacy in vitro, it does not provide clinical benefit to humans with sars-cov or mers-cov infections.remdesivir (gilead science (gs)-5734) is a phosphoramidate prodrug of the adenosine ni gs-441524 which is effective against filoviruses, pneumoviruses, and paramyxoviruses and is currently in a phase i dose-escalation trial for ebola virus infection [30] . biochemical studies indicate that remdesivir acts as a non-obligate chain terminator [31] . remdesivir is effective against a broad spectrum of human and pre-epidemic zoonotic covs and potently inhibits replication of sars-cov and mers-cov in primary human airway epithelial cultures (table 1 ) [17 ,32 ] . mice infected with a lethal dose of sars-cov displayed less weight loss, lower lung viral titer, and reduced lung pathology following prophylactic or therapeutic administration of remdesivir [17 ] . a partial resistance phenotype was attributed to two mutations in the viral rdrp, suggesting remdesivir acts on this target [32 ] . importantly, the fitness and virulence of remdesivir-resistant sars-cov was reduced compared to wt sars-cov, indicating the barrier to remdesivir resistance is high [17 ] . increased potency of remdesivir against cov lacking exon catalytic activity suggests that the drug is sensitive to proofreading by exon, albeit to a markedly lower extent than other nis [32 ] . this raises important questions about the mechanism of cov inhibition by remdesivir, which may be recognized by exon but removed less efficiently or may be less visible to exon compared with other nis. studies probing the interactions between remdesivir and the cov replication machinery will likely yield crucial insights into how this ni circumvents or overcomes cov proofreading activity, which can in turn be applied to modeling the development of new nis and enhancing potency of existing nis.beta-d-n4-hydroxycytidine (nhc): nhc is a cytidine analogue that has demonstrated potent, broad-spectrum antiviral activity against venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (veev), respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a virus (iav), influenza b virus (ibv), chikungunya virus (chikv), and covs (table 1) . nhc exerts its antiviral effect primarily through mutagenesis of viral rna [22,33,34,35 ,36] . serial passaging in the presence of nhc led to low level resistance for veev but not rsv, iav, and bovine viral diarrhea virus, thus indicating a high resistance barrier [33,35 ,37] . potent anti-cov activity of nhc was demonstrated for sars-cov and hcov-nl63 [36, 38] . although the mechanism of cov inhibition has not been determined, micromolar-range ec 50 s suggests that like remdesivir, nhc may also have a novel way of interacting with the cov replicase. the coronavirus antiviral nucleoside analogues pruijssers and denison 59 table 1 nucleoside analogues with demonstrated activity against human covs potent, broad-spectrum antiviral activity exhibited by nhc warrants further investigation into use of nhc for the treatment of cov infections, either alone or in combination with other daas and immunomodulators.other nis with in vitro activity against covs and low cytotoxicity include the adenosine analogue bcx4430, which has broad spectrum activity against positive and negative sense rna viruses and has shown antiviral activity against mers-cov and sars-cov [31, 39] ; the deoxycytidine analogue gemcitabine hydrochloride, a chemotherapy drug that inhibits sars-cov and mers-cov [40] ; the uridine analogue 6-azauridine with activity against hcov-nl63 [36] ; and the immunosuppressant imidazole nucleoside mizoribine which inhibits sars-cov (table 1 ) [18] . flex-base modification of the guanosine analog acyclovir (acyclovir fleximer) yielded activity against hcov-nl63 and mers-cov (table 1 ) [41] . more research into the efficacy, potency, and mechanism of cov inhibition is necessary to determine whether further development of these compounds as cov antivirals is warranted.as with sars-cov and mers-cov, new zoonotic covs likely will emerge from divergent virus pools in animal reservoirs. it is therefore critical to develop broad-spectrum anti-cov strategies aimed at multiple conserved targets and functions. despite high conservation of the viral rdrp and low tolerance for mutations at key residues, resistance against nis due to mutations in the viral rdrp has been observed in covs and other rna viruses [32 ,42,43 ,44,45] . treatment with combinations of potent anti-cov nis could increase the barrier to resistance and enhance efficacy, especially if additive or synergistic interactions occur. moreover, a therapeutic regimen that combines drugs with distinct modes of action or which interfere at different steps in the viral replication cycle could simultaneously increase antiviral potency, broaden the activity spectrum, and reduce the emergence of drug resistance against covs. classes of candidate companion compounds include nis, helicase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, viral entry inhibitors, and deddh family exoribonuclease inhibitors with potential activity against exon [46,47 ,48] , the latter deserving special interest. deddh inhibitors aurintricarboxylic acid and pontacyl violet 6r effectively inhibited lassa virus np exonuclease in a proof-of-concept biochemical assay [48] . the structural and functional conservation across cov family members and the absence of redundant functions elsewhere in the genome makes exon a potential achilles' heel. combining compounds that inhibit exon activity with one or more nis would simultaneously reduce cov replication fidelity, boost the potency of the ni, mitigate selective pressures leading to drug resistance, and ultimately attenuate viral disease.finally, both sars-cov and mers-cov infections spur exuberant host inflammatory responses that rapidly progress toward severe immunopathology, the most probable driver of morbidity and death rather than direct viral damage to pulmonary tissues [49] . this potentially limits the therapeutic window for daas. thus, combinations of daas and targeted immunomodulators may be necessary to halt lethal progression of immunopathology and extend the therapeutic window for intervention. a multicenter, placebo-controlled, double-blind randomized trial (mir-acle: nct02845843) is currently in progress to determine the efficacy of combining the immunomodulator ifnb1b with lopinavir-ritonavir, a protease inhibitor cocktail used to treat hiv that also inhibits mers-cov in vitro [50] . adequately controlled prospective studies like miracle are urgently needed to assess efficacy of candidate cov drugs. these studies should include compounds that have demonstrated broad-spectrum in vivo efficacy against covs, such as remdesivir, knowing that additional novel zoonotic covs are an inevitable future occurrence.nothing declared.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the cause of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), has spread across the globe resulting in a pandemic. at the time of this review, covid-19 has been diagnosed in more than 200 000 patients and associated with over 8000 deaths (centers for disease control and prevention, world health organization). on behalf of the society of infectious diseases pharmacists, we herein summarize the current evidence as of march 18, 2020 to provide guidance on potential covid-19 treatment options. it is important to caution readers that new data emerges daily regarding clinical characteristics, treatment options, and outcomes for covid-19. optimized supportive care remains the mainstay of therapy, and the clinical efficacy for the subsequent agents is still under investigation. antimicrobial stewardship programs, including infectious diseases pharmacists and physicians, are at the forefront of covid-19 emergency preparedness. we encourage all readers to continue to assess clinical data as it emerges and share their experience within our community in a well-controlled, adequately powered fashion.coronavirus disease 2019 treatment: a review of early and emerging optionsin december 2019, several patients in wuhan, hubei, china were diagnosed with pneumonia secondary to an unknown virus. in response, an epidemiological alert was placed with the world health organization (who) dated december 31, 2019. by january 7, 2020 chinese scientists had isolated severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1] . in the months that followed, sars-cov-2, the cause of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , spread across the globe resulting in the current pandemic. at the time of this review, covid-19 has been diagnosed in more than 245 000 patients and associated with over 10 000 deaths (centers for disease control and prevention [cdc] , who).on behalf of the society of infectious diseases pharmacists, we herein summarize the current evidence as of march 19, 2020 to provide guidance on potential covid-19 treatment options. it is important to caution readers that new data emerges approximately every hour regarding clinical characteristics, treatment options, and outcomes for covid-19. optimized supportive care remains the mainstay of therapy, and the clinical efficacy for the subsequent agents is still under investigation. most existing preclinical and clinical data on antiviral therapy are derived from other viruses, including sars-cov-1 (first reported in 2003), middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus ([mers-cov] first reported in 2012), and non-coronaviruses (eg, ebola virus disease). it is unclear how well these data can be extrapolated to sars-cov-2. furthermore, the clinical relevance of antiviral in vitro activity (defined as half-maximal effective concentration [ec 50 ] values) remains unclear given an absence of pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic or clinical data that equates achievable exposures relative to these values to a treatment effect. finally, in vitro data should be compared cautiously across studies given the potential variability in testing methodologies that could impact perceived activity.antimicrobial stewardship programs, including infectious diseases pharmacists and physicians, are at the forefront of covid-19 emergency preparedness [2] . we encourage all readers to continue to assess clinical data as it emerges and share their experience within our community, preferentially evaluating these agents in the context of randomized, controlled trials.gilead sciences, inc. in response to the ebola outbreak in west africa from 2014 to 2016. in its active triphosphate nucleoside form, remdesivir binds to ribonucleic acid (rna)-dependent rna polymerase and acts as an rna-chain terminator. it displays potent in vitro activity against sars-cov-2 with an ec 50 at 48 hours of 0.77 µm in vero e6 cells [3] . similar activity has been demonstrated against other zoonotic coronaviruses with ec 50 values of 0.07 µm demonstrated for both sars-cov-1 and mers-cov [3] [4] [5] [6] . remdesivir is highly selective for viral polymerases and is therefore expected to have a low propensity to cause human toxicity. accordingly, sheahan et al [6] demonstrated a wide therapeutic index for remdesivir in a human airway epithelial cell model. the drug also displays a high genetic barrier to resistance in coronaviruses and has a long intracellular half-life that allows for once-daily dosing [7, 8] . the dose under investigation for treatment of covid-19 is 200 mg intravenously (iv) on day 1 followed by 100 mg iv daily for up to 10 days, infused over 30-60 minutes ( table 1) .the therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir was first described in an animal model against ebola among infected rhesus monkeys in which once-daily dosing resulted in suppression of viral replication and protection from lethal disease [9] . however, in a human study, remdesivir-treated patients with ebola experienced a 28-day mortality rate of 53% in a randomized controlled trial of 4 experimental therapies conducted in response to the democratic republic of congo outbreak of 2018, resulting in early termination of this study arm [10] . it is worth noting that this trial did not have an active control arm, and mortality rates for the other experimental treatments were 49.7% (zmapp), 35 .1% (mab114), and 33.5% (regn-eb3). against mers-cov, sheahan et al [5] evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir among infected mice and found treatment significantly reduced virus lung titers, weight loss, lung hemorrhage, and lung injury scores. the authors proposed the importance of early therapy initiation to diminish virus replication and promote pulmonary repair because remdesivir demonstrated less clinical benefit with high-titer virus inoculum. most notably, the authors also noted that prophylactic remdesivir diminished mers-cov replication and disease, which was similar to their findings in a murine model with sars-cov-1 [5, 6] .the first report of a remdesivir-treated patient with covid-19 in the united states was a 35-year-old male in snohomish county, washington who received treatment on hospital day 7 (illness day 11) due to developing pneumonia and persistent fevers [11] . the patient experienced clinical improvement and negativity of oropharyngeal swab on hospital day 8, although nasopharyngeal swab remained positive. no adverse events to remdesivir were reported for the patient, which is consistent with previous case reports of use in other viruses [12, 13] . among the first 12 patients confirmed by the cdc to have covid-19 in the united states, 3 were treated with remdesivir via compassionate use protocol [14] . all patients reported transient gastrointestinal symptoms and aminotransferase elevation. all patients are reportedly recovering, but the authors were unable to assess the efficacy or safety of remdesivir based on the lack of comparator and confounding treatments, including concomitant use of corticosteroids in one patient. there are 4 clinical trials currently enrolling patients in the united states (table 1) . two additional trials recruiting only in china have been registered on clinicaltrials.gov nct04257656 (severe disease) and nct04252664 (mild/moderate disease). remdesivir may also be obtained through compassionate use and the emergency investigational new drug (eind) application process. at the time of this review, requests for compassionate use must be submitted online via https://rdvcu.gilead. com/. compassionate use is only considered for hospitalized patients with polymerase chain reaction (pcr)-confirmed sars-cov-2 requiring mechanical ventilation in whom enrollment in a clinical trial is not feasible. patients are excluded from the compassionate use program if they do not meet the above criteria, have evidence of multiorgan failure, are receiving vasopressors for hypotension, have liver disease defined as alanine aminotransferase (alt) >5 × upper limit of normal (uln) or renal impairment defined as creatinine clearance (crcl) <30 ml/min, or receiving dialysis or continuous venovenous hemofiltration. inclusion and exclusion criteria for compassionate use may change, so applicants are encouraged to review the most up to date criteria for all potential patients. clinicians should be cognizant that it typically takes a minimum of 72 hours for institutions to receive emergency institutional review board authorization (if required), protocol, and consent forms from gilead, us food and drug administration (fda)-approval for the eind, and eventual drug shipment. clinicians should coordinate with their local information technology teams to build a medication order sentence into the electronic health record during this time. patients may receive other antiviral therapies during the waiting period but must immediately discontinue them if they receive remdesivir for compassionate use.it is interesting to note that the adaptive clinical trial protocol originally stated "remdesivir is a prodrug that is metabolized to its active form as a substrate of cyp-3a4". this implies the existence of a drug-drug interaction with cyp3a4 substrate inhibitors such as ritonavir or voriconazole. however, the protocol also stated "although remdesivir is a substrate for cyp2c8, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4 in vitro, coadministration with inhibitors of these cyp isoforms is unlikely to markedly increase remdesivir levels, as its metabolism is likely to be predominantly mediated by hydrolase activity." unlike the former, the latter statement is substantiated by well described chemistry of the molecule. the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases was contacted about this discrepancy and in collaboration with gilead, this has been corrected. there is no reason to believe that any significant drug interactions between remdesivir and cyp3a4 inhibitors or inducers are likely [8] .emerging clinical evidence and available in vitro data suggest remdesivir is a promising agent for the treatment of covid-19. institutions should explore clinical trial enrollment or compassionate use remdesivir for moderate-to-severe patients. additional clinical data are eagerly anticipated and should help further define the role of this agent in covid-19.chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of covid-19. in early february, wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against sars-cov-2 with an ec 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µm in vero e6 cells. these data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against sars-cov-1 and mers-cov in various cell lines, where ec 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µm were demonstrated, respectively [15] . these findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in china during this outbreak. although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-february that promising early results have been demonstrated. per gao et al [16] , "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the united states and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. as an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. in 2006, biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against sars-cov-1 in vero cells. the authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (ec 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µm) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (ec 50 of 34 ± 5 µm).against sars-cov-2, yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (pbpk) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. in vitro analyses in vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (ec 50 of 0.72 µm) was greater than that of chloroquine (ec 50 of 5.47 µm) against sars-cov-2 [18] .to inform optimal dosing of hydroxychloroquine, the investigators then performed pbpk modeling. in this analysis, the investigators utilized human population pharmacokinetic and rat lung penetration data for each compound to estimate free trough concentrations in the lung to ec 50 ratios (r ltec ) [18] . because 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily has been reported to demonstrate efficacy against sars-cov-2, the target r ltec for hydroxychloroquine regimens was set to ≥2.38 (day 1), 5.92 (day 3), and 18.9 (day 5), which were the r ltec values predicted with the "efficacious" 500 mg by mouth twicedaily dosing of chloroquine [16] . various dosing regimens were simulated, but 2 are particularly notable. the first was an oral loading dose of 1200 mg (divided 800 mg then 400 mg) on day 1, followed by 400 mg daily. this regimen led to significantly higher r ltec on day 1 (33.3), day 3 (55.1), and day 5 (103) than those values demonstrated with chloroquine. the second regimen was a loading dose of 800 mg (400 mg × 2) on day 1 followed by 200 mg twice daily. this was also associated with higher r ltec values than chloroquine on day 1, 3, and 5 (corresponding to 21.0, 38.9, and 85.4, respectively) [18] . the authors concluded that these data support the lower dose regimen because r ltec values were significantly higher than those with the "proven efficacious" regimen of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily. clinicians should note that both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have half-lives of ~40 days [19] , and therefore short durations would likely provide prolonged courses of therapy. this was exemplified in the pbpk modeling in which r ltec values with hydroxychloroquine were predicted to still be above the targeted efficacy threshold on day 10, even with a 5-day course of therapy.although these data are encouraging for the potential role of hydroxychloroquine against sars-cov-2, we caution against solely relying on these data to support dosing regimens for patients. the use of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily as the reference for efficacy is rational given initial reports from china [16] , but it is important to note that this dosing still requires validation, and the improved r ltec values reported are largely driven by the finding that hydroxychloroquine was 7.6 times more potent than chloroquine in vitro. although this enhanced potency may very well prove true as more data become available, this report is counter to the relative potency demonstrated with the structurally similar sars-cov-1 strain in 2006 in which chloroquine was approximately 5 times more potent than hydroxychloroquine. in addition, a recently published study has demonstrated that the ec 50 value for chloroquine is 1.13 µm [3] , similar to the value reported for hydroxychloroquine in the analysis by yao et al [18] .because there are currently no efficacy data available for hydroxychloroquine in covid-19, additional consideration should be given to the optimal dosing strategy. we use the following example to illustrate this point. if one were to consider these 2 compounds to be equally potent (identical ec 50 values) and utilize the pbpk data from yao et al [18] , the 800 mg load, 400 mg daily regimen for hydroxychloroquine would yield r ltec values of 2.76, 5.11, and 11.2 on day 1, 3, and 5, respectively. these r ltec values would be slightly lower than those achieved with 500 mg by mouth twice daily of chloroquine on day 3 and significantly lower than those on day 5, suggesting the potential need for a higher dose to have similar activity. although the 400 mg daily regimen is the most common regimen currently being assessed in clinical trials, the rationale for that dose is currently unclear, and at least 1 clinical trial in china is using a higher dose of 800 mg by mouth daily.to this point, gautret et al [20] recently published their initial experience on the impact of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine by mouth every 8 hours on viral eradication in patients with covid-19. the authors reported on 36 patients (20 hydroxychloroquine and 16 control) who were covid-19 positive and able to have nasopharyngeal sampling for the first 6 days of therapy (in the treated arm). the investigators demonstrated that hydroxychloroquine (14 of 20, 70%) was superior to standard of care (2 of 16, 12.5%; p = .001) in eradicating sars-cov-2 from the nasopharynx. it is interesting to note that 6 patients were prescribed azithromycin "to prevent bacterial super-infection" and the investigators found that viral eradication was numerically superior in this subgroup (6 of 6, 100%) compared with those who received hydroxychloroquine alone (8 of 14, 57%). the authors concluded that azithromycin "reinforced" the sars-cov-2 viral load achieved by hydroxychloroquine. although these data are intriguing, certain limitations to this data set must be acknowledged. first, although viral eradication is an important endpoint, the authors did not report clinical outcomes in these patients. second, the cohort initially contained 26 hydroxychloroquine patients, but 6 of them were removed from the analysis due to early cessation of hydroxychloroquine therapy including 3 pcr-positive patients who were transferred to the intensive care unit (icu), 1 pcr-negative patient who passed away, and 1 pcr-positive patient who discontinued hydroxychloroquine due to nausea. finally, the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy arm included patients with significantly higher viral loads, represented by lower cycle threshold (c t ) values than those who received combination therapy. if the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy patients with c t values <23 are separated from those with c t values ≥23, there is a notable discordance in viral eradication rates (1 of 5, 20% vs 7 of 9, 78%), with this latter number approaching the 6 of 6 demonstrated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin combination therapy in which all patients had c t values ≥23. given this finding, the small numbers in this study, the lack of clinical outcomes presented, the potential for additive toxicity with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, and the desperate need to practice good antimicrobial stewardship during the covid-19 pandemic, we would caution clinicians against using these data to support combination therapy.despite all of the unknowns, the initial experience in china is encouraging for the potential role of chloroquine, or alternatively hydroxychloroquine, for the management of covid-19. clinicians are encouraged to closely follow subsequent peer-reviewed publications from the ongoing chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine trials, because others have raised concerns regarding the apparent in vitro and/or in vivo discordance witnessed with chloroquine in other viral infections [21] . furthermore, if hydroxychloroquine is utilized, careful consideration for dose selection should be given in accordance with the aforementioned data, as well as considerations for when to initiate during the course of illness.lopinavir is a human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)-1 protease inhibitor administered in fixed-dose combination with ritonavir (lpv/r), a potent cyp3a4 inhibitor that "boosts" lopinavir concentrations. lopinavir seems to block the main protease of sars-cov-1, inhibiting viral replication [22] . in 2003, chu et al [23] evaluated a series of antivirals for in vitro activity against sars-cov-1. they reported lopinavir at 4 µg/ml and ribavirin at 50 µg/ml inhibited sars-cov-1 after 48 hours of incubation and that the agents were synergistic when used together [23] . de wilde et al [24] later described the antiviral activity of lopinavir against sars-cov-1 and demonstrated an ec 50 17.1 ± 1 in vero e6 cells, which is near the upper range of lpv plasma concentrations previously measured in patients with hiv [25] . sheahan et al [5] evaluated the in vitro efficacy of lpv/r in combination with interferon beta (infb) against mers-cov and found the addition of lpv/r did not significantly enhance antiviral activity of infb alone (ec 50 = 160 vs 175 iu/ml, respectively). they also described the ec 50 of lpv/r (8.5 µm) and lpv alone (11.6 µm), suggesting similar activity to that described for sars cov-1. despite in vitro activity against mers-cov, therapeutic doses of lpv/r + infb in mice models failed to reduce virus titer and exacerbated lung disease [5] . this is notable because this was the same study in which remdesivir demonstrated both more potent in vitro activity as well as in vivo efficacy. however, the in vivo animal data for mers-cov appears equivocal given that a nonhuman primate model demonstrated improved clinical and pathological features after lpv/r treatment [26] . a randomized controlled trial of lpv/r and recombinant interferon-β1b versus placebo is currently enrolling for patients with mers-cov, which might help clarify the apparent discrepancy between in vitro and animal models [27] .based on in vitro findings, chu et al [23] utilized combination therapy with lpv/r, ribavirin, and corticosteroids for any newly diagnosed patient with sars-cov-1 without acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) starting in april 2003. patients receiving lpv/r combination therapy (n = 41) were matched to historical patients receiving ribavirin plus corticosteroids (n = 111), and a significant reduction in the development of ards or death at 21 days was observed (2.4% vs 28.8%, p < .001). this was corroborated by an expanded case-control matched study of 75 lpv/r-treated patients from the same center that demonstrated a significant reduction in pulse steroid use (27.3% vs 55.4%), intubation (0% vs 11%), and mortality (2.3% vs 15.6%) among patients who received lpv/r combination versus no lpv/r, respectively, as initial therapy [28] . more important, the benefits of lpv/r were only demonstrated in patients who received initial treatment with lpv/r (defined as initiation of drug at time of sars-cov-1 diagnosis). there was no observed benefit when lpv/r was added as rescue or salvage therapy (death rate 12.9% vs 14%).this compelling mortality difference in sars-cov-1 and continued investigation in mers-cov led to inclusion of lpv/r in the chinese sars-cov-2 guidelines at a dose of 400 mg/100 mg (2 capsules/tablets) by mouth twice a day for no more than 10 days even though to our knowledge, no in vitro data for lpv/r in sars-cov-2 exist [29] . in pediatric patients weighing 15-40 kg, the recommended dose in the united states is 10 mg/kg suspension by mouth twice daily. there are 10 ongoing registered clinical trials in china, korea, thailand, and hong kong evaluating lpv/r as monotherapy or in combination with other antivirals (eg, ribavirin, interferon beta-1b) or traditional chinese medicine for treatment of covid-19.real-world data for treatment of covid-19 with lpv/r are emerging. young et al [30] reported outcomes of the first 18 patients infected with sars-cov-2 in singapore, 5 of whom received lpv/r monotherapy. three patients had reduction in oxygen requirements after treatment initiation; 2 deteriorated to respiratory failure. two of 5 patients (40%) experienced clearance of viral shedding on treatment, and 4 of 5 (80%) experienced adverse events that precluded completion of the planned 14-day treatment course. other published case reports or case series from korea and china comprising 6 total patients describe decreased viral load and clinical improvement after lpv/r initiation. these data are difficult to interpret in light of concomitant drug therapies, varied time points of therapy initiation, heterogeneous severity of illness amongst patients, and the lack of comparator treatments [31] [32] [33] . finally, early reports from wuhan have described some patients receiving lpv/r in addition to other therapies (including corticosteroids), but clinical outcomes and adverse events are either not described or not delineated by treatment group [34] [35] [36] .most recently, cao [37] et al reported the results of an openlabel randomized trial comparing lpv/r 400/100 mg twice daily (n = 99) to standard care (n = 100) for the treatment of covid-19 pneumonia. the primary endpoint was defined as the time from randomization to an improvement of 2 points on a 7-category ordinal scale or discharge from the hospital. secondary outcomes included 28-day mortality, time until discharge, and virologic response on repeat oropharyngeal swabs over the course of the study. the median time from symptom onset to randomization was 13 (interquartile range [iqr], 11-16) days, and this did not differ between the groups. there was no significant difference in time to clinical improvement (16 [iqr, [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] , −17.3% to 5.7%) between patients receiving lpv/r and standard care. when the 3 patients who died after randomization but before receiving lpv/r were removed, there remained no difference in mortality (16.7% vs 25.0%; absolute difference, −8.3 percentage points; 95% ci, −19.6 to 3.0). more important, there was no difference between treatment arms in reduction of viral loads over time between the 2 groups.with the available data, it is difficult to assess whether lpv/r has a role for the treatment of covid-19 either as monotherapy or in combination. the data from sars-cov-1 are encouraging, but this must be weighed against the inferior performance in mouse models against mers-cov, the less potent in vitro activity compared with remdesivir and chloroquine for sars-cov-1, and limited data suggesting no advantage over standard care for sars-cov-2. more important, it warrants comment that in the recent randomized controlled trial in covid-19 pneumonia, the median time from symptom onset to initiation of therapy was 13 days, and in the sars-cov-1 experience, therapy appeared effective if started early, but not as rescue and/or salvage. if used, drug interactions must be screened, and gastrointestinal toxicities, including diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting, and hepatotoxicity, require close monitoring, particularly because elevated aspartate transaminase or alt may exclude patients with covid-19 from clinical trials. the lpv/r tablets can be taken without regard to food but should not be crushed because this decreases systemic exposure; solution should be used in patients who cannot receive intact tablets [38] .nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against sars cov-2, with an ec 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µm in vero e6 cells [3] . this potent activity is consistent with ec 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against mers-cov in llc-mk2 cells in which ec 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µm, respectively, have been demonstrated [39] . nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39] . this broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39] .due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth bid of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (p = .008) [40] . three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (clinicaltrials. gov identifier nct01610245 [march 2018], nct02612922 [april 2018], and nct03336619 [september 2019]), although results are unavailable. nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41] . although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against sars-cov-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of covid-19.tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits both membrane-bound and soluble interleukin-6 (il-6) receptors. interleukin-6, which is secreted by monocytes and macrophages, is one of the main drivers of immunologic response and symptoms in patients with cytokine-release syndrome (crs). although tocilizumab was first approved by the fda in 2010 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, it has gained traction in recent years for treatment of patients with crs following chimeric antigen receptor t-cell (car t) therapy as a corticosteroid-sparing agent [42] . indeed, it received fda approval for severe or life-threatening car t-associated crs in 2017 due to its efficacy and safety profile. although criteria for grading crs severity varies by cancer center, it has been proposed to administer tocilizumab to crs patients with any of the following: oxygen requirement <40%, hypotension responsive to fluids or a low dose of a single vasoactive agent, or grade 2 organ toxicity as defined by the common terminology criteria for adverse events [43] . interleukin-6 antagonism may make a patient more susceptible to bacterial infection and has been associated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving chronic therapy with tocilizumab for giant cell arteritis or rheumatoid arthritis. in a case series of 53 adult patients with relapsed or refractory b-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, grade 3 crs or higher was associated with increased risk of subsequent infection, but it was unclear whether tocilizumab or corticosteroid use promoted this risk [44] . there were no reported adverse events in the 60 tocilizumab-treated patients submitted to the fda for the crs indication, which recommends a maximum of 4 doses for treatment [45] .hyperinflammatory states and cytokine storming, including elevated il-6, has been reported in severe covid-19 and were associated with increased mortality in patients in china [36] . a preprint (nonpeer reviewed) case series of 21 patients treated with tocilizumab between february 5 and 14, 2020 in china reported marked success, including rapid resolution of fever and c-reactive protein, decreased oxygen requirements, and resolution of lung opacities on computerized tomography imaging [46] . the authors state the patients all had "routine treatment for a week" before tocilizumab, which was described as "standard care according to national treatment guidelines" including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, and other supportive care. all patients had il-6 analyzed before tocilizumab administration with a mean value of 132.38 ± 278.54 pg/ml (normal <7 pg/ml). it should be noted that in the united states, il-6 monitoring is a send-out laboratory for most institutions with a turnaround time of 3-7 days. no adverse events were described in the chinese cohort; however, long-term assessment was not done.immunotherapy with tocilizumab is listed as a treatment option for severe or critical cases of covid-19 with elevated il-6 in the 7th edition of the national health commission of the people's republic of china covid-19 diagnosis and treatment guide [29] . the recommended dose is 4-8 mg/kg or 400 mg standard dose iv once, with the option to repeat a dose in 12 hours (not to exceed a total dose of 800 mg). there are 2 ongoing trials in china evaluating safety and efficacy of tocilizumab for patients with covid-19 pneumonia, but none registered in the united states.we anticipate that more data regarding tocilizumab use in patients with covid-19 will emerge, and it will be imperative for clinicians to evaluate it closely. the optimal timing of tocilizumab administration during the disease course is not yet defined, nor is there a known il-6 threshold for progression to severe disease. it is imperative to continue to follow the longterm outcomes in these patients to assess the risk versus benefit of tocilizumab.similar to other severe respiratory tract infections, there is significant interest and controversy surrounding the role of corticosteroids for the management of severe pneumonia due to coronaviruses. the potential benefit of these agents to blunt the inflammatory cascade seen in severe disease needs to be carefully weighed against the concerns for secondary infections, adverse events, and other complications of corticosteroid therapy. the data assessing the role of corticosteroids as adjunctive care for severe coronavirus (sars-cov-1, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2) pneumonia are difficult to interpret. given the retrospective observational nature of these analyses, there is significant confounding by indication that is difficult to control or correct for in addition to limited sample sizes. patients who receive corticosteroids have a higher severity of illness, are more likely to require invasive interventions, and are more likely to be receiving intensive care. in addition, there is significant heterogeneity with regard to timing of corticosteroid initiation, which can significantly impact disease progression and likelihood of response. all of these features lead to patients who receive steroids being at increased risk for poor outcomes. in addition, there is great variation in agent and dosage used, which can impact both safety and efficacy. therefore, clinicians making any therapeutic decisions based on the literature for corticosteroids need to keep these considerations in mind.the clinical data for use of corticosteroids in sars-cov-1 infections are mixed. multiple analyses show no impact on outcomes [47] , one report demonstrates decreased mortality in critically ill patients [48] , and others have documented worse outcomes for patients receiving steroids, including increased time to viral clearance [49] or an increase in the composite endpoint of icu admission or death [50] . in mers-cov, receipt of corticosteroids has been associated with a delayed time until viral clearance in a large cohort (n = 309) of infected patients [51] . however, this same data set showed a nonsignificant reduction in 90-day mortality in patients receiving corticosteroids (adjusted odds ratio = 0.75; 95% ci, 0.52-1.07) after accounting for differences between the groups in a regression model accounting for time-varying exposures. finally, recent evidence in sars-cov-2 suggested a decrease in mortality in patients with ards with the receipt of corticosteroids (23 of 50 [46%] vs 21 of 34 [62%] without; hazard ratio, 0.38; 95% ci, 0.20-0.72) [52] .as demonstrated, the data for corticosteroids are inconsistent, confusing, and inconclusive. although target patients in whom corticosteroids will improve outcomes may exist (eg, those with cytokine-related lung injury who may develop rapidly progressive pneumonia), that population remains ill-defined [53] . clinicians need to carefully weigh the risks and benefits of corticosteroids on the individual patient level. this need for a risk-benefit assessment in individual patients and careful consideration of dose is exemplified in the covid-19 diagnosis and treatment guide from the national health commission of the people's republic of china where the authors state, "based on respiratory distress and chest imaging, may consider glucocorticoid that is equivalent to methylprednisolone 1-2 mg/kg/day for 3-5 days or less. note that large-dose glucocorticoid suppresses immune system and could delay clearance of sars-cov-2." [29] a recent consensus statement from the chinese thoracic society recommends a lower dose, ≤0.5-1 mg/kg per day methylprednisolone for ≤7 days in select patients, after careful consideration of risks and benefits [53] . randomized controlled trial data are urgently needed to clearly define the role of corticosteroids in covid-19.ribavirin, a guanosine analog that terminates rna synthesis, was first approved in the 1980s and has been used clinically for respiratory syncytial virus, viral hemorrhagic fever, and in combination with interferon for hepatitis c. as mentioned previously (see lpv/r section), it was evaluated against sars-cov-1 in 2003 and used clinically in combination with corticosteroids and/or interferon in the absence of other treatment options; however, outcomes were either poor or ill-defined [54, 55] . the doses required for antiviral activity against sars range from 1.2 to 2.4 grams by mouth every 8 hours, which are associated with excessive toxicity to patients [56] . wang et al [3] evaluated the in vitro activity of ribavirin against sars-cov-2 and found an ec 50 of 109.5 µm, which was over 100 times less potent than remdesivir. the risk of hematologic toxicity at high doses likely outweighs potential clinical benefit, and therefore ribavirin was not considered a viable candidate for further investigation by the who research and development plan for sars-cov-2 given its lack of in vitro efficacy, toxicity profile, and poor outcomes.interferons (α, β) may stimulate innate antiviral responses and are expected to have in vitro activity against sars-cov-2, given the previously described activity demonstrated against mers-cov (ec 50 175 iu/ml). however, toxicities are substantial including severe cytopenias, hepatotoxicity (including fatality), neuropsychiatric events, and risk of developing fatal or life-threatening ischemia or infection, particularly when combined with ribavirin. this combination was not associated with improved mortality or enhanced viral clearance in a retrospective analysis of patients infected with mers-cov who were initiated on combination therapy within 1-3 days of icu admission [57] . despite the limited to poor data, chinese guidelines recommend ribavirin 500 mg iv 2-3 times daily in combination with lpv/r or inhaled interferon-α (5 million units nebulized twice daily) as one of the "standard treatment" options for covid-19. various combinations of ribavirin, interferon, and other antiviral agents are currently being studied in several clinical trials.based on the poor in vitro activity, an absence of animal or human data supporting its use, and a significant toxicity profile, we recommend avoiding use of ribavirin in patients with covid-19 at this time. although interferons may be useful as adjunctive care, they pose a significant risk to critically ill patients, and in the absence of supportive data they also cannot be currently recommended.given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for covid-19. this was exacerbated by the initial report from huang et al [1] in wuhan where patients managed with covid-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. it is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of sars-cov-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. the authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for covid-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against sars-cov-2. in fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting sars-cov-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µm/l [56] . coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. this would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against sars-cov-2 or other coronaviruses. therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with covid-19 once influenza has been ruled out. table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of sars-cov-2-infected patients. at this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. in general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.appropriate management strategies for patients with covid-19 are a rapidly evolving therapeutic challenge, and the optimal agents (if any) to treat infection or prevent progression to critical illness remain ill-defined. although certain agents listed in this review are encouraging, and the potential benefit of therapy likely outweighs the relatively minor risk of adverse events from short-course therapy, the evidence remains inconclusive and changes almost daily.patient populations who warrant therapy and the timing of initiation of therapy need to be defined. given that disease progression can occur rapidly in stable patients and that viral loads are highest early in the infection course, the authors of this review opine that rapid initiation of therapy in high-risk populations (patients who are hospitalized or outpatients who are at high risk of complications) is rational and should be considered, ideally in the context of a well-controlled, adequately powered trial. more important, however, this strategy is not without risk and needs to be weighed against potential adverse events (that remain poorly defined) and impending drug shortages with increases in use of these agents. to help address these concerns, careful consideration should be given to duration of therapy with many clinical trials and institutional protocols recommending 5-7 days for uncomplicated disease. duration of therapy should be individualized to the patient and the progression of disease.clinicians must continually monitor and adapt as new literature becomes available. caution should be applied because the bulk of the available clinical data are uncontrolled, not peer reviewed, or even unpublished. given these [59] . the safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma transfusion in sars-cov-2-infected patients has not been established, and no protocols exist currently in the united states. protocols are reportedly being developed at the johns hopkins university hospital.darunavir/cobicistat hiv-1 protease inhibitor currently being evaluated in a clinical trial (nct04252274), but no in vitro or human data exist to support use at this time.thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of sars; however, no clinical data exist [60] . no in vitro or clinical data exist for covid-19.humanized, monoclonal igg antibody that binds to complement protein c5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (mac). being evaluated in a clinical trial (nct04288713) for covid-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.favipiravir rna-dependent rna polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high ec 50 (decreased potency) against sars-cov-2 but was effective in protecting mice against ebola virus despite similarly high ec 50 values [3] . currently being evaluated in clinical trial nct04273763 for patients with covid-19. this agent is not fda approved or available in the united states.galidesivir (bcx4430) nucleoside rna polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of biocryst pharma and previously evaluated for ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.algae-derived lectin and potent hiv entry inhibitor agent that demonstrated in vitro activity against sars-cov-1 [61] .ivig ivig remains on critical national shortage in the united states. the benefit in patients with covid-19 is unclear.nelfinavir, an hiv-1 protease inhibitor, might be active against sars-cov-2 based on a preprint publication that utilized homology modeling [62] . no clinical data exist.anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against sars-cov-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63] .human monoclonal antibody discovered by regeneron that reportedly binds to the s protein of mers-cov. currently in phase 1 trial in healthy volunteers (nct03301090). the company reportedly announced recruitment for phase 2 and 3 trials for sars-cov-2; however, these are not registered on clinicaltrials.gov.sarilumab il-6 receptor antagonist fda-approved for rheumatoid arthritis. recently announced a us-based trial will begin enrolling at medical centers in new york for patients with severe covid-19 disease.sofosbuvir antiviral used to treat hepatitis c, in vitro activity against sars-cov-1, no clinical data exist [64] .a novel, fully human anti-il6r by tiziana life sciences. the company recently announced they are moving forward with clinical development for patient use in patients with covid-19 and excessive il-6 production.vitamin c there is an ongoing clinical trial of 12 grams iv bid vitamin c in china for treatment of covid-19 (nct04264533). use of this agent is not recommended at this time.chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 ml iv twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the national health commission of the people's republic of china: the covid-19 diagnosis and treatment guide, 7th edition. this previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in china [65] . limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of covid-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.