according to national public health data, about 1.5 million scorpion envenomings, resulting in 2000-3000 deaths, are recorded annually worldwide [1, 2] . while large regions in the northern hemisphere, such as the united states, canada, europe, and russia, as well as australia in the southern hemisphere are not associated with severe scorpionism [3] , more than two billion people living in northern saharan africa, african sahel, south africa, near and middle east, southern india, eastern andes, mexico, and south america are at risk of being stung by scorpions [1] . climate change together with urban expansion and poor city sanitation management in many of these areas have increased the likelihood of encountering scorpions. for instance, in brazil alone, malign incidences with scorpions have nearly doubled from 64,000 to 124,000 annual envenoming cases since 2012 [4] . (b) cn2 from centruroides noxius venom is a classical β-natx. (c) cn12, also from c. noxius venom, shows structural resemblance to β-natxs, but exhibits an α-natx function. (d) agitoxin 1 from leiurus hebraeus (previously l. quinquestriatus hebraeus) is an α-ktx toxin. the protein database accession numbers are 1ptx for ahhii; 1cn2 for cn2, 1pe4 for cn12, and 1agt for agitoxin 1. ktx: potassium channel toxins, natx: sodium channel toxins.peptides from the long scorpion toxin superfamily are 55-76 residue-long molecules with generally four disulfide bridges [13] . due to their mode of action, they can also be called sodium channel toxins (natxs), as their main targets are sodium ion channels [12] . this family can be further divided into two groups, α and β-natxs, depending on their specific interaction with the voltage-gated na + channels ( figure 1a ,b). α-natxs block site 3 of sodium ion channels, and therefore inhibit the inactivation of the channels and prolong their action potential. in contrast, β-natxs interact with site 4 of na + channels and shift the activation voltage of the channels to a more negative potential, which results in channel inactivation (opposite to the effects of site 3 toxins) [14] . it is noteworthy that not all natxs can be assigned to these two groups. for example, cn12, from centruroides noxius, and ts2, from tityus serrulatus venom, structurally resemble a β-natx but exhibit an α-natx effect ( figure 1c ) [15, 16] . in addition, aah it4, a toxin from androctonus australis hector, displays both α and β-natx effects [11] .the short scorpion toxin family is composed of peptides of 23-64 residues in length with three or four disulfide bridges. these peptides, also known as potassium channel toxins (ktxs), mainly act as potassium ion channel blockers ( figure 1d ) [17] . considering their sequences and cysteine pairs, ktxs can be divided into α, β, γ, κ, δ, λ, and ε-ktx groups [18, 19] . the α-ktx group, which is considered to be the largest subgroup of the short scorpion toxin family, contains 23-42 residue-long peptides with three or four disulfide bridges [20] . the β-ktx group comprises longer chain peptides of 50-57 residues in length [21] . the γ-ktx group can be found in the genera centruroides, mesobuthus, and buthus, and it mainly blocks the human ether-à-go-go-related gene (herg) channels [22] . instead of having a cs α/β structure, similar to the α, β, and γ-ktx subfamilies, toxins of the κ-ktx group are predictable structure-function relationship [36] . most of these peptides are cationic molecules that display notable structural flexibility. in aqueous solutions, these peptides exhibit a random coil conformation. however, under membrane-mimicking environments, such as 50%-60% of aqueous trifluoroethanol, they readily adopt an amphipathic α-helical structure [37] . this characteristic enables them to interact with a broad spectrum of biological targets; however, they do not have any known specific molecular targets [38, 39] .few enzymes have been found in scorpion venoms, in part because up until recently, interest has been focused on small proteins and peptides. however, during the past years, hyaluronidases, phospholipases, and metalloproteases, among other enzymes, have been detected in venoms of different scorpion species.different hyaluronidases have been identified in different families of scorpions, including buthidae, bothriuridae, and urodacidae [40] . it is known that these enzymes potentiate the toxicity of venom by disrupting the integrity of the extracellular matrix and connective tissues surrounding blood vessels at sting point, and they thereby ease the systemic diffusion of other relevant scorpion toxins [41] . it has recently been demonstrated that hyaluronidases also play an essential role in venom distribution from the bloodstream to the target organs [42] . the same study also indicated that the neutralization of hyaluronidases could be considered as a first-aid strategy in scorpion envenoming treatment.phospholipases are known to be potent hemolytic agents, as they disrupt cell membranes by hydrolyzing phospholipids. they can also cause tissue necrosis and hemorrhages. phospholipase activity has been detected in several scorpion species, including opisthacanthus cayaporum [43] and heterometrus laoticus [44] .generally, venoms from tityus species exhibit significant proteolytic activity, and the first scorpion metalloprotease was discovered in the venom of t. serrulatus [45] . metalloproteases and serine proteases have also been detected in t. discrepans venom [46] and, apart from tityus species, in the venom of hemiscorpius lepturus [47] . it is believed that proteases play a key role in activating toxin precursors through post-translational modifications [48] . in addition, these enzymes inhibit platelet aggregation, modulate cytokine production, and activate the complement system [49, 50] . altogether, these effects facilitate the diffusion of scorpion venom toxins via the degradation of matrix proteins.only a very limited number of studies on non-peptidic scorpion venom compounds have been reported. however, it has been shown that the venoms of some scorpions, including m. tamulus, contain serotonin, which is a monoamine that may cause vomiting and considerable local pain in scorpion envenomings [51] . the metal and salt composition of some scorpion species have also been evaluated by al-asmari et al. [52] . in their study, they found copper, zinc, calcium, magnesium, iron, lead, manganese, arsenic, and nickel ions in the venom of a. bicolor, a. crassicauda, and leiurus quinquestriatus. they suggested that these components are associated with enzyme activity, as they probably act as enzyme cofactors. in addition, two 1,4-benzoquinone compounds, with antimicrobial activity, have recently been isolated from the venom of diplocentrus melici, a scorpion species endemic to mexico [53] (see table 1 ). moreover, it has been reported that one of the low-molecular-weight compounds with anticoagulant activity isolated from the heterometrus laoticus venom is adenosine, which is a well-known inhibitor of platelet aggregation [54, 55] .scorpion envenomings can cause severe pathological effects and even death in humans. the intensity of an envenoming usually depends on the victim's sensitivity and body mass, the anatomical location of the sting, the amount of injected venom, and the scorpion species. commonly, based on the severity of symptoms, scorpion envenomings are classified into three levels: mild, moderate, and severe ( figure 2 ) [56, 57] . mild envenomings result in local inflammatory reactions, whereas moderate and severe envenomings may provoke lethal systemic responses.clinical manifestations and symptoms of mild, moderate, and severe scorpion envenomings. typical symptoms of mild stings last for minutes to hours and include great local pain, a reddened and swollen site of sting (erythema and edema), numbness, sweating, body tremors, and agitation. more intense stings from scorpions with venom containing cytolytic toxins may result in blood blisters, hemorrhages, and necrosis of the surrounding tissue. in moderate envenoming cases, the body additionally reacts with fever, abdominal and joint pain, hyperglycemia, abnormally rapid breathing, increased heart rate, and nausea with vomiting. these symptoms can reside for days and are mostly caused by neurotoxins: na + , k + , and ca 2+ ion channel modulators. neurotoxins can also cause severe envenomings, which can lead to cardiovascular, neurological, pulmonary, and/or gastrointestinal complications, such as pulmonary edema, myocardial failure, arrhythmia, congestive heart failure, extreme muscular convulsion, hypertensive encephalopathy, acute peptic ulcers, pancreatitis and lethal multiple organ failure, mental confusion, and coma. after several days, most victims of lethal scorpion stings die from cardiac or respiratory failure.generally, the first treatment strategies that are undertaken after an envenoming event focus on pain relief and possibly intravenous hydration to decrease the negative effects of strong salivation and sweating. in order to relieve acute pain after a scorpion sting, either cooling by ice or intravenous injection of paracetamol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as diclofenac and indomethacin, or topical administration of lidocaine cream at the site of the sting can be used [58] . however, it is not surprising that the analgesic effect of lidocaine might be superior to the former treatments [59] . further substances that are considered for application in envenoming cases are prazosin (which counteracts catecholamine-induced hypertension) [60] , antihistamines and steroids (which reduce inflammatory responses) [61] , sodium phenobarbital (which prevents convulsions and lung edema) [8, 62] , and calcium gluconate (which eases muscle spasms) [63] . while partially being used in practice, there does not seem to be a general consensus on the efficacy and possible adverse effects of these treatment options. yet, in the case of prazosin, it has been shown that the mortality and the mean residence time in the hospital could be significantly reduced by the administration of two doses of the drug, one immediate and one three hours after the envenoming incident [64] . additionally, small molecules, such as heparin, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid edta, and aristolochic acid have been shown to neutralize scorpion venom enzymes, such as hyaluronidases, phospholipases a 2 , and metalloproteases. thus, these molecules might be considered as a starting point for the development of future treatments [5] . in more severe envenoming cases, antivenoms are employed to neutralize the venom and diminish the morbidity and mortality of scorpion stings ( figure 3 ). conventional plasma-derived antivenoms are produced by the purification (and digestion) of polyclonal immunoglobulin g (igg) molecules harvested from the plasma of hyperimmunized animals, such as horses or sheep. these polyclonal antivenoms can cause severe adverse reactions due to their heterologous origin [65] and are known from the field of snakebite envenoming to generally possess low percentages of venom-neutralizing antibodies [66, 67] . moreover, conventional antivenoms may have limited efficacy against the medically most important toxins, such as small neurotoxins, as these toxins are often weakly immunogenic and therefore fail to raise a strong antibody response in the production animal [68] . nonetheless, the administration of these types of antivenoms is effective for clinical use and has been life-saving since the 1900s. thus, plasma-derived antivenoms are still the standard of treatment for systemic scorpion envenomings [69] .recently, in pursuit of finding alternatives to equine iggs for scorpion envenoming treatment, strategies involving avian egg-yolk-derived immunoglobulin ys (igys) have been developed [70] . in contrast to equine iggs, avian igy antibodies are obtained noninvasively from egg yolks from laying hens that have been immunized with scorpion venom. these igy molecules have been argued to activate the mammalian complement system much less than animal-derived iggs and not interact with rheumatoid factors. they are produced in amounts comparable to those found in the plasma of large mammals and have been argued to be more affordable. previous studies on igy-based antivenoms against snake and scorpion venoms have demonstrated that neutralizing antibodies can be raised by this method, albeit with lower neutralizing capacity than antibodies present in plasma-derived antivenoms [71] . nevertheless, there has been a slightly increased interest in the use of egg-yolk-derived igy antibodies for antivenom manufacture [72] [73] [74] [75] . as an example, in a recent study, it was demonstrated using a rescue assay involving mice that the lethality of a. australis hector (aah) venom could be neutralized with igy antibodies. however, in addition to having the same drawbacks as equine iggs in terms of polyclonality and batch-to-batch variation, avian-derived igys are phylogenetically even more distantly related to mammals [76] and still require the use of production animals for their manufacture. therefore, it seems likely that the development of next-generation antivenoms based on recombinant monoclonal antibodies and antibody fragments may be a more promising research avenue for developing effective, safe, and cost-competitive antivenoms with defined therapeutic composition for future envenoming therapy.in the field of next-generation antivenoms, the development of phage display technology and recent advances in toxicovenomics have enabled researchers to pursue new therapeutic strategies with the purpose of creating better envenoming therapies [77] . these technology-driven approaches have made it possible to identify the most toxic, and thus medically relevant, components in a given venom, and to efficiently and systematically discover human monoclonal antibodies against these components. in turn, this has paved the way for developing recombinant antivenoms with anticipated improved safety profiles compared to conventional antivenoms. as an example, using phage display technology, the discovery of a human monoclonal single-chain variable fragment (scfv) antibody against t. serrulatus toxins, serrumab, was reported in 2012 [78] . this monoclonal antibody was demonstrated to have a high neutralizing capacity against β-toxins from t. serrulatus, while it was also capable of cross-neutralizing toxins from c. suffusus suffusus and l. quinquestriatus. more recently, in 2019, the field of recombinant scorpion antivenoms took another step forward when the discovery of a broadly-neutralizing monoclonal scfv antibody (scfv 10fg2) capable of neutralizing an estimated 13 different neurotoxins from different scorpion species belonging to the centruroides genus was reported [79] . using a rescue assay, this study demonstrated that scfv 10fg2 was capable of neutralizing 3 ld 50 s of freshly obtained whole venoms from five different scorpion species, belonging to the centruroides genus, in 1:10 and 1:20 molar ratios of venom to antibody. the implementation of broadly-neutralizing antibodies in the formulation of recombinant antivenoms is a significant simplification in their pharmaceutical composition, since the inclusion of only a few broadly-neutralizing antibodies may be sufficient to neutralize the entire venoms of several different species. reducing the product complexity of recombinant antivenoms is an important challenge to solve to enable cost-competitive manufacture of such medicines [80, 81] .next to scfvs, single-domain v h h antibodies, also known as nanobodies (nb), are being intensively explored for their utility in relation to recombinant antivenoms. nbs are native to the immune system of camelids and sharks and constitute the smallest natural antibody fragments known to date [82] . the low molecular mass of nbs allows for their distribution into deep tissues throughout the body [83, 84] . this property, in addition to their high ex vivo stability and low immunogenicity, makes them an interesting format for the development of next-generation scorpion antivenoms [5, 85] .as an example of their utility, a preclinical study on a bispecific nb, targeting aahi and aahii toxins from a. australis venom, demonstrated that this nb was able to provide in vivo protection against 100 ld 50 s of intracerebroventricularly administered aahi (toxin to nb molar ratio of 1:2) and 5 ld 50 s of subcutaneously administered whole venom. these results were significantly better than controls, in which equimolar amounts of traditional equine antibody fragments were unable to neutralize 2 ld 50 s of subcutaneously administered whole venom [86] . finally, using a murine model, it was demonstrated that low molecular mass toxin-nb complexes seemed to be quickly cleared through glomerular filtration, while uptake in the liver remained low [87] . thus, these studies demonstrated that nbs may possess promising pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics. similar studies on h. lepturus and hottentotta saulcyi with comparable results also support the notion that nbs may find their utility for developing novel treatments for scorpion envenomings [83, 88] .finally, monoclonal iggs are another recombinant antibody format that has been investigated for its ability to neutralize animal toxins. as an example, in vivo lethality studies assessing the neutralization capacity of several murine monoclonal iggs have shown positive results for the neutralization of a. australis and c. noxius toxins [66] . in the future, however, it is likely that research in this area will focus more on human monoclonal iggs, rather than non-human iggs, as human iggs have a range of benefits over heterologous iggs. an overview of the benefits and drawbacks of different antibody formats can be found elsewhere [66] .it is widely reported in the literature that scorpion venom is a rich source of bioactive compounds, and as such, their toxins are of interest to the pharmaceutical and biotech industries [89] . however, despite the fact that substantial research efforts are ongoing and the prospects for scorpion-derived therapeutic peptides are very promising, chlorotoxin is the only toxin from scorpion venom that has been taken into clinical trials [90] . moreover, no scorpion toxin-based drug is currently found in the market [91] . in this section, potential applications of scorpion venom compounds, which have been the subject of therapeutic research, are presented ( figure 4) , with a focus on results recently reported in the scientific literature. a comprehensive overview of such compounds, including older research reports, can be found elsewhere [12] .in the past century, antimicrobial drugs revolutionized the control of diseases caused by microorganisms, such as bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites. however, due to the global problem of antimicrobial resistance (amr) development, new antimicrobial agents are crucially needed for the 21st century. these agents must be discovered at a rate that is sufficiently fast to combat the evolving rate of multidrug resistance (mdr) in microorganisms [92] . natural product research holds promise for providing new molecules as a basis for novel antimicrobial drug development. in 1991, it was reported that the folding pattern of charybdotoxin, a ktx isolated from l. quinquestriatus hebraeus venom, was strikingly similar to that of the insect antibacterial component, defensin [93] . this discovery set the stage for studies on scorpion-derived antimicrobial peptides (amps), which have led to a large number of discoveries that may be of relevance for therapeutic applications. comprehensive reviews on the different classes of amps found in the venom of several scorpion species can be found elsewhere [94, 95] . here, the focus will be directed only on more recent discoveries, with an overview of amps with bactericidal activity that have been reported in the last five years, which is summarized in table 1 . the compounds mentioned in table 1 are from the scorpion venom, unless otherwise specified. whenever data on the number of disulfide bridges were not available for a compound, a question mark (?) is used. non-peptidic compounds are marked with a star (*).recently, the spotlight has been put on the general and intrinsic multifunctionality of scorpion venom components, including amps [103] . for instance, native scorpion amps, uyct3, and uyct5 from u. yaschenkoi and an enhanced uyct peptide (designated as d3) were demonstrated to be potential bioinsecticides and promising candidates for the engineering of aphid-resistant crops. when pea aphids (acyrthosiphon pisum) that are known as severe agricultural pests were fed with these amps, the amps displayed activity against aphid bacterial symbionts and reduced the number of symbionts, leading to a reduction in pest survival and delay in pest reproduction [111] . meucin-49 from m. eupeus also showed insecticidal activity in addition to having broad-spectrum activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria [103] . the red and blue benzoquinones from d. melici are multifunctional components that, besides showing antibacterial activity, also exert cytotoxic effects on neoplastic cell lines. in mouse models of mdr tuberculosis infection, blue benzoquinone showed comparable activity to commercially available antibiotics, while it did not cause adverse side effects in healthy mice [53] . similarly, the low molecular mass chitosan obtained from m. gibbosus had a strong inhibitory effect against the bacterium l. monocytogenes and the yeast c. albicans. in addition, its antibacterial activity against b. subtilis and s. enteritidis was higher than the antibiotic, gentamicin [99] .despite the multifunctionality and desirable potent action against microbes, natural scorpion amps generally have cytotoxic effects on eukaryotic cells, which is an obstacle that must be overcome. to this end, protein engineering techniques have been used to improve the potency and spectra of antimicrobial activity of the natural scorpion amps [107, 112, 113] . employing these techniques, it has been demonstrated that scorpion amps can be effectively used as scaffolds to design more specific and less harmful antibiotics [114, 115] . in addition, combining low concentrations of fast-killing scorpion amps with classical antibiotics is another approach that can be pursued in order to circumvent their cytotoxic effects against eukaryotic cells [116] . all in all, using natural scorpion amps as scaffolds for the rational design of novel antimicrobial agents and mixed formulations of antibiotics opens a new window of research to be pursued in the future.the most important opportunistic fungal pathogens that are responsible for high mortality, especially in hospitalized and immunocompromised/critically ill patients, belong to the candida, aspergillus, cryptococcus, and pneumocystis genera [117] . it has been reported that the prevalence of invasive fungal infections has increased from 6.3% in 1999 to 20% in 2013 [118] . among the aforementioned genera, candida is the most common cause of fungal infections worldwide, and invasive candidiasis occurs in more than 100,000 patients every year [119] . antifungal drug resistance among candida species is increasingly reported, and the emergence of mdr c. glabrata, which can acquire resistance following exposure to antifungal agents, presents significant challenges in many medical centers [120] . moreover, only three drug classes are licensed for monotherapy against candida infections including azoles, polyenes, and echinocandins [120] . therefore, new antifungal drug candidates from additional drug classes are sought after. a summary of the scorpion-derived antifungal agents reported in the last five years is found in table 2 . (0) a. niger and c. albicans [109] the compounds mentioned in table 1 are from the scorpion venom, unless otherwise specified. whenever data on the molecular weight and/or the number of disulfide bridges were not available for a compound, a question mark (?) is used.stigmurin, selected and synthesized based on a transcriptomic analysis of the t. stigmurus venom gland, exhibits both antibacterial and antifungal activity. it is effective against the gram-positive bacterial species, s. aureus, including methicillin-resistant strains. stigmurin has also been demonstrated to be effective against the fungi c. albicans, c. krusei, and c. glabrata, with low toxicity against healthy human erythrocytes [98] . these data suggested that stigmurin could be considered for the treatment of candidiasis. more recently, two analog peptides, stiga6 and stiga16, were designed from the original peptide that demonstrated improved antimicrobial and antifungal activity. these peptides could inhibit the growth of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, as well as c. albicans, c. krusei, and c. glabrata, at lower minimal inhibitory doses compared to stigmurin [106] . stiga6 and stiga16 also showed high antiparasitic activity against trypanosoma cruzi (see section 4.4) . this study demonstrated that rational design using scorpion toxins as scaffolds may be useful for obtaining leads with improved therapeutic features against a wide range of pathogens, including fungi.few antiviral vaccines and drugs are commercially available against the more than 200 viruses known to infect humans [124] , which is a situation that has been highlighted by the current sars-cov-2 pandemic and puts an emphasis on the importance of discovery and development of new antiviral agents. to this end, venomous animals are considered by many researchers as promising sources for such discoveries [124, 125] . while some scorpion toxins show specific antiviral effects against just one type of virus, other toxins are active against several different viruses. mucroporin-m1, a derivative of mucroporin from the lychas mucronatus venom, presents antiviral activities against three rna viruses (measles (mev), severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (sars-cov), and influenza h5n1). binding assays demonstrated that there is a significant and specific interaction between immobilized mucroporin-m1 on cm5 biosensor chips and mev. following the mixing of 1 × 10 3 plaque-forming units per milliliter (pfu/ml) of mev with different concentrations of mucroporin-m1 and incubating the mixture for 1 h at 37 • c, two probable mechanisms of action were assessed. these assessments included measurements of the direct effects of mucroporin-m1 on the virus through the inhibition of mev plaque formation and evaluation of the compound's ability to compromise the infectivity of the virus through the suppression of mev replication. the results showed that mev infectivity could be inhibited almost completely by 10 µg/ml of mucroporin-m1 within 40 min. in a similar way, mucroporin-m1 showed inhibitory effects against both sars-cov and h5n1 pseudoviruses [126] . later, it was demonstrated that mucroporin-m1 can inhibit the replication of the hepatitis b virus through the activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) pathway and downregulation of hnf4α in vitro and in vivo [127] . given the dual inhibitory activities against viruses and bacteria, mucroporin-m1 may be considered as a lead compound for treating viral and bacterial co-infections. mucroporin-m1 also serves as an example demonstrating the potential of peptides from scorpion venoms to be used as scaffolds for designing multifunctional antiviral agents.another example is the recombinant peptide, rev37, from the scorpion euscorpiops validus, which was been demonstrated to possess inhibitory effects against dengue virus type 2 (denv-2), hepatitis c virus (hcv), zika virus (zikv), and herpes simplex virus type 1 infections at non-cytotoxic concentrations. the inhibitory effects of rev37 against denv-2, hcv, and zikv infections were determined in the hepatoma cell line huh7 via real-time fluorescent quantitative pcr for mrna in the infected cells. rev37 was able to reduce the level of denv-2, hcv, and zikv infection at the mrna level at a concentration of 10 µm by 91%, 97%, and 87%, respectively. since the cellular entry processes of these four viruses are similar, it has been suggested that a specific molecular mechanism, in which the rev37 peptide alkalizes acidic organelles to prevent low ph-dependent fusion of the viral membrane to the endosomal membrane, blocks the release of the viral genome from the endosome to the cytoplasm and thus restricts viral late entry [128] . the propensity to cause adverse reactions, lack of or low efficacy, and high price of the very few vaccines and therapeutics that are available against the aforementioned viruses [129, 130] emphasize that rev37 may be a relevant lead that possibly could be developed into an antiviral drug.smp76, a scorpine-like peptide from the venom of s. maurus palmatus, is another recent example of a scorpion-derived agent that is effective against different viruses. the recombinantly expressed peptide (rsmp76) can inhibit rna replication and protein synthesis of denv-2 and zikv in primary mouse macrophages, the human lung adenocarcinoma cell line (a549), the huh7 cell line, and the human monocytic cell line (thp-1) in a dose-dependent manner. at a concentration of 10 mm, the inhibitory effects of rsmp76 were 75.7% against infections caused by denv-2 (tsv01) and its more virulent strain (ngc), while for zikv infection, inhibition was evaluated to be 73.8%. although the detailed molecular mechanisms of the rsmp76-induced inhibitory effects need to be elucidated, it seems that the mechanism of inhibition did not include direct inactivation of the viral particles. it has been suggested that rsmp76 suppresses an established viral infection by upregulating interferon-β expression through the phosphorylation of the interferon regulatory factor 3, which enhances type-i ifn responses and thus inhibits viral infection [131] . since the achievement of viral clearance is very difficult, antiviral agents, such as rsmp76, that can suppress established viral infections are considered to be more efficient than traditional antiviral therapeutics, which exert their antiviral effects through the direct inactivation of viral particles or the inhibition of viral cell entry [131] . enhancing the protective effects of host innate immunity, such as interferon (ifn) activation, by antiviral agents, such as rsmp76, may potentially circumvent the development of drug resistance and the effects of genetic variability in the viral genome [132] . these examples, selected from dozens of ongoing studies, demonstrate the potential of scorpion-derived peptides to be developed as antiviral therapeutics.parasitic diseases are considered a health problem, particularly in developing countries, where people are frequently infected by parasites belonging to the genera, plasmodium, trypanosoma, and leishmania, among others [133, 134] . since antiparasitic therapeutic agents available for clinical use are often toxic [135] , there is an urgent need for the discovery and development of novel therapeutics [136] .scorpion toxins have been demonstrated to possess inhibitory effects against a number of parasites. scorpine, purified from pandinus imperator venom, was the first isolated scorpion toxin that demonstrated antiprotozoan effects against plasmodium berghei [137] . later on, recombinantly expressed scorpine produced 98% mortality in the sexual stage of p. berghei and 100% reduction in p. falciparum parasitemia [138] . similarly, meucin-24 and meucin-25, two linear ndbps synthesized from a cdna library of the m. eupeus venom gland, demonstrated antimalarial activity. both peptides inhibited the development of p. berghei and killed intra-erythrocytic p. falciparum parasites at micromolar concentrations without harming mammalian cells [139] , making them potential candidates for antimalarial therapies.scorpion-derived agents can be effective against other parasites as well. taenia solium (pork tapeworm) is a parasite responsible for taeniasis (intestinal infection) and cysticercosis (tissue infection) in humans [140] . in 2010, t. solium cysticercosis was added to the list of major neglected tropical diseases of the world health organization (who) [141] . t. crassiceps is another species of the taeniidae family of tapeworms that, due to extensive antigen similarity with t. solium, functions as an experimental model to test and screen promising antigens before testing them in pigs [142] . it has been demonstrated using in vitro assays that hge36, a naturally occurring truncated form of a scorpine-like peptide from the hoffmannihadrurus gertschi venom, can reduce the viability of t. crassiceps larval cysts at submicromolar concentrations while having a minimal effect on human lymphocytes [143] . this study demonstrated that scorpion-derived agents may hold potential as therapeutic agents for human cysticercosis disease.human african trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) and american trypanosomiasis (chagas disease) are induced upon infection with the protozoan parasites, t. brucei and t. cruzi, respectively. being considered endemic in latin america, chagas disease is a potentially life-threatening illness that affects 6-7 million lives according to the who [144] . in an in vitro assay, it was recently demonstrated that stigmurin and its analogs, stiga6, stiga16, stiga25, and stiga31, show high antiparasitic activity against epimastigote forms of t. cruzi that is a form naturally found in the gut of infected insect vectors [106, 113] . stiga6 and stiga16 have also been shown to have activity against trypomastigote forms of t. cruzi, which are mainly found in the blood of patients in the acute phase of chagas disease. in addition, these peptides demonstrate higher antiparasitic activity at a lower concentration compared to benznidazole, which together with nifurtimox are currently available as chagas disease medicines [106] . therefore, stiga6 and stiga16 may be utilized in the development of therapeutics against chagas disease.it has been demonstrated that leishmania parasites are sensitive to peptides with antimicrobial and ion channel inhibitory activity. since scorpion venoms are rich sources of such peptides, borges et al. demonstrated that t. discrepans crude venom and its main fractions (tdi, ii, and iii) could inhibit the growth of promastigote forms (the motile, long-elongated flagellated infective form of the leishmania parasite that develops in the midgut of the sandfly) of l. mexicana, l. braziliensis, and l. chagasi that eventually led to parasite death in vitro [145] . unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, leishmanicidal activity of compounds from the venoms of other scorpion species/families has not been reported, and it should be investigated whether the leshmanicidal effects are restricted to the genus tityus.bradykinin is a potent endothelium-dependent vasodilator peptide with hypotensive properties that belongs to the kinin group of proteins. the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inactivates bradykinin by degrading it [146, 147] . the inhibition of ace via bradykinin-potentiating peptides (bpps), such as captopril, which is derived from a peptide found in the venom of the lancehead viper (bothrops jararaca), has been established as a clinically approved strategy for preventing hypertension [148] .the multifunctionality of scorpion toxins is in the limelight once again regarding the bradykinin-potentiating effects of scorpion venoms. it has been demonstrated that the c-terminal fragment of bmkbpp, an amp from m. martensii venom with antibacterial and antifungal activities, shows significant sequence similarity with the peptide k12, which is a known ace inhibitor from b. occitanus venom. in an in vitro assay using guinea pig ileum segments of nearly 3 cm in length, both bmkbpp whole peptide and its c-terminal fragment (bmkbpp-c) demonstrated bradykinin-potentiating activity at a concentration of 50 nm. however, bmkbpp whole peptide and bmkbpp-c were less potent than peptide k12, with bmkbpp-c being more active than the whole peptide [149] . the sequence similarity between a fragment of a toxin and bpps is also observed for t. serrulatus venom peptides. the n-terminal of ts3, an α-toxin acting on voltage-gated sodium channels, demonstrated a striking sequence similarity with ts10 (former peptide t) that is a known bpp [150] . ts10 was originally reported as an ace inhibitor, since it could inhibit the ace-catalyzed hydrolysis of bradykinin [151] . later, using male wistar rats and their aortic rings, in vitro and in vivo assays demonstrated that the n-terminal of ts3 (ts3 1-14[c12s] ) and ts10 were not able to directly inhibit ace activity; instead, they induced a strong vasodilatory effect that could be reversed in the presence of the nitric oxide (no) synthase inhibitor, n(ω)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester (l-name). this suggests that ts10 and ts3 1-14[c12s] play their role by activating molecular targets in the vascular endothelium, which leads to no production and eventually vasodilation [150] . in addition, it has been reported that t. serrulatus hypotensins (tshpt-i, ii, iii, and iv) and tisth from t. stigmurus also potentiate bradykinin through improvement of the endothelial function and no release in rats [152, 153] . these cases show that scorpion peptides can potentiate bradykinin through mechanisms other than ace inhibition.besides vasodilation and hypotension, scorpion-derived bpps play important roles in other physiological processes. it is estimated that a considerable number of cancer patients receive radiation therapy during their course of illness [154] . however, radiation therapy might lead to side effects, including radiation-induced heart disease (rihd) in patients having lymphoma, breast, lung, and esophageal cancer [155, 156] . it has been demonstrated that bpps obtained from l. quinquestriatus improved cardiomyopathy induced by γ-radiation in rats, probably by acting as a scavenger of free radicals to protect the heart from negative effects derived from radiation exposure [157] .several scorpion toxins can modulate the immune system [158] . indeed, the contribution of released inflammatory mediators (e.g., cytokines, eicosanoids, and reactive oxygen species) and activation of the complement system is well explored in the envenoming pathophysiology following scorpion stings [57, 158, 159] . for instance, an increase in the regulatory cytokines, interleukin (il)-10 and il-4, has been observed in experimental envenomings by a. australis hector and c. noxius, as well as in real human envenomings by t. serrulatus [160] [161] [162] [163] . although most of the studied scorpion toxins exhibit pro-inflammatory effects and activate the immune system [20, 58, 160, 164, 165] , a few of them demonstrate potential therapeutic applications by controlling the immune responses and acting as immunosuppressive agents.the most studied class of immunosuppressive scorpion toxins is the blockers of voltage-gated potassium channel type 1.3 (k v 1.3). although many cells express k v 1.3, most of the studies have focused on effector memory t cells (t em ) due to the high expression profiles of k v 1.3. the t em cells are a subpopulation of t cells regarded as an attractive pharmacological target because of their role in the development of autoimmune diseases [166] . a recent review covering the structure and function of these channels, as well as the therapeutic implications of blocking k v 1.3 using toxins derived from scorpion venom, has summarized the studies of more than 60 scorpion toxins from the androctonus, buthus, mesobuthus, lychas, parabuthus, leiurus, centruroides, and tityus genera [167] .beside k v 1.3 channels, other ion channels, such as k v 3.1 and k v 2.1, have also been demonstrated to be important for t-cell activation and function [168, 169] . pucca et al. described ts6 and ts15, from t. serrulatus, which block k v 2.1 and inhibit the proliferation and function of different t-cell subpopulations in vitro. the study also showed that ts15 was capable of inhibiting delayed-type hypersensitivity (dth) response in vivo, indicating the potential of the peptide to be developed into a treatment for autoimmune diseases [169] . another study performed by xiao et al. described the immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory properties of st20, a disulfide-bridged α-ktx found in the venom of scorpiops tibetanus. in vitro functional studies showed that this peptide was able to inhibit the expression of the cell surface marker cd69, as well as the secretion of il-2, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, and ifn-γ in activated human t cells. in vivo experiments using a rat autoimmune disease model showed that dth was ameliorated in the presence of st20 [170] . thus, new immunosuppressive therapeutic drugs may be derived from scorpion venom toxins, which can be optimized in regard to structure and function, possibly facilitating the future use of such agents in clinical settings.generally, scorpion stings are reported as very painful events. most known scorpion toxins are known to modulate voltage-gated ion channels (mainly sodium and potassium channels) [20] . voltage-gated sodium (na v ) channels play a key role in nociception (pain) [171] . the na v channels comprise a family of nine homologous α-subunits (na v 1.1-na v 1.9), which together with β-units (β1-β4) generate the ion-conducting pore [172] . however, only four na v channel subtypes are involved in pain: na v 1.1, na v 1.6, na v 1.7, and na v 1.9 [173] [174] [175] [176] . throughout the last decades, scorpion toxins capable of inducing pain mediated by these channels have been widely explored [20, [177] [178] [179] [180] . most recently, two peptides, hj1a and hj2a, have been isolated from the hottentotta jayakari venom that are potent agonists of na v 1.1. demonstrating dual α/β activity by modifying both the activation and inactivation properties of the channel, hj1a and hj2a may be used as alternative tools for developing selective na v 1.1 modulators for the treatment of epileptic diseases, such as dravet syndrome [181] . in addition, scorpion toxins that induce pain, mediated by different ion channels, such as voltage-gated potassium channel 4.2 (k v 4.2) [182] and trpv1 [35, 183] , have also been encountered.moreover, scorpion toxins capable of controlling pain (i.e., analgesics) have been reported in the literature. many of these analgesic toxins are not toxic to mammals, as they belong to a group of insect-specific neurotoxic α or β-toxins that interact with na v , k v , and/or ca v pathways [114, [184] [185] [186] [187] [188] . during the last two decades, over 20 scorpion venom-derived peptides and proteins have been reported to exert anti-nociceptive effects in vitro and in vivo. due to the absence of toxicity in mammals and comparable effects to standard of care medications, such as carbamazepine, most of the scorpion-derived proteins are intriguing agents that could be used for future development of analgesics. the scorpion m. martensii (previously known as b. martensii karsch) has been thoroughly studied as the source of more than 15 analgesic peptides [189, 190] . analgesic properties have also been reported in a. mauretanicus mauretanicus (ammviii, α-anatoxin), l. quinquestriatus quinquestriatus (lqqit2, β-toxin), h. laoticus (hetlaxin, α-toxin), b. occitanus tunetanus (botaf, β-toxin), and t. serrulatus (tsntxp) ( table 3) . however, there is still much unexplored venom territory for future discovery in the field of analgesic venom components.in 2019, rigo et al. reported the presence of anti-nociceptive effects of a non-toxic protein from t. serrulatus, tsntxp [191] . this protein is described to be structurally similar to na v -modulating neurotoxins, such as ts7. however, tsntxp is non-toxic to animals. effects of tsntxp were studied in 184 adult male and female swiss mice in regard to acute and neuropathic pain. the results demonstrated that tsntxp has potent anti-nociceptive properties in both models, which is potentially due to a substantial reduction of glutamate release. these results, combined with the lack of acute adverse effects, suggest that tsntxp may possibly be utilized in future pain treatment. table 3 . summary of known anti-nociceptive scorpion toxins.bmk as m. martensii 7701 da (4) ttx-r (na v 1.8, 1.9), ttx-s (na v 1.3); reduction of neural excitability; skeletal muscle ryr [192] [193] [194] [195] bmk it2 m. martensii 6650 da (4) ttx-r and ttx-s na v [192, 196] the discovery of specific and selective anticancer drugs that can directly act on tumors, display a synergistic effect with existing chemotherapeutics, or function as cargoes for drugs with low bioavailability is significantly on the rise [216] . chlorotoxin (ctx) from l. quinquestriatus venom is a molecule that interacts with chloride channels. ctx was the first scorpion-derived agent that demonstrated inhibitory effects on glioma cell migration and invasion. it also exhibited the advantage of being able to penetrate deep into tumor tissue [217, 218] . since the discovery of ctx, the list of scorpion crude venoms and isolated toxins with anticancer activity has been growing rapidly, hence a comprehensive review of all reported compounds exceeds the scope of this review, but can be found elsewhere [216] [217] [218] [219] . here, we present a few cherry-picked recent studies with the most significant findings.t. serrulatus crude venom was tested in 2019 for possible anticancer effects against the siha and hela cervical cancer cell lines, and the venom was shown to induce apoptosis in hela cells [220] . wang et al. had previously obtained similar results with the crude venoms of h. liangi and m. martensii. the two venoms were tested for potential anticancer effects toward hela cells, and both venoms showed dose-dependent anti-proliferative and apoptosis-inducing effects through upregulation of the cdk-inhibitor, p21. however, neither of the venoms showed significant effects on non-cancer huvec-21 cells, suggesting specificity toward cancer cells [221] . additionally, the venoms of a. crassicauda and l. quinquestriatus have been examined using breast (mda-mb-231) and colorectal (hct-8) cancer cell lines [222] . this examination revealed that the venoms exhibited significant time and dose-dependent cytotoxicity, and that they caused an increase in the number of apoptotic cells and reactive oxygen species for both cancer cell lines when the cell lines were subjected to the venoms. the observed arrests in the cell cycle could be an indication of tumor suppressor p21 upregulation and could, hence, suggest selectivity toward cancer cells. anticancer properties have been recently associated to the crude venom of rhopalurus junceus and a mix of five peptides from the same venom [223, 224] . despite generating promising results, further investigations on the aforementioned scorpion crude venoms are needed to characterize the effective anticancer constituents among other venom components.in 2018, li et al. constructed a scorpion venom library of a. australis and a. mauretanicus that led to the discovery of a highly potent novel anticancer peptide from a. mauretanicus named gonearrestide. this peptide was subsequently tested against several colorectal cancer cell lines (dld-1, hke3, dks8, and hct116) and the glioma cell line, u-251. extensive in vitro, in vivo, and ex vivo studies on hct116 cells demonstrated that this peptide possessed high specificity toward cancer cells, could significantly arrest the cell cycle in the g1 phase, and could thus strongly inhibit tumor growth. additionally, proliferation and cytotoxicity studies with the non-cancer human epithelial cell lines fhc (colon), mcf-10a (breast), and human erythrocytes only identified negligible off-target effects of gonearrestide [225] . another study by benaissa et al. investigated the activity of the negatively charged fractions of a. australis venom against du145 prostate cancer cells and successfully identified strong anti-proliferative effects mediated by the na v 1.6-directed peptide aahiv [226] . however, regardless of its potent anti-proliferative effects, this peptide was not able to inhibit cell migration. another study on agap and agap-sypu2 from m. martensii venom (see section 4.7 for their analgesic effects) demonstrated that these two peptides possessed in vivo antitumor properties in mouse ehrlich ascites tumor models and mouse s-180 fibrosarcoma models [213, 227] . furthermore, agap showed strong anticancer effects, including the inhibition of stemness, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration, and invasion toward mcf-7 and mda-mb-231 breast cancer cells [228] . it also inhibited the voltage-gated proton channel hv1 [229] , which has been investigated as a possible target for cancer therapy and has been extensively reviewed elsewhere [230] . two studies on a third m. martensii peptide, bmkn2, indicated that this peptide could selectively induce apoptosis in cancerous human oral cells, while normal cells were affected to a much lesser extent [231, 232] . another interesting study highlights a newly discovered short (14 residues) peptide from b. occitanus tunetanus, rk1, with potent anticancer effects toward glioblastoma (u87) and melanoma (igr39) cancers [233] . while showing no apparent in vivo neurotoxicity toward intracerebroventricularly injected mice, rk1 was demonstrated to possess cytotoxicity against u87 and igr139 cells in vitro, and it was able to inhibit cell proliferation and migration of these two cancer cell lines. rk1 also inhibited angiogenesis in a chicken chorioallantoic membrane model. a cell-penetrating peptide (cpp) from t. serrulatus venom, named cpp-ts, is the final promising member of the long list of scorpion-derived agents with anticancer effects discussed here. using a cpp-ts-derived peptide (subpeptide ), a study demonstrated that this peptide has selective internalization properties in specific cancer cell lines, such as sk-mel-188, hep g2, caco-2, mda-mb-231, a549, and du 145, which make it a potential intranuclear delivery tool for cancer cell targeting [34] . these handful of studies from the growing body of recently published papers indicate the potential of utilizing scorpion venoms as a source for discovering new cancer therapeutics.the large diversity of scorpion venom components has fueled a wide range of studies on these molecules, from toxicology to antivenom development and therapeutic applications. in particular, therapeutic applications of scorpion venom compounds have attracted a lot of attention due to the urgent need for either finding or improving treatments against a broad spectrum of diseases. the emergence and spread of superbugs (amr microorganisms) represent an increasingly serious threat to global public health, which is projected to get much worse in the years ahead. therefore, the exploration of the utility of novel bioactive molecules, scaffolds, and mechanisms of action represents a potentially powerful approach to develop new antimicrobial therapeutics and diagnostic tools for current and future diseases. dozens of scorpion-derived bioactive molecules have been shown to possess promising pharmacological properties, of which around 100 have been mentioned in this review. these pharmacological properties of scorpion-derived bioactive molecules include antimicrobial, immunosuppressive, bradykinin-potentiating, analgesic, and anticancer effects among others. in addition to chlorotoxin, which has already entered clinical trials, the cpp-ts peptide (which is a potential intranuclear delivery tool for targeting cancer cells) is likely to be a molecule receiving significant scientific interest in the future. however, before venom-derived biotherapeutics can be introduced to the market, a number of technological issues must be overcome, including obtaining access to material (venoms and toxins), characterizing isolated venom components, establishing manufacturing approaches for novel compounds, and reducing the potential propensity to cause adverse effects, especially for long-term therapy. nevertheless, the scientific literature reviewed here shows several examples of promising scorpion venom-derived proteins and peptides that may be used as leads for the development of new biotherapeutics. thus, if the data observed in vitro and in preclinical models translates well to the clinical setting, there may indeed be great promise in exploiting the benefits of scorpion toxins. funding: we thank the villum foundation (grant 00025302) for financial support.the authors declare no conflicts of interest.the advancements in next generation sequencing technologies, such as 454 [1] or solexa [2] , have led to an increased interest in the deep sequencing of samples from mixed populations. when the sequences of interest are largely similar and only a few salient differences exist within these populations, it is difficult to quantify or to identify the important trends with existing tools. the msa is a useful visual aid when analyzing a small set of sequences within a sample, but to identify important trends within a large number of sequences, or among multiple sets of deeply sequenced samples, a more quantitative approach is necessary. existing tools, such as bioperl [3] , biopython [4] , and samtools [5] , are useful for efficiently generating, manipulating and storing msas, but statistical metrics and visualizations for the comparison of the samples that the msas represent, do not exist.the applications we have implemented in andes allow an investigator to identify and compare the variations within a sample or among multiple samples. three independent projects that have used andes will be described in the "results and discussion" section. the first project involved quantifying, on a whole genome level, the mutation rates and the locations of novel variations for a coronavirus that had been passaged 10 consecutive times in cell culture. the depth of sequencing was derived from a single solexa run for each of 3 selected passages. this exemplifies how andes can be used to compare temporally separated samples, to analyze genome-wide mutation trends, and to identify specific variations for further analyses. in the second project, andes was used to differentiate between the strains of human influenza h1n1 sequences that were deposited into genbank. because the majority of human h1n1 sequences were generated from the circulating seasonal strain, there were little, or no, consistent annotations in the genbank records to differentiate them from the collected sequences of the 2009 swine-origin influenza pandemic. in this case, the sequencing depth was accumulated across data that were deposited by a community of influenza researchers. the clustering and analyses of the dataset made it possible to design strainoptimized, degenerate pcr primers for the purpose of sequencing both seasonal and swine origin h1n1 genomes. the final project described is an application of the andes toolset to assess the sequencing accuracy and identify loci-specific sequencing errors for a 454 titanium sequencing run performed on a subregion of the 16s rrna gene (16s rdna). the deep sequencing of clonal copies of a 16s sequence provided the data to empirically determine actual pcr and sequencing error rates. this has played a critical role in characterizing the nature of sequencing errors on downstream analyses.the fundamental data structure of the andes suite of tools is the position profile. this data structure contains the number of nucleotides that support each position of the analyzed region of interest. andes currently supports the conversion from the output of clustalw [6] (i.e. .aln files), however the format of the position profile is relatively trivial; therefore the encoding of output from an alternative alignment application should be readily supported. alignments generated with razers [7] , mus-cle [8] , and amoscmp [9] tools have also been successfully converted into position profiles and analyzed. figure 1 shows the input msa that the resultant position profile in figure 2 was created from. each column in the position profile is calculated by summing the number of nucleotides or gap contributions at each position. each line of the position profile is essentially a probability mass function (pmf), with support at {a, t, g, c, and -(gap)}, when the values are normalized and sum to 1. gaps introduced at the beginning or end of the msa are assumed to be caused by read termination, so these gaps are not considered to be nucleotide variations and are therefore ignored. bases with iupac ambiguity codes [10] in the alignment are given equal weight for each nucleotide they represent. for example, the iupac code, m, represents a or c, so 0.5 will be contributed to both a and c position counts. the major allele is also stored in the profile for visual convenience. the number of lines in the position profile is the gapped length of the consensus sequence for the msa.the alignment of two or more profiles is important for comparing or merging their contents into a new composite profile. profile merging may be used to pool multiple sample profiles together, or to accumulate the sequencing results from a previously partitioned sample. figure  1 . column 1 contains the most common allele. when multiple alleles share the value of the greatest frequency, one of the alleles is arbitrarily chosen to represent that position. columns 2-5 represent the frequency of each nucleotide at each position for the sample represented by the position profile.since the compute time of an all-versus-all msa tool, such as clustalw, has an exponential growth rate [8] as a function of the number of sequences in a run, n, it is recommended to reduce n, and take advantage of parallel computation resources. this can be accomplished by dividing n across s independent runs with smaller input sizes of n/s, and then performing a final merge across the s profiles.profile alignment in andes involves computing the major allele for each position based on the underlying nucleotide composition. if the most common allele at a position is a gap, then the most frequent allele that caused the gap to open is used as the major allele. the representative major alleles for each profile are then aligned with clustalw. the results from the clustalw alignment are then used as a proxy to the underlying nucleotide distributions. since the quality of the profile alignment can only be as good as the algorithms used to align the major alleles, andes also allows for the integration of alternative msa tools, such as muscle, which can also produce clustalw-like output. to complete the profile merge, the new position frequencies are then summed for each column, using the major allele positions as proxies. similarly for a profile comparison, the corresponding positional frequencies between the two aligned profiles are then compared.the root mean square deviation (rmsd) plot is a visualization of the differences between the nucleotide distributions along the alignment of two or more samples. in the rmsd plot, the alignment between two sequences is represented along the x-axis, and the computed rmsd value for each nucleotide position between two aligned samples is represented along the y-axis ( figure 3 ). to compute the rmsd for each nucleotide position, the standard rmsd formula [11] was modified to compare the nucleotide distributions between each sample:and p[y i,p ] are the probabilities of nucleotide, p, at position i, for the sample x and y, respectively. the nucleotide, p, is an element of the nucleotide set {a, t, g, c, -}, where the -character, represents a gap that was necessary to align the two profiles. the position, i, ranges from 1 to the length of the gapped alignment, l. the number of insertions and deletions (indels) that were necessary to align the sequences in the msa, are also included for each position. the denominator within the square root operator, 5, is the number of symbols in the nucleotide set used.the minimum rmsd value of 0 occurs when the distributions of nucleotides are identical between the two alignments for a specific position. the maximum value of 0.632 is generated if the allele of one sample is completely different than the second sample, for example, if sample x consisted of 100% t's and sample y consisted of 100% g's. another important rmsd value is 0.316. this value occurs when one sample is biallelic, for example a/t, and the other sample is partially similar with a single allelic representation of a. see figure 4 and 5 for sample calculations of the two cases.summary rmsd values between two samples can be computed by taking the arithmetic mean of the rmsd value for every position along the length of the alignment, l. these summary values can be used to generate a distance matrix among all samples. see table 1 . the shannon entropy (se) is a measure of uncertainty or information content in a random variable. when applied to the distribution of nucleotides at a single position, it represents the amount of variation at that position. a normalized shannon entropy (nse) can be computed by using a logarithm of base 5, the number of supports for the distribution, for the calculation. this nse has a range between 0 and 1, where 0 represents no variation (only a single allele is represented in the sample), and 1 represents maximum variation (the uniform existence of a, t, g, c and gaps). p[x i,p ] is the probability of nucleotide, p, at position i, for the sample x. the nucleotide, p, is an element of {a, t, g, c, -}, where the -character, represents a gap that was necessary to align all the sequences within the sample. the position, i, ranges from 1 to the length of the gapped alignment, l. the number of insertions and deletions (indels) which were necessary to align the sequences in the msa, are also included for each position. the se plot is generated by plotting the alignment of a single sample along the x-axis versus the se on the y-axis (for example, figure 6 ). a summary se value for a single sample can be computed by taking the arithmetic mean of the se for every position along the length of the alignment, l. since the se can be calculated within a single sample, it is useful for quickly identifying regions or positions of variability without the necessity of choosing an ideal reference sequence.the base conversion probabilities between two samples, or within a single sample, can be computed between aligned profiles. given an alignment of all sequences in the sample(s), the following formula, which is based on the definition of conditional probability, is utilized:[ , ]this formula computes the probability of base q in aligned position i in sample y, converting to base p in aligned position i in sample x, summed over all aligned positions. p and q are from the nucleotide set {a, t, g, c, -}. i is the nucleotide position range between 1 to the figure 4 example calculation of the rmsd value between two monoallelic samples, x and y. in this case, the maximum rmsd value of 0.632 was achieved because the allelic distributions between the two sample positions did not agree. figure 5 example calculation of the rmsd value between a biallelic sample, x, and a monoallelic sample, y. in this case, the intermediate rmsd value of 0.316 was generated because sample x was biallelic, and sample y was monoallelic but in partial agreement. length of the gapped alignment, l. computing base conversion frequencies is useful for determining if there are any unexpected pressures in mutation rates towards particular nucleotides, or sequencing error biases. one will typically see a significantly higher base conversion rate between transitions (a↔g or c↔t) than transversions (other remaining combinations).inter-sample cluster analyses can be performed by first computing the distance matrix among all samples with the rmsd formula.the matrix can be loaded into a statistics package such as r [12] , and a multidimensional scaling (mds) plot or dendrogram may be computed and plotted. mds is a statistical technique used to convert an n dimensional description of the relationship between samples (e.g., a distance matrix), into a lower dimensional plot (e.g., 2d). as a result, samples with similar characteristics are reflected in the plot by their close spatial proximity to each other. sample r code has been provided in the andes tool set to perform these cluster analyses based on the generated distance matrices.the detection of polymorphisms and the generation of a representative consensus sequence both depend on the investigators' threshold for determining the significance of underlying variations. for example, this threshold may be the rate of sequencing errors or the prevalence of a minor allele that the investigator would like to eliminate from the consensus sequence. it is common to automatically assign iupac ambiguity codes to certain base positions even when the existence of the alternative base, or bases, has a low frequency, e.g., 1 representative. alternatively, consensus sequences may be manually edited or entire sequences may be eliminated from the set of representative input sequences, in the effort to reduce the dominance of ambiguity codes in the final consensus sequence. these workarounds are tedious, and the elimination of specific sequences from the set of sequences under analysis leaves the final consensus sequence potentially skewed towards the representation of only the most common variants. downstream processes, such as degenerate primer design will then be forced to compute on a non-representative consensus. to generate the most representative consensus sequence, it is preferable to use the largest sample possible, since this will represent the population of interest most accurately and minimize the effects of random errors.profile to consensus generation automatically converts a position profile into a consensus sequence using the standard iupac ambiguity codes. the benefit of using a position profile to generate a consensus sequence is the ability to perform filtering a priori, using either a nominal or percent cutoff. when a nominal threshold-based filter is applied, the nucleotide frequencies for each this table represents a subset of the rmsd-based distances that were calculated between partitions of human influenza h1n1 collection dates. each value is the average positional rmsd along the lengths of the 2 compared ha segments. the complete rmsd distance matrix was then used as input into r to compute a dendrogram as seen in figure 7 . position that do not exceed the specified threshold are set to zero. by not changing the values of the nucleotide frequencies that exceed the threshold, their relative proportions are still maintained. when applying a percent cutoff filter, the positional nucleotide frequencies are first normalized into positional probability mass functions (pmf's). an application of threshold-based filtering can be to remove low levels of nucleotide representations as a result of sequencing errors, or to prioritize the depth of variation allowed in the consensus sequence.an example of the effect of filtering based on nucleotide probability is shown in figure 7 . in this example, the ambiguity code assigned to the position was d, because the position required representation for the existence of a, t, and c in the sample. a sequencing error upper bound rate of 5% was determined and used as a threshold for filtering low prevalence nucleotide representations. the necessity for a c representation was removed, allowing the new ambiguity code to become a w, representing a or t. assuming the representation of c was a result of sequencing error, the w ambiguity code is a more accurate representation of the allelic composition at that position for the sample.if deep sequencing is performed on a homogenous or clonal population, then it is possible to estimate the average quality value (qv) that should have been assigned to each position independent of the quality values assigned by the sequencing technology's base caller. this is useful for comparing the actual error rate to that of the base caller's quality value, for example to properly calibrate the sequencing qv or to set alternative thresholds of sequence quality based on actual acceptable error rates. the standard formula for qv is:the probability of an error, p[err i ], is estimated for each position i, as:the probability of an error is defined as the probability of not attaining the most common allele. if the empirically determined error rate is 0, then the qv is set to 40 (i.e., 0.0001 errors per base). if the coverage depth allows for the determination of error rates less than 0.0001, then a qv of greater than 40 is optionally permitted. most base callers limit their maximum qv to 40, although there is no theoretical limit.to compare or merge the positional nucleotide distributions across multiple profiles, it is necessary to first perform a global profile alignment, so that homologous nucleotide positions can be determined. to demonstrate the profile alignment strategy based on using the major allele as a proxy, 2,900 sequences (a sample size divisible by 2, 4, and 10) were randomly sampled from the 2,913 avian influenza mp segments that were available from genbank and multiple degrees of partitioning and merging were compared against the reference profile, which was generated without any partitioning or merging. the results of this experiment show the effect of partition size and count, on both profile generation accuracy and compute time.the accuracy of the partition and merge strategy was measured and illustrated with the rmsd plot. the split and merge of 2, 4, and 10 partitions, were plotted against the reference as seen in figure 8 . most nucleotide distributions between merged profiles were identical to the reference with an rmsd value of 0. exceptions occurred around 450 bp (a dinucleotide repeat) and at the 5' and 3' ends, where even the reference msa was questionable due to improper gapping. the combination of lower sequencing quality towards the 3' end of sequences, mismatching sequence lengths, and short tandem repeats, typically contribute to poor end msas. overall, the merging of profiles was accurate even across 10 partitions. figure 7 example effect of percentage filtering used to reduce the coverage of ambiguity codes. in the original nucleotide distribution for a specific position, the ambiguity code d, which represents a, g, or t is called. c is likely to be a result of sequencing error, so it is preferable to exclude it when designing degenerate primers. after applying a 5% filter, the assigned ambiguity code for that position can be reduced to a w, which more accurately represents the target population (a or t). timing statistics measuring the reduction of both serial and parallel compute times using this partition and merge strategy are laid out in table 2 . parallel compute times were estimated as the sum of the parallel times for sequence alignment, profile generation, and profile merge. the serial compute times used the sum of the serial times for the same 3 steps. the parallel compute time for each step was estimated as the longest running job among partition compute times, and the serial compute time was estimated as the sum of all partition compute times. when the input sequences were split into 10 partitions, serial and parallel speedup factors of 4.4x and 41.35x were observed, respectively, with very little degradation of profile generation accuracy.deep sequencing platforms such as 454, solexa and solid provide opportunities to explore genetic diversity of populations at much greater resolution than sanger sequencing, development of quantitative and visual analyses of genome-wide variations are critical for identifying trends and assessing their biological significance. figure 3 is an example of a root mean square deviation (rmsd) plot applied to a study of viral diversity using deep sequencing data that was generated from a series of coronavirus (cov) passages. the coronavirus utilized in this study was engineered to produce a rapidly mutating phenotype. viral rna from the 1 st , 5 th and 10 th passages was subjected to rt-pcr and amplicons were deeply sequenced with solexa [13] . reads were mapped onto a sanger sequenced reference cov sequence, gen-bank accession ay278741, using razers, and a position profile was generated for each of the sequenced passages. the approximate coverage depth for base positions ranged from 500x to 1000x. there was significantly greater sequencing depth for positions covered by overlapping amplicons. the rmsd plot was then generated based on the positional rmsd values computed between the position profiles for each of the passages and the reference. the blue, green, and red glyphs represent variations from the 1 st , 5 th , and 10 th passages, respectively, for each base position. from the rmsd plot, one can determine that the positional distributions of nucleotides have increasingly deviated from the reference. with the association of annotation (not presented), an investigator can quickly determine which genes may have been impacted and focus on their analyses.the shannon entropy (se) plot was then generated to further investigate the variation within the sample of the cov population sequenced in the 10 th passage ( figure  6 ). the se plot facilitates distinguishing which positions in the sequenced genomes have higher than background levels of variation. most of the positions in the analyzed region from 25,500 -28,000 bp, have an se close to zero, which would indicate that a single allele was dominant. an se analysis over time may show se values for specific positions increase as the viral population began to adapt to growth in the cell culture, and then decrease if an advantageous variation increasingly dominates in the population. positions with consistently high se values over time may be experiencing little or no selective pressure. for example, in figure 6 , the variation seen in the se plot was higher than the background in the region between 26,000 and 26,700. this region encompasses the envelope protein and membrane protein orfs of the cov. this data may suggest to researchers that an experiment could be designed to investigate the role of these particular proteins to the cov's adaptation to growth in cell culture.a nucleotide conversion table was computed between the 1 st and 10 th passage on the same region of the cov genome that was analyzed for the rmsd and se plots (table 3 ). this nucleotide conversion table summarizes the probability that a base in the 1 st passage will change to another base by the 10 th passage. 1 st passage nucleotides have been labeled for each row on the left of the table and 10 th passage nucleotides have been labeled for each column at the top of the table. for example, there is a 0.47% probability that a g in the 1 st passage, will become an a by the 10 th passage. transition probabilities (a↔g or c↔t), which have been highlighted in bold, tend to be greater, than transversion probabilities. from the table, the probability of the transition from g®a (0.47%) is greater than the transversion probabilities for g®t (0.08%) or g®c (0.06%). however, the a®t (0.24%) and t®g (0.35%) transversions have higher rates than the a®g (0.18%) and t®c (0.28%) transitions. this contributes additional evidence that there may be some selective pressure acting upon this region of the genome, especially if these probabilities depart significantly from those computed for the entire length of the genome when using the same sequencing technology.establishing a baseline for sequencing technology specific systematic sequencing errors is especially important for the nucleotide conversion analyses, since these computed values are absolute, rather than relative to another sample's positional nucleotide distribution. since every read contributes to the overall analysis, rather than a vote towards a consensus sequence, the impact of sequencing errors on individual reads must be considered. most sequencing technologies either include a step to amplify the target dna or require quantities of dna which required the investigator to perform dna amplification a priori. it has been estimated that pcr amplification will introduce an upper bound on sequence quality which is dependent on the fidelity of the polymerase. excluding pcr slippage and mispriming, taq dna polymerase has been demonstrated to produce error rates of at least 10 -5 for base substitutions and 10 -6 for frameshift errors [14] . the application of the 2900 avian mp segments were randomly selected without replacement from the available 2913 segments in genbank. the sequences were then partitioned into 2, 4, and 10 subsets to demonstrate the effect of partitioning on profile generation time and accuracy. individual compute times for sequence alignment, profile generation, and profile merge were recorded for each job. parallel and serial compute times for sequence alignment and profile generation were computed by finding the maximum and sum, respectively, across individual job times. total parallel and serial compute times for each partition were calculated by summing up the parallel and serial compute times, respectively, across sequence alignment, profile generation, and profile merge. when partitioned into 10 subsets, serial and parallel speedup factors of 4.4 and 41.35 were observed, respectively. the source nucleotide is represented along the rows. the destination nucleotide is represented along the columns. to interpret the measure at 1 st passage g/10 th passage a, one could say there is a 0.47% probability that a g in the first passage will become an a at the 10 th passage, p(a in 10 th passage | g in 1 st passage) = 0.47%. transition frequencies have been highlighted in bold. because the table contains conditional probabilities, i.e. not marginal probabilities, the percentages in each row will sum to 100%, but the percentages down each column may not.nucleotide distribution-based filtering tools, an integral part of andes, allows the user to define a threshold for differentiating between base conversions which may be significant, versus those that should be attributed to sequencing or pcr errors.an important capability of andes is the ability to compute the summary distances between deep sequencing results to produce an n × n distance matrix. when a large group of sequences can be partitioned, for example temporally, andes can be used to quantify the differences among each partition. with the help of statistical cluster analyses tools, partitions that contain the variations of interest can be identified. as an example, the hemagglutinin (ha) coding segments of human influenza a h1n1 sequences were downloaded from ncbi and were grouped according to the collection date that was annotated in their respective genbank records. sequences were grouped into biweekly partitions when possible. if the collection day was not available, then the sequence was assigned to the partition with the same month with a null day. for example, if the collection date for a sample was june 2008, then the sample's sequence would be assigned to the 2008-06-00 partition. if the collection year was the only information recorded, then the sequence would be assigned to a partition with a null month and a null day, for example 2008-00-00. for each partition, clustalw was used to align all the sequences within the partition and a position profile was generated. a distance matrix was then generated by computing the summary rmsd value between every position profile, and r, the statistical software package, was used to produce a dendrogram with the hclust function ( figure 9 ). as apparent from the dendrogram, the human h1n1 samples that were collected from march to june 2009 have much greater sequence similarity than those collected from june 2008 to january 2009. this may be attributed to the sudden focus of h1n1 sequencing performed on potential swine origin viral samples that were collected starting march 2009. many other applications can be imagined for comparing position profiles across partitions, for example, investigating influenza diversity among different avian species or association of viral clades by geographic location.the ability to analyze groups of similar sequences that have been objectively partitioned either spatially or temporally allows individual partitions of interest to be identified. the underlying position profiles of these partitions can then be merged together to generate a new cumulative position profile from which a consensus sequence can be generated for downstream applications, such as degenerate primer design. for example, suppose it was determined that the mutation rate for a circulating virus caused a percentage of previously designed primers to fail at an unacceptable level for high throughput sequencing over a period of 4 months. by downloading sequences from genbank and building partitions of new sequences on a weekly basis, an incrementally merged profile, consisting of an arbitrarily defined time period extending into the past, can be quickly generated. after the merged profile has been converted into a consensus sequence with an appropriate threshold set to achieve the desired sensitivity, the currently used primers can be figure 9 example dendrogram clustering using an rmsd-based distance matrix. each leaf in the dendrogram represents a biweekly partition of collection dates. the cluster of leaves on the left-hand side are likely attributed to the swine origin h1n1 virus outbreak, whereas those sequences collected on the right-hand side were based on the circulating seasonal h1n1 virus.tested in silico on the new consensus sequence to determine which regions will not have the minimum required coverage depth due to predicted primer failure. new primers can then be designed on these regions based on the new consensus. because all of the sequences are included in the cumulative position profile, manual intervention is not necessary to decimate redundant sequences. as a result, it is possible to generate a consensus sequence that more closely represents the genotypes of the viral variants in circulation accurately and in a timely manner.to identify the nature of sequencing artifacts and how they may impact the analyses of a 16s metagenomic sample, andes was applied to compute empiricallydetermined quality values on a set of 454 titanium sequencing runs. these actual quality values were compared against those assigned by the 454 base caller, or associated with sequence features, such as homopolymer runs. briefly, a mock community consisting of 22 known microbial organisms from the phyla actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, deinococcus-thermus, firmicutes, and proteobacteria was established. pcr amplification targeted 3 variable regions of the ribosomal 16s gene, each approximately 500 bp in length. pcr products were then sequenced using 454 titanium. the resultant sequences were then analyzed using the blast algorithm [15] against the 16s reference database consisting only of the mock community, in order to associate each sequence with an organism and 16s copy with the highest similarity. for each (organism, 16s copy, variable region) combination, a partition of sequences was created and amoscmp was used to align the partitioned sequences against the specific (organism, 16s copy, variable region) reference sequence. a position profile was then generated based on the amoscmp results. figure 10 is an example of the estimated quality values along one of the (organism, 16s copy, variable region) combination partitions. the average coverage depth was 10,514. the majority of positions had error rates of less than 1 in 100 (qv > 20). these average qvs were then compared against the average of qvs for each position assigned by the 454 base caller in order to determine how well 454 assigned quality values correlated to actual error rates. further correlation analyses were also performed after aggregating by nucleotide type and length of homopolymer runs (not shown).the results from the studies indicate that there was little correlation between empirically determined quality values and the 454 assigned quality values. this suggests that many of the sequencing errors are unpredictable with current error models. the consensus sequences from 454 assemblies are generally of high quality because the availability of coverage depth ameliorates the impact of random errors. systematic errors, such as those caused by homopolymer runs, which cannot be addressed with additional sequencing depth, are known and accepted to be a source of error that needs be addressed in downstream processing. however, the level of individual error rates cannot be dismissed if they are intended for downstream cluster analyses, an important step prior to establishing operational taxonomic units (otus). an example of the frequency of errors along figure 10 example plot of empirically determined quality values (qv). a subregion of the 16s gene was deeply sequenced with 454 titanium and then transformed into a position profile. the average empirically determined qv was plotted on the y-axis, along the length of the genome on the x-axis. the length of an (organism, 16s copy, variable region) combination is shown in figure 10 . this pattern of random error along the entire length of the alignment is consistent with the difficulties that have been observed when using individual 454 sequences to establish otus in order to estimate population diversity [16] . contrary to initial supposition, addressing errors from homopolymer runs alone is not sufficient to solving the problem of accurately establishing otus. tools such as andes, which allow an investigator to produce an accurate local and global view of deep sequencing results, serves to make the identification of these trends more visible, so they may eventually be addressed correctly.as discussed in the "merging and comparing profiles" subsection, the alignment of two profiles uses the major allele for each positional distribution as the proxy for the alignment. while this works well for most datasets that have been analyzed, it would be preferable to use the rmsd distances between positions as actual mismatch penalties. this would make the full nucleotide distribution at each position available for optimally determining whether introducing a gap or a substitution was more suitable.the increasing cost efficiency of deep sequencing provides us with a great opportunity for asking questions about and exploring the potentially complex structure of variations within an evolving, nearly homogeneous population or a shared biomarker. we have explored the application of the andes tool sets toward understanding mutation rates of a coronavirus, aiding in the cluster analyses of seasonal versus swine origin h1n1 flu partitions, and exploring the quality of a deep sequencing technology itself. andes provides a useful tool set and a basis for the comparison of complex samples at the level of positional nucleotide distributions, both visually and statistically. these tools will help to reveal the important biological information hidden under mountains of deep sequencing data.project name: andes project home page: http://andestools.sourceforge.net/ download web site: https://sourceforge.net/projects/ andestoolsoperating system: tested and in production on linux.programming language: perl and r license: gnu gpl v3 any restrictions to use by non-academics: nonecoronaviruses have been known to medicine for some time [1] , but it is of course only very recently that the coronavirus sars-cov-2, the covid-19 virus new and dangerous to humans, was identified. it is believed to be related to an initial cluster of pneumonia cases associated with a seafood and fresh meat market in wuhan, china, [2] . current case rates at the time of writing are close to one million with close to 60,000 deaths. the genomic relationships to other coronaviruses were quickly examined by lu et al. to shed light on the origins, epidemiology, and receptor binding of the virus [2] . on january 17th , 2019, the wuhan isolate genbank entry mn908947.3 replaced mn908947.2, and mn908947.3 probably represents an adequate stable description of the sequence for research into that strain isolate, and was immediately investigated by the present author [3, 4] . originally, it was seen by authorities as a coronavirus outbreak but not as sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome). however, its genomic relationships examined in refs [3, 4] also showed many fairly close correlations with the genomes of sars-cov in the previous human (but not pandemic) outbreaks and in pigs, bats and civets, and the emphasis was on finding subsequences that are well conserved across coronavirus strains and species. the earliest patients suffering from what is now called covid-19 had overall 99·98% genome sequence identity to the above wuhan isolate, so that one may reasonably say that it is the origin of covid-19, and its virus sars-cov-2 [2] . the earlier wuhan isolates also related (with 88% identity) to two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-like coronaviruses collected in 2018 in zhoushan, china, but differed more from sars-cov (at about 79%) and mers-cov (at about 50%) [2] . the wuhan and related isolates revealed a coronavirus that resides in the subgenus sarbecovirus of the genus betacoronavirus [2] , and although genetically distinct from its predecessor sars-cov it appeared to have similar external binding proteins, meaning here the spike glycoprotein discussed extensively in the present paper. see section 1.3 below for introduction to this protein, which also discusses some further early identified genomic correlations. in addition, the rest of this present paper discusses many other genomic relationships relevant to the design of synthetic vaccines and therapeutic antagonists againstcovid-19.one problem is that covid-19 is a new pathogen posing a global threat and so presents new challenges both in primary prevention, where a vaccine is required, and in secondary prevention, where a therapeutic compound (ideally, "in a pill") is required to treat patients who are infected. it might also present challenges for tertiary prevention, which seeks to remedy a persistent level of infection, or to prevent recurrence even to essentially the same strain, as discussed in section 1.2. a main problem of concern, and a point of the present paper, is the likely appearance of new strains with resistance to vaccines and therapeutic agents. at the time of writing, confirmed cases double globally every 6 days, and undetected cases are expected to be much higher (the current plateauing of reported cases in china offers a glimpse that this this should attenuate soon, but estimates of how and when are varied). with a significant portion of humanity already infected, there is enhanced probability of successful "escape mutations" in the genome of the virus. development of vaccines and perhaps particularly therapeutics that could, but do not, take account of this by targeting less variable protein regions could be a huge waste of resource and a dangerous delay.covid-19 is, of course, by far the most serious, but not the first sars outbreak of concern to humans, and coronaviruses have for decades been of veterinary concern [1] . however, it still remains true that zoonotic coronaviruses have only rather recently seriously impacted humans, as far as is known. they include sars-cov (2002, betacoronavirus, subgenus sarbecovirus), and mers-cov (2012, betacoronavirus, subgenus merbecovirus). although the idea that sars-cov-2 was distinct from sars-cov was originally discouraged, distinction is here a matter of degree. by usual criteria they are fairly closely related, genetically clustering within betacoronavirus subgenus sarbecovirus. until very recently, sars-cov, effectively sars-cov-1, was the primary reference point and model regarding molecular and functional details, and it remains important.shortly after the appearance in genbank of the apparently final version of the wuhan seafood market isolate mn908947.3 [2] , the present author compared a variety of coronavirus genomes [3, 4] . the krsfiedllfnkv protein subsequence was seen as a potential achilles' heel because it is exposed or potentially exposable, being required for proteolytic activation cleavage, and importantly is also a well-conserved feature on the surface of the virus [3, 4] . being well conserved suggests that mutations are much less easily "accepted", meaning that the virus is less likely to survive more than one or two generations. as discussed below, the conservation is in a region of protein on the virus surface concerned with at least one step of lung cell entry, interesting because coronaviruses seem to be able readily adjust to alternative means of entry, possibly hinting at additional roles for the subsequence. whether or not that is the case, the above motif seems a likely primary target for synthetic vaccines and a basis for drug discovery, and was proposed as such [3, 4] . it is a motif that was found to be quite well conserved even in more distantly related coronaviruses [3, 4] , and the present paper also explores how far that seems to extend. it includes the common cold coronaviruses. another potential subsequence of interest popular with researchers is also examined (the ace2 binding domain discussed below), but the above remains popular with the present author because of its relatively high degree of conservation. present authors' opinion, however, it relates to a specter that recently haunted covid-19 vaccine research, and which might still cause some concerns. this is the question of why there is no significant immunity acquired by the body to prevent recurrence of common cold, of which up to roughly 30% of cases are believed to be due to coronaviruses. fortunately, at time of final writing of this paper, news reports indicate that neutralizing antibodies can be found in patients who have had covid-19. however, with the risks of escape mutations of the virus in mind, it remains worthwhile considering whether the subsequence krsfiedllfnkv, again, found to be well conserved [3, 4] across many coronaviruses [3, 4] , is still present in common cold coronavirus. this is in order to force better immune response by targeting using synthetic or cloned vaccines with this epitope. most common cold strains fall into one of two coronavirus serotypes: oc43-like and 229e-like, which are the main examples discussed below. while the common cold is generally considered as mainly an upper respiratory tract infection and a mundane inconvenience, common human coronaviruses betacoronavirus hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1, as well as alphacoronavirus hcov-229e, also cause severe lower respiratory tract infections in children and the elderly. some discussion is also given to hcov-hku1 in this paper.the above motif krsfiedllfnkv occurs in the spike glycoprotein [4] responsible for initial binding of previous sars coronaviruses to lung cells and their activation of the spike protein by a proteolytic cleavage [5] [6] [7] . the spike glycoprotein (or just "spike protein") is the familiar spike that studs the surface of the coronavirus, giving it the appearance of a crown to electron microscopy, hence "corona" (latin: crown). after the completion of the first version of the previous paper [3] , a bat virus with 97.41% identity of the amino acid sequence of the spike protein discussed extensively in the present paper, was entered into genbank as entry qhr63300.1. as of the time of final writing this on april 2 nd 2020, there is 100% match of this protein with entry yp_009724390.1 that appears to be a same or similar to the above wuhan isolate. the top hundred nonredundant matching entries found using mn908947.3 by blastp at https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast.cgi (see below) for mn908947.3 spike protein used here vary from the above 100% match down to 75 .80%, such as aau04646.1, which is a civet isolate.in viruses, proteins of a similar protruding nature, e.g. the hemagglutinin of influenza a, are primary targets for vaccine development, and important targets for development of therapeutic drugs that seek to block the virus from infecting host cells. at the time of the current project, only the three dimensional structures of the sars-cov spike proteins of the earlier sars outbreak was known (e.g. ref [8] ), which has only 75%-81% sequence match to sars-cov-2 [3] . note that it is customary to write sars-cov rather than sars-cov-1. rna viruses mutate with high frequency but so far the differences in spike proteins in emergent sars-cov-2 variants are much less. at the time of the study in late february and early march 2020, the amino acid residue sequences of the spike proteins of covid-19 isolates from different states and countries, such as california, brazil, taiwan, and india, remain identical or almost so. for example, with respect to the original wuhan isolate [2] , phenylalanine (f) is replaced by cysteine (c) as residue 797 in a swedish isolate, and alanine (a) is replaced by valine (v) as residue 990 in an indian isolate. as of 21 st march 2020, largest variants in the sars-cov-2 genome as a whole show 99.9% nucleotide sequence match, which for a genome of 29,858 rna bases, suggests approximately 30 base changes, and of the order of 5 in the spike glycoprotein gene of 3821 nucleotides. that then suggests roughly 1 to 3 amino acid differences in the spike protein of current (march 2020) sars-cov-2 variants, consistent with the above more specific observations of isolates from california etc. a single amino acid change can, of course, sometimes have significant effect, e.g. on the aggressive character of a coronavirus, and so be considered as creating a new strain. some new strains are being reported at the time of writing, but to the author's knowledge none of them are spike protein variations, and more specifically none are as yet in the krsfiedllfnkv subsequence. the left hand side of fig. 1 shows the sars-cov (previous sars) s1 spike glycoprotein within the trimer that makes up the spike. the right hand side shows sars-cov-2, the sars of current concern. all human sars coronaviruses (and indeed the spike proteins of many other related coronaviruses) appear similar in overall conformation, and the variations seen in experimental structures are probably more to do with crystallization or other preparation methods, particularly regarding solvent details and ligands. sars-cov, on the left, has been well studied and still serves as the reference model. in order to fuse with and infect cells, the spike protein needs to be in an open state; presumably the closed state makes it less vulnerable to antibodies. on the left, fig. 1 also shows the approximate positions of the cleavage points superimposed on the protein data bank (pdb) entry 5xlr for sars-cov. reading from the n-terminus of s1, the important functional elements of sars coronaviruses deduced from sars-cov studies [5, 6] and applicable to sars-cov-2 are the s1 nterminal domain (s1-ntd), the s1 c-terminal domain (s1-ctd), the s1/s2 site as the first protease cleavage site as a loop between a pleated sheet and a-helix, the fusion peptide (fp) associated with a highly disordered loop between two a-helices which contains the second cleavage site s2', and a heptad repeat (hr). the arginine (r) in the conserved motif krsfiedllfnkv that was of interest in the previous study [2] is the cleavage point in s2'.recall that the krsfiedllfnkv subsequence associated with s2' is potentially important, not least because it must be exposed or exposable (because it permits proteolytic cleavage) and therefore the site cannot be well shielded. the experimental three dimensional structures of coronavirus spike proteins do not for the most part reveal the large amount of glycosylation that protects most of the spike protein surface. possibly the major problem, however, is not so much in the selection of accessible surface regions as a basis for design entry inhibitor and vaccine design [8, 9] but that the coronavirus readily escapes from such agents by mutation, including in the spike protein [10, 11] . this is the further importance of being a highly conserved motif, i.e. a subsequence that does not readily change from strain to strain except for a conservative sidechain replacement in more remote strains. of course, as one carries the study forward to more distantly related viruses, one expects the motif to differ at some stage, and this is investigated later below. in contrast, nonetheless, the pigag motif "associate with the s1/s2 cleavage site disappears in coronaviruses that are not too distantly related [3, 4] . as noted above, a high degree of conservation of krsfiedllfnkv in the face of genetic indicates that it is in some way important to the virus, presumably for the proteolytic activation cleavage, and/or initial binding to lung cells, but there could be other interactions with other proteins, i.e. to reduce an inflammatory response, as discussed later below.agents.modern computer-driven strategies, and the kind of chemical products that they help produce, differ substantially from the earlier and more familiar approaches in which the computer played little if any role. in large part this is due to the invention of automatable peptide synthesis by merrifield in 1963, who used solid phase peptide synthesis based on crosslinked polystyrene beads [12] . traditional vaccines are purely biological, being composed of dead or attenuated strains of pathogen (meaning mainly, viruses and bacteria). in contrast, a synthetic vaccine is a vaccine consisting mainly of synthetic peptides but also sometimes carbohydrates, often linked to a carrier protein to render it immunogenic. such vaccines produced via chemical synthesis are safer because they do not involve cell-derived material or biological processes for production. their purity can be controlled as in the case of classical drugs. the world's first synthetic vaccine was created in 1982 from diphtheria toxin by louis chedid (scientist) from the pasteur institute and michael sela from the weizmann institute. in 1986, manuel elkin patarroyo created spf66, the first version of a synthetic vaccine for malaria. primarily applications so far have been veterinary. many early vaccines used dead samples of foot and mouth disease virus to inoculate animals, but they caused real outbreaks. scientists discovered that a vaccine could be made using only a single key protein from the virus, and later also found that loops from the surface proteins could be cloned or used in cloned or synthetic constructs. novartis vaccine and diagnostics, among other companies, developed a synthetic approach that very rapidly generates vaccine viruses from amino acid sequence data in order to be able to administer vaccinations early in a pandemic outbreak.traditional vaccines have so far remained the popular choice, but during the h1n1 outbreak in 2009, they only became available in large quantities after the peak of human infections. this was a learning experience for vaccine companies. creating vaccines synthetically would be currently more expensive but has the ability to increase the speed of production and to retune and fine tune the solution to combat new variations in pathogens. this is all especially important in the event of a pandemic. synthetic vaccines are also considered to be safer by researchers than vaccines grown from e.g. eggs or from bacterial cultures (in the latter case there may even be other viruses present). cloned proteins can however reflect the same desirable principles; regions of pathogen amino acid sequence acting as epitopes (see below) can be presented as loops at the surface of a cloned protein. the general idea is that synthetic vaccines are freer of contaminants and focus on the essential features of the required immune response. they can also be developed in a more logical step by step approach. for example, sometimes diagnostics are considered as a useful early step on the way to a vaccine, since they are only required to raise antibodies in animals such as sheep for diagnostic kit production, not to be safe in humans and also raise immune system memory and a cellular as well as antibody response.synthetic vaccines also have the advantage that they can be seen as cartridge vaccines, meaning that they contain bits and pieces that can readily be replaced by others to update the vaccine in order to combat new strains of pathogen. a synthetic vaccine thus has several functional components, looking somewhat like a swiss army knife under the electron microscope. the key component reproduces the essential features of a pathogen protein that the immune system sees. it is an epitope that typically means a patch of some 5 to 20 amino acid residues. reproduced as a short peptide, epitopes can be considered as haptens. haptens are substances with a low molecular weight such as peptides, small proteins and drug molecules that are generally not immunogenic and require the aid of a carrier protein to stimulate a response from the immune system in the form of antibody production. there are two main types of epitope, b and t, discussed in theory section 2. a synthetic vaccine consists of t-epitopes as haptens (for cell response and immune system memory), molecular adjuvant (e.g. muramyl dipeptide), and possibly excitatory or anti-inhibitory peptides. b-epitopes are good for raising antibodies in e.g. sheep to use in diagnostics/biosensors, all attached to, or cloned into, a carrier protein. the latter must be safe but at the same time sufficiently different from any human protein to avoid autoimmune disease. used extensively as a carrier protein in the production of antibodies for research, biotechnology and therapeutic applications, keyhole limpet hemocyanin (klh) is the most widely employed carrier protein, and least for studies using laboratory animals. for humans the food and drug authorities may have other preferences for carrier protein, but klh illustrates the desired features. its large size and numerous epitopes generate a substantial immune response, and abundance of lysine residues for coupling haptens allows a high hapten:carrier protein ratio, increasing the likelihood of generating hapten-specific antibodies. because klh is derived from the limpet, a gastropod, it is phylogenetically distant from mammalian proteins, thus reducing false positives in immunologically-based research techniques in mammalian model organisms, and clinically avoiding autoimmune effects. so far, the food and drug authorities do not seem to have favored synthetic vaccines for human use, but this may be more to do with the peptides themselves than the carrier proteins available. the earlier methods of peptide synthesis did not achieve high levels of purity. however, this has changed and quite elaborate peptides as well as proteins can be made, facilitated by making peptide synthesizers run fast to avoid the slower side reactions, and by methods that join shorter synthetic peptides into longer chains [43] [44] [45] [46] .one of the original motivations for the present study was to capture experience and design strategies from vaccine, diagnostic and antagonist design [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . methods by the author and colleagues ranged from the expert system approach to automated bioinformatics and protein modeling [26] [27] [28] and automated drug design (e.g. refs [29] [30] [31] [32] ). see also ref [33] . more recently there has been an automated approach based on the proposed q-uel language [34] [35] [36] [37] . the more fine-grained principles for the design of synthetic peptide vaccines, and antagonist peptides made of d-amino acids, are discussed in some detail in the previous paper [3] . a variety of bioinformatics techniques are available to help in development of these solutions (e.g. ref [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] ), as well as computational (e.g. refs [33] ) and synthetic techniques (e.g. ref [43] ). the q-uel language [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] used in the preceding work [3] is also a means of gathering relevant information from the world wide web efficiently when encountering a new problem such as an epidemic caused by a new virus, or at least a problem new to the researcher [3, 4, 38] . it also enables more automated interaction with websites for publically available bioinformatics tools. the motivation for this was all the stronger because the popular highly integrated approach to bioinformatics' called the biology workbench at the university of san diego supercomputer center has been no longer available for some time [39] . however, the standard bioinformatics tools (e.g. refs [40] [41] [42] ) used in the present study can of course be used readily by researchers reasonably experienced in bioinformatics.although peptidomimetics (containing amino acids that would not occur in normal ribosome-based biosynthesis) have been considered by authors as a basis for haptens in synthetic vaccines, they are in the author's opinion probably best considered as potential therapeutic antagonists. in the present study, the specific aims include design of molecules to impede binding and activation of the spike glycoprotein at the surface of lung cells [5] [6] [7] . synthetic peptides copied from subsequences in the spike protein could be used directly for such clinical purposes, but then an important design step would be to render them resistant to biodegradation by human proteases. this is typically by inclusion of d-amino acid residues [44] [45] [46] [47] .previously, in the author's personal opinion, peptides and peptidiomimetics have been currently best considered as first steps in the research and development of small organic "in a pill molecules" of the traditional kind favored the by the pharmaceutical industry. their role there nonetheless is a powerful one, linking amino acid sequences seen in nature, conveniently already "designed" by millions of years of evolution, to (typically) smaller novel organic molecules designed to have van-der-waal's and electrostatic features in the binding site. however, the author's reticence has been largely based on cost, including cost in changing traditional production strategy, and in the reservations of food and drug authorities, but fairly recently all that appears to be changing. thpdb (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/thpdb/) includes an example of a manually curated repository of peptides and related molecules approved by the us food and drug administration (fda). over some 70 peptide drugs are approved in the us and other major markets, and those in pipelines and in or approaching clinical trials may now be exceeding 200 entries. as natural compounds, peptide drugs are typically less toxic than more traditional chemical candidates. although d-amino acids are not natural features of ribosomal production of peptides and proteins, human metabolism can handle them. they occur in gut microbes and ingested material and in human proteins they form spontaneously in a kind of aging process from some amino acids in situ in protein sequences (e.g. l to d-aspartate). diverse d-amino acids such as d-serine, d-aspartate, d-alanine, and d-cysteine are found as free amino acids and small peptides as well as in some proteins, and quite commonly in mammals. they are often found having playing important roles in the nervous system. for example, n-methyl-daspartate (nmda) receptors are associated with learning and memory and d-serine, daspartate, and d-alanine bind to those receptors. hydrogen sulfide generated from dcysteine reduces disulfide bonds in receptors and potentiates their activity. peptides made of d-amino acids resist not only normal proteolytic degradation but also resist an immune response (unless attached to a carry protein) [44, 46] . they persist some 4-6 days in the body, which is an ideal time period for pharmaceutical action, and are ultimately degraded to safe products (probably mainly in the peroxisomes and by enzymes in the kidneys) [44, 46] . the negative aspect is that they do have higher entropy to overcome than many drugs of more traditional form, but in practice this appears to be more a barrier to computer simulation of binding than to the real molecule, as extensively discussed below.studying the binding of synthetic peptides or small organic molecules to human proteins benefits from computer simulations of the solute-solvent system, and it was early found that these should ideally include water molecules in a detailed way because there are hydrogen bonding options between water molecules and amino acid residues which are not particularly intuitive [48, 49] . in most cases, the spatial locations of hydrogen atoms are deduced rather than seen in experimental protein and peptide three dimensional structures. this is likely to impact considerations of docking ligands to protein targets. in the present author's opinion, this provides a beneficial possibility for retroinverso designs [3] made by reversing the sequence and using d-amino acids that has the unfortunate or complicating effect of interchanging the c=o and n-h groups in the backbone of the synthetic peptide [3] . the beneficial possibility is that, for example, a repulsive c=o…o=c electrostatic interaction between a synthetic peptide and the spike protein could be ameliorated in the manner c=o…h…o=c where the h is a water, serine or threonine hydrogen atom, or by c=o…h-o-h…o=c, albeit that in practice the water molecule likely lies more to the side of the o..o interaction vector. somewhat similar considerations apply to any n-h…h-n interactions that can ameliorated by the lone pair orbitals of an oxygen atom. both could also involve tautomerization and/or rearrangement of internal hydrogen bonding networks (e.g. in the manner …o-h…o-h…. to …h-o..h-o…). today, to take care of such matters, researchers consider docking of ligand to protein and high grade molecular dynamics simulations of the overall solute-solvent system by molecular dynamics, at least as the final refinement step [50] , but even the awareness that the above compensations and others can take place can make it worthwhile to synthesize and test a proposal. somewhat similarly, design of peptide synthetic vaccines and diagnostics can make direct use of peptides duplicating sequence motifs in the pathogen protein found by bioinformatics and relatively simple computational tools. after that, researchers often go straight to synthesis and experimental immunological testing of the constructs rather than using complex simulations [51] [52] [53] . epitope predictions for sars-cov-2 (simply meaning the choice of amino acid residue subsequences to synthesize for synthetic vaccines, but also for peptidomimetic antagonists) have been made by several authors (e.g. ref [54] ). they have typically made use of extensive historical experimental data about the amino acid residue sequences of epitopes such as the epitope database and analysis resource (iedb) and the virus pathogen resource (vipr) (e.g. ref [54] ).the immune system by its nature can make its own adjustments to recognize pathogens and vaccines, but designing some kind of therapeutic antagonist against virus binding to the lung cells requires rather more consideration about what human protein the spike protein is binding. bioinformatics as the study of biosequences is a powerful tool, but it is well known that having the detailed three dimensional structure of the human protein target for a potential new pharmaceutical agent, or to which a virus attaches, is a great benefit to rational computer-aided design. studies specifically investigating human protein binding and activation of previously known sars viruses have for some years been carried out by several groups (e.g. [54] [55] [56] [57] ). it seems reasonably well agreed that angiotensin converting enzyme type 2 (ace2) is responsible for binding the sars associated with the 2002 outbreak, combined with a proteolytic cleavage to activate the spike protein, for which type ii transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) is the current popular candidate [3] . several three dimensional structures are known for ace2 complexed with sars spike protein e.g. protein data bank (pdb) entry (6acg) and of variants of the latter (e.g. tmprss2 protein data bank entry 2oq5).however, the full story involving human cell surface proteins (with which sars-cov-2 interacts in order to infect and replicate) is possibly not quite as firmly established at the time of this present study as some summaries would suggest. the origin of the general problem for a more detailed conformational chemistry approach is that diversity of genome and means of infecting cells are readily generated in nature in the case of different virus hosts, virus strains, and species jumps, and it is long established that the binding shows variation in the receptors used that correspond to viral groups. there have been alternative proposed candidates for initial binding receptors, e.g. carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (ceacam1), and various dipeptidyl peptidases. highly virulent coronaviruses that form syncytia between cells can even spread in a receptor-independent fashion. even when an initial binding receptor such as ace2 is identified for a coronavirus, initial uncertainty or enduring complexity for the rest of the entry process may be the norm. many other human proteases present in the lung seem capable of cleaving various sites on the spike protein and which could cause its activation. for example, a variety of proteases such as trypsin, tryptase clara, mini-plasmin, human airway trypsin-like protease (hat), and tmprss2 (transmembrane protease, serine 2) are known to cleave the glycoprotein hemagglutinin (ha) of influenza a viruses as prerequisite for the fusion between viral and host cell membranes and viral cell entry. human airway trypsin like protease (hat), tmprss3, tmprss4, tmprss6 have also all been considered by sars researchers at various stages. other human proteins that might have similar involvement to the above in the sars-cov-2 case, and that are also affected by the same antagonists against the sars-cov-2 targets in the preceding paragraph, have also attracted the attention of researchers. the trypsin-like serine protease hepsin which has a fairly broad action and which is significantly inhibited by a diverse set of ligands, a particular example of one such binding is represented by protein data bank entry 5ce1. even intracellular proteases could be released on cell damage resulting from the first wave of lung infection or from other disease or tissue trauma. some variants and strains may use other, as yet unknown, proteins, or sugars, to assist entry. it is also plausible the spike protein might be activated by other proteases on exit from the epithelial lung cells, so allowing it efficiently to infect other cells. the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 also has the so-called furin cleavage sequence (prrars or prrars), which is an extension to the so-called pigag motif of ref [3] . consistent with the present author's preferred choice of krsfiedllfnkv motif, coronaviruses with high sequence homology (such as that isolated from a bat in yunnan in 2013), lack the furin cleavage sequence. nonetheless, because furin proteases are abundant in the respiratory tract, sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein might be cleaved on exit from cells.even if the means of binding, activation and entry is well established for a viral strain, recall that a single rna base difference resulting in a single amino acid residue difference could alter all that, and there also appear to be several other possibilities that the virus can exploit in parallel. indeed, somewhat similarly, potential inhibitors of sars entry and/or activation proposed by researchers (e.g. refs [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] ) may work by several routes in parallel, and significantly at least three mechanisms were reported in one relevant study [61] .once a target protein and its relevant binding site are clearly understood, methods are available for screening available ligands (binding molecules) to bind to those sites as potential antagonists, or even for "growing" or evolving antagonist molecules in those sites, whether smaller organic molecules [29] [30] [31] or peptides [32] . pharmaceutical chemists have long used evidence and hunches to deduce a pharmacophore, i.e. an abstract description of recurrent molecular features that are necessary for molecular recognition of the ligand by the protein [3] . a pharmacophore ultimately implies at least a schematic model of the interfacial surface between ligand and protein, but in practice, a pharmacophore tends to be either considered from the perception of the ligand (one compares similar inhibitors etc.) or from the perception of the binding site (one compares positions of key residues in the binding site). the choice depends on the quality of each kind of data, but could involve both. historically, drug design was frequently based only on indirect deduction of binding site features using the chemical features of the ligands which successfully inhibit (or in a few instances excite) a response. this is essentially the use of quantitative structure activity relationships (qsar). in effect the perception of the binding site was indirect and typically based on the chemist's expertise and hunches, and so often extremely "fuzzy". subsequent elucidation of many protein structures with clear pictures of their binding sites led to a crisper physical perspective, exemplified by a study [50] that included many ligand molecules in the present investigation, and so faced some similar issues. in the approach which may now be considered traditional, docking calculations are fast, using grid maps that consist of a three dimensional lattice of regularly spaced points, centered on some region of interest of the protein target under study.as discussed above, ace2 and tmprss2 are very likely correct targets, but again they are not necessarily the only targets even for cell entry of current sars-cov-2, and the mechanisms used by each new coronavirus strain can differ, as the result of even a single amino acid residue change. in such circumstances, the conservation of the krsfiedllfnkv motif might be considered suspicious. the activation cleavage is at the arginine (r) and workers tend to conclude that this site is more essential for action than s1/s2, and mutation of the arginine (r) specifically inhibits trypsindependent fusion in both cell-cell fusion and laboratory assays. but also, with the arginine retained, many other proteases can active the spike protein as above, and others can do so in laboratory conditions. because of the conservation, one might therefore hold the seemingly reasonable hypothesis that this site is not also susceptible to cleavage and activation by other extracellular proteolytic enzymes, but also doing something else. whether or not this is so, all this complexity makes detailed interaction models of spike protein binding and activation difficult, and while the "best bet" for ranking the choices of target protein may currently seem obvious, making a reasonable, currently conventional, choice which is actually an incorrect assumption can delay productive research into therapeutic agents. in the case of the hunt for prevention and cure of virus diseases, and particularly covid-19, there seems to be increased justification for a "fuzzier" set-theoretic picture of a pharmacophore as an ensemble of different binding sites, or of ligands in a ligand-oriented perspective, as follows. many of these, and perhaps all, suggest that even if one is using an incorrect picture of the mechanisms of entry and replication, even using the "wrong" or less important protein target, one might achieve some success. in brief summary, the justifications for the ensemble pharmacophore in the coronavirus case, i.e. the contributions to "fuzziness", include parsimony, that proteins and parts of proteins sometimes have more than one function [12] encouraged by limited numbers of accessible sites (due to e.g. glycosylation) and exemplified by parallel alternative mechanisms of cell entry, multiple methods of drug action, escape from scientific defense measures by virus mutation, polymorphism of human proteins involved, different expression levels of human proteins involved, and the potential problem of the "specter of vaccine development" (concerns about missing the appropriate region of the virus that allows common cold viruses to escape the appropriate immune response). to the above may be of course added the fact that even if an experimental researcher is convinced of the value a specific protein as appropriate target, the picture for the computational chemist is a fuzzy one. the system itself, real and simulated, is to be seen as a statistical mechanical ensemble of multiple states, sampled over the population of molecules and across their conformational behavior in time. not least, protein binding sites are often partially disordered before binding, and in any case there may be several binding modes. picking the right one can be difficult because there is a fine balance between solvent and conformational entropy, and entropy is notoriously hard to compute [12] .given this argued uncertainty as to the nature of the target protein and its binding site, a broader initial net as an ensemble pharmacophore can help. docking approaches are continually being improved by researchers, and recently include ways of combining features that could ultimately relate to different protein binding sites. while many authors of these studies include the word "ensemble" in their discussion of pharmacophores, they appeared to be significantly different to the particular means of combining multiple pharmacophores that was explored here. however, the present author has had his attention drawn to some that are rather similar and the approach of kumar [33] appears to particularly akin, especially in regard to distributions of expected values and use of weighting. kumar's description [33] thus suffices, and briefly stated, it explores the ability of an ensemble of selected protein-ligand complexes to populate pharmacophore space in the ligand binding site, assesses the importance of pharmacophore features using poisson statistical and information-theoretic entropy calculations, and generates the pharmacophore models with high probabilities. a scoring function then combines all the resultant high-scoring pharmacophore models. there is one significant operational difference between kumar's approach and that used here. recall that in the more traditional docking approach, it is the ligand as candidate drug that is typically seen as the variable and constantly changing and in many studies "evolving" the ligand chemistry with the pharmacophore is the basis of drug design [29] [30] [31] [32] . ref [50] , related to the present study, has aspects of that applied in a different way. kumar's approach can, however, combine the perspective of both pharmacophore and ligand as conceptual variables. despite that, the present author's approach, as used in the present overall project, considers one candidate ligand at a time. this seems less efficient from the point of view of designing candidates, and not even as smart as the older single, non-probabilistic pharmacophore approaches [29] [30] [31] [32] . nonetheless, a single, simpler one-ligand-at-a-time strategy is both adequate and appropriate in the present case. this is because there is already a data collection of candidate antagonists to build on [50] , as discussed in section 1.7.approaches of the ensemble pharmacophore kind are currently highly recommended for investigation of sars-cov-2 and for the spike protein in particular, again because of some uncertainties and the likely multiple functions of some spike protein features. however, it has not as yet had significant impact in the present study. the approach actually taken remains consistent in the sense that inclusion of one particular source for a pharmacophore, an enzyme considered by the author, was evidently going to dominate the ensemble because of certain similarities in the antagonists of sars virus entry and inhibitors of the enzyme [3] , given the knowledge available at this time. that choice is not, however, obvious, as follows.pharmacophore.what may be more controversial is the case when there is a representative choice and it is a protein that is not obviously relevant to the target protein, or simply not "on the radar" of coronavirus researchers. what makes it a candidate is not necessarily that it is relevant to viral infection and not necessarily that it has an evolutionary relationship to proteins that are considered relevant, although this is a question addressed briefly in this paper. rather, it may simply be based on the pragmatic notion that there may be ligands, potential binding molecules as antagonists, which are common to both more popular choices human target proteins and a less obvious candidate. the small organic molecule emodin has been found to inhibit sars coronavirus entry [59, 60] , as also so have other compounds some of which have emodin-like features [3, 61] . similar molecules, and importantly emodin itself, are also inhibitors of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, an example of a steroid binding enzyme [62] . it is normally anchored within the endoplasmic reticulum through an nterminal transmembrane domain. its involvement as a protein target is here based on a chemical justification. a biological justification might be that this enzyme is involved in the inflammation response which a coronavirus might also benefit by inhibiting. if so, the goal is not, of course, to help the virus by inhibiting at the same target which it would also gain by inhibiting, but rather to inhibit protein targets more crucial to it, i.e. for cell entry and possibly replication which are even more crucial to the virus. some inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 might even be a desirable thing because excessive or prolonged inflammation (including in response to pathogens) is well known to be potentially damaging to the host. an excessive inappropriate immune response may also include the basis of allergic reactions and even of autoimmune diseases.a pragmatic reason for this choice of protein as pharmacophore is that was also one of those protein-ligand interaction systems that have been well studied by the present author and collaborators [50] . such studies pursued the idea of using a more rigid molecular framework, including the steroid framework and fragments of it, as a more rigid scaffold for active drug groups [50] . importantly, that study and subsequent work has already established data base of compounds that bind to 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, and it includes many molecules including some discussed in this paper that again have some of the features of emodin. it also includes many weak binders that could also be much stronger binders at what turns out to be a more obviously relevant protein target. these issues can be addressed quickly in the laboratory and certainly seem worthy of investigation before addressing the more popular targets.there was a further implication in the previous paper [3] , though not a requirement for its main arguments, that the peptides designed on the basis of the krsfiedllfnkv motif bind the same krsfiedllfnkv site as do emodin-like molecules. that seems currently to be an even less reliable assumption than the assumption that the above steroid dehydrogenase enzyme is relevant to coronavirus biology, and it is not of course an assumption that even matters if either a peptidomimetic and/or small organic molecule is found effective. however, again keeping in mind that there are a limited number of accessible, conserved sites in the spike protein, and that these may be involved in multiple mechanisms as discussed above, common targets for action of both peptides and smaller organics like emodin seems plausible. partially the problem is extensive glycosylation. it is well known that glycosylation plays an important role in receptor-ligand recognition but also have structural influence in receptor-ligand recognition because of its bulky shape caused by branched side chains. for that and other reasons it may be that the krsfiedllfnkv site is, with just a little variation, almost the only site on the spike protein that is persistently recognizable in coronavirus strains, and so presumably carrying out an important function and accessible, as also discussed in this paper. angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) binding is however also considered in this paper.a number of ideas and principles, borrowed in established and recent design of synthetic vaccines and petidomimetics, were used (see ref [3] for discussion and e.g. refs [63] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] ), as well as some of the ideas that lie behind the popular zinc data base [70] . as discussed in refs [3, 4] , the present investigation started as a use case for the hyperbolic dirac net (hdn) and particularly the associated q-uel language for automated inference [34] [35] [36] [37] . the theory has been discussed elsewhere, e.g. in refs [34] [35] [36] [37] , which relate more to the practical and general uses of q-uel. these considerations are less important here because present studies can be reproduced by standard bioinformatics and molecular modeling means. nonetheless, it is doubtful that the research for refs [3, 4] could have been done and written up so rapidly without the aid of q-uel to interact with websites of the world wide web, gather knowledge, and facilitate use of the publically available bioinformatics tools [3] .the challenge is ultimately one of molecular recognition but in practice many key principles for hapten design relate to distinguishing types of naturally occurring epitope. by the term "epitope" in this paper is meant "continuous epitope", though several smaller epitopes may be joined to represent a discontinuous epitope in which conformation and relative position in space can sometimes be important. while a synthetic construct implies the use of synthetic chemistry typically combined with a judicious carrier protein to which the peptide is linked chemically, constructs can also be obtained by cloning, using protein engineering principles [12] . the terms b-epitope and t-epitope relate to the traditional picture of a bone marrow b or thymus t response. b cell epitopes occur at the surface of the protein against which an immune system response is required. they are recognized by b cell receptors or antibodies in their native structure, and are concerned with the bone marrow response and antibody production. t epitopes may be buried inside protein structures and released by proteolysis, and are traditionally considered as concerned with a cellular response and immune system memory, i.e. active immunity. continuous b cell epitope prediction is very similar to t cell epitope prediction. the focus is on b-epitopes here, though a bepitope can also be (or overlap with) a t-epitope especially if it has a significant content of hydrophobic residues. prediction of these has traditionally been based has mainly been based on the amino acid properties such as hydrophilicity, charge, exposed surface area and secondary structure. there are many predictive algorithms available, but the present author prefers a more "expert system" kind of approach that incudes experimental data, though the above biophysical considerations certainly still play a strong role (see below).infection.the previous paper [3] focused primarily on design of synthetic peptides as infection antagonists. however, partly for the reason of greater conformational flexibility discussed below, smaller less flexible organic molecules (i.e. with fewer rotatable bonds) are the traditional province of the synthetic chemist rather than use of an automated peptide synthesizer, are preferred for pharmaceutical application.consideration of peptides is more often considered as merely a useful intermediate step in more traditional pharmaceutical compound design. biodegradability per se of peptides is not the main concern, since including d-amino acids in the design prevents proteolysis. in preliminary docking and simulation studies, the peptides do bind to 11βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, but less strongly and with several binding modes [3] . this weaker binding is not in itself a contraindication of the idea that these peptides bind at the same site as the more rigid non-peptide molecules, because it is an expected consequence of the much greater flexibility of peptides compared with molecules with, for example, multiple aromatic ring scaffolds. conventional wisdom (e.g. ref [12] ) frequently uses the rule-of-thumb that the total change in intramolecular (bond rotational) entropy of a peptide ligand is roughly t∆s total = 1.5 kcal⋅mol −1 per residue at 300 k, corresponding approximately to a 12-fold reduction in conformational freedom per residue on binding. because van der wall's and hydrogen bonding tend to be very roughly equivalent for peptides in water and in well bound forms, the water entropy effects known as hydrophobic effects (along with electrostatic forces) play an important role in determining the balance of energies and final outcome. krsfiedllfnkv would thus cost about +19.5 kcal/mole entropic contribution to bind rigidly, primarily compensated by hydrophobic contacts at up to about -1.7 kcal/mole in going from an aqueous to a non-polar environment, i.e. -22.1 kcal/mole for a 13 residue peptide or analogue of krsfiedllfnkv. that example would not favor binding, but the proper calculation is in the details which of should show balance that favors good binding if that is found to be the case experimentally. despite the above comments, the flexibility of peptides does provide more opportunities to fit a specific binding site, i.e. they can show some accommodation and they are more tolerant to imperfections in the design process. however, this is also an argument for their importance as an intermediate step in the design of more conventional pharmaceutical agents.the main methods are essentially standard bioinformatics approaches as used in refs [3, 4] . some methods, e.g. rules for epitope prediction, are best discussed in context in results section 4. the q-uel methods specifically for bioinformatics are discussed in [38] , and those for computational chemistry and docking of compounds are those using krunch as described in ref [3] and the appendix to ref [50] . they are somewhat unorthodox by focusing on heuristics to handle the multiple energy minimum problem, but the end effect is probably similar to that of long runs using high grade molecular dynamics calculations, given opportunities for calibration [50] . epitope predictions lie in more traditional "one dimensional" bioinformatics, and in this paper and the previous paper depended on predictions using a gor4 secondary structure prediction of α-helix (h), extended chain or β-sheet (e), and coil or loop (c). the reason for this and the particular use of gor4 is discussed in ref [3] , but briefly, it is in part because sections predicted by runs of c tend to be immunogenic even if they are incorrect as structure predictions [3] . however, charged residues in α-helices and βsheets are believed to be occasionally b-epitopes, and short sections extended chain can effectively imply loops. the core and initial rules for b-epitope prediction used in the present study consider (i) surface exposure when a three dimension structure is known, but allowing for conformational adjustment to expose residue when in a likely disordered or flexible loop, scores +2, (ii) known exposure based on other kind experiment, which also recognizes the possibility that a partially buried site by the above criteria can be brought to the surface on binding, notably for proteolytic cleavage [3] , (iii) runs of amino acid from the set [stnqy] score +1, from the set [dekhr] they score +2, and from the set [livfcm] they score -1, (iv) runs of secondary structure prediction as coil or loop c, though runs of three or less e and the first and last three of helix h can be considered as c for this purpose, score +1, and (v) the motif nx(s/t)x of asparagine (n) serine (s) or threonine (t), where x means "not a proline" (p) scores +2. however, this will not permit a corresponding peptidomimetic or vaccine without considering glycopeptide synthesis technology. see discussion below, which would justify a negative score, depending on the technology available.in addition, these may be combined with predictions based on significant homology with proven epitopes in data bases, which has already been done by several groups for sars-cov-19 (e.g. ref [54] ).for sources of data concerning covid-19 virus spike proteins, genbank and the protein data bank were the main sources. there was some use of in-house collections of data, e.g. of typical b-epitopes and t-epitopes, although publically available collections would probably serve the same function. there was also use also of a data base of non-peptide ligand molecules of potential interest already generated during and since the work described in ref [50] that was used where appropriate. many of these molecules (including emodin) are also found on the public zinc data base [70] as indicated in results section 4 below, but several, including derivatives of carbenoxelone, are not, and these derivatives are of interest as potential coronavirus antagonists. to look up an entry on the zinc data base by the codes used in this and other papers, one can go to http://zinc15.docking.org/ substances/ and enter zinc00011032. in an automated approach such as that favored by q-uel, a variable (such as a perl variable $mol) to zinc00011032 and is set an the q-uel application goes to http://zinc15.docking.org/substances/search/?q=$mol. any references to experimental binding results concern data from cited papers, and see for example ref [69] for typical methods used for natural herbal compounds. as discussed in ref [3] , q-uel helped gather these in the form of q-uel knowledge representation tags, so they become part of the growing knowledge representation store.in regard to peptides and proteins, table 1 used in ref [3] shows the standard iupac one-letter codes used for amino acid residues in sequences throughout this paper. table 1 . one letter amino acid codes used in the text.conservative replacements are those common substitutions from a peptide design perspective, but for example phenylalanine (f), isoleucine (i), and alanine (a) are seen as natural substitutions that appear in discussion of spike protein sequence motifs later below. these amino acid residues have hydrophobic sidechains but they are not conservative replacements but rather substantially different size. a reasonable explanation is of course that sidechain size conservation matters less when the sidechains are at exposed at the surface of the protein. similar notions underlie the idea that what can readily replace what is not always an equal probability in each direction. in that respect, table 1 tends to reflect the changes that are used in the present project for design, when starting from epitopes.the previous paper [3] should not give the impression that the specific motifs discussed (and particularly krsfiedllfnkv) are the only sections likely of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to be of interest in the above respect. the preference for one choice was based on (a) conservation across many strains, suggesting that the site has an important function and is likely at the spike surface, and (b) avoiding the shielding of the spike protein by extensive glycosylation. the dramatic effect of relaxing these restrictions is a major point of this section, in which a large number of candidates are found. over-prediction is not necessarily a bad thing, because once a laboratory has a peptide synthesizer and other tools for constructing and testing designs, it is relatively easy and cheap to test and reject ideas, and more problematic to miss opportunities. the intention here is also to cover most possibilities, to enable index numbers to be assigned to them according to their order in the sequence (putative epitope 1 etc). consequently, in future one may then readily refer to the index number, or speak of a new proposal or experimental epitope extending, overlapping, or even lying between two of these epitopes. they are primarily to be seen as b-epitope predictions, though they are favored if some t-epitopic character is also expected.an initial step is based on adding up weights as described in methods section 3.2. in practice, there was also some judicious use of expertise and an epitope data base in an attempt to refine assignments. recall that the trimeric sars coronavirus (sars-cov) spike glycoprotein consists of three s1-s2 heterodimers. some of these will be shielded by that configuration during most of the life cycle of the virus, but not necessarily in every s protein monomer, and also shielded by glycosylation. the higher scoring predicted epitopes in the sequence below are underlined and in bold, and are primarily to be considered as b-epitopes but with some extension to include t-epitope character where possible. also included in these predictions are those using the immune epitope database and analysis resource (iedb) and the virus pathogen resource (vipr) which have already been made [54] (see later below). these are shown in underlined, bold, and in italics in the following, and since some are contiguous sections that look like a single long representation in the following, they are also stated separately below. it is apparent that while focus was on just krsfiedllfnkv, if strain variation and glycosylation are ignored then much of the spike protein sequence contains epitope candidates. 10 20many of the epitopes predicted in the present study overlap with prediction made using the immune epitope database and analysis resource (iedb) and the virus pathogen resource (vipr) [54] , and these comprised the following.recall that one of the reasons for the original single preferred candidate krsfiedllfnkv was that many of predicted epitopes contain evidence of glycosylation, reflecting the last of the "rules" (v) in methods section 3.1 above. that rule has, however, a special status, and the present author has tended to consider them undesirable for synthetic vaccine or diagnostic development. it indicates likely glycosylation of the protein. the bulky oligosaccharides so attached can be immunogenic, but they are rather difficult to work with synthetically, traditionally expected to make bulk production expensive, and may be variable in structure which cannot typically be seen in detail in experimental three dimensional protein structures (typically as obtained by x-ray crystallography or high grade electron microscopy). antibodies that are raised against the glycosylated surface patch of the protein or corresponding synthetic glycopeptides may be specific for their carbohydrate units. these can be recognized irrespective of the peptides, or in the context of the adjacent amino acid residues. conformation and exposure of b-peptide epitopes of glycoproteins may be modulated by glycosylation because of intramolecular carbohydrate-protein interactions. the beneficial versus undesirable effects of glycosylation in synthetic vaccines is also a complex matter. glycosylation may be essential for reactivity with the antibody, but conversely it may in effect inactivate the capabilities of a section of amino acid sequence to function as a b-epitope, which seems to be a very good reason for giving the glycosylation motif a strong negative rather than positive score. unfortunately this will depend on the structure of the antigenic site and antibody fine specificity, and the recognition mechanisms involved are not fully clear. there is a (usually) positive aspect, however, in the current view that similar effects of glycosylation apply to t-celldependent cellular immune and igg antibody responses, and that glycosylated peptides can elicit glycopeptide-specific t cell clones after being bound and presented by mhc class i or ii molecules. it is of course only a positive aspect if the intended effect is obtained by the synthetic construct.the overall spike glycoprotein protein sequence shown above changes across the coronaviruses, but the krsfiedllfnkv subsequence is most notable amongst the exceptions. it extends to the common cold coronaviruses with minor variation, and may imply a better targeted approach to stimulate immunity. for common colds caused by the rhinovirus, recent research suggests misdirection of antibody responses against a non-protective epitope as a mechanism how the virus escapes immunity and so permits recurrent infections [71] . a clearer understanding of conserved subsequences in coronaviruses may also help tune the action of toll-like receptors to initiate the appropriate response. these are a class of proteins that play a key role in the innate immune system. they are single-pass membrane-spanning receptors usually expressed on sentinel cells (e.g. macrophages and dendritic cells) that recognize structurally conserved molecular features of pathogens [72] .despite concerns about two or more strains of covid-19 virus appearing, these are not big changes for present purposes. it is sufficient to consider the sequence of the original wuhan isolate as reference in comparisons for present purposes, i.e. for comparing the spike protein sequences of other coronaviruses. recall that as discussed in introduction section 1.3, at the time of the study in late february and early march 2020, the sequences of the spike proteins of covid-19 isolates from different states and countries, such as california, brazil, taiwan, and india, remain identical or almost so. for example, with respect to the original wuhan isolate [2] , phenylalanine (f) is replaced by cysteine (c) as residue 797 in a swedish isolate, and alanine (a) is replaced by valine (v) as residue 990 in an indian isolate. neither of these relate to the sequence motif krsfiedllfnkv of particular interest here.in the initial studies [3, 4] , the genome of the common cold coronavirus, and particularly the sequence of the spike protein, was considered sufficiently far from that of the covid-19 virus so as to be less relevant to that problem. while looking at differing sequences is essential for detection of conserved motifs, very different and less relevant pathogens are unlikely to preserve them, except perhaps as pattern matches involving quite complex substitution rules. however, the appearance of the covid-19 krsfiedllfnkv motif does appear in common cold coronaviruses and with typically at most two relatively conservative substitutions. that is in the sense of preserving hydrophobic sidechain as discussed above in methods section 3. the conservative aspartate (d) and asparagine (n) replacement is also fairly common in the motif in the sequences examined. an example shown below is a clustal omega alignment of the covid-19 virus spike protein original wuhan seafood market isolate (genbank entry mn908947.3) with spike proteins representatives members of the two major common cold coronaviruses strains 229e and oc43 (genbank entries np_073551.1 and aiv41987.1). despite radical sequence differences for the spike protein sequences overall (only 12.8% identity, well within the range for a random match), the underlined sequence motif krsfiedllfnkv of covid-19 virus is essentially retained as that sequence, except that alanine (a) replaces phenylalanine (f) in the common cold coronavirus (which is moderately conservative at the surface of a protein) and a conservative leucine for valine substation in one case. in the sequence (not shown) of hcov-hku1 which is often associated with more serious cases of cold-like diseases the above motif is still noticeable as rsffedllfdkv in which the isoleucine (i) is replaced by phenylalanine (f). the "a for f" modified motif rsaiedllfdkv is also found in the coronaviruses of dogs, cats, rodents, pigs, rabbits, camels, ferret badgers, raccoon dogs, amongst others. all of these might be eaten by humans in certain countries and notably they are, for the most part, species that live in close proximity to humans. the "pigag" motif does not show up in the above alignment, as is also the case in many other distantly related coronaviruses [3, 4] . however there is a subsequence pigtnyrscestt in the hcov-hku1 spike protein that appears to relate to pigagicasyqtq in the covid-19 virus (recall that hcov-hku1 is a common cold virus, albeit usually associated with more severe, lower respiratory tract cases). in contrast, not only does the krsfiedllfnkv motif stand out as potentially important to the covid-9 virus by virtue of such comparisons, but also a match with that motif is almost the only continuous stretch of amino acid residues in most alignments like that above. the subsequence kwpwyiwl is an exception that is of interest and a characteristic feature of many sars coronaviruses. it is not, however, considered further in the present paper, except to note that it does not appear to be associated with a covid-19 virus spike protein proteolytic cleavage site. these sites are most prominently trypsin: s1/s2 htvsllrstsqksivaytmsl, s2' lpdplkptkrsfiedllfnkv; cathepsin: s1/s2 htvsllrstsqksivaytmsl; elastase: s2' lpdplkptkrsfiedllfnkv, plasmin: s1/s2 htvsllrstsqksivaytmsl, s2' lpdplkptkrsfiedllfnkv, tmprss1: s1/s2 htvsllrstsqksivaytmsl; tmprss2: multiple sites; tmprss11a: s1/s2 htvsllrstsqksivaytmsl, s2' lpdplkptkrsfiedllfnkv.as one looks out to more distant relatives, there are a number of variations in the krsfiedllfnkv motif which, despite large variations in spike protein sequence as a whole, are still recognizable in the spike proteins of coronaviruses of diverse various host species, as shown for some examples in table 2 . the most noticeable variation is the occasional substitution of the cleavage point arginine (r) by a g. rather than disrupt the possibility of cleavage, however, it is seemingly displacing that role to a arginine (r) or lysine (k) that lies to the n-terminal (left) side of the motif. it is interesting that this commonly retains firmly the iedllf core of the motif. the notion that the krsfiedllfnkv motif overall plays an important role, and presumably a common or similar function across at least a very large number of known coronaviruses, still seems a reasonable one. most important of course is that it is at least the case for the sars-cov-19 virus and its near relatives. at this time, no match with a coronavirus in genebank has been detected by the author by blast-p using queries with no phenylalanine (f), e.g. rsaiedllldkv, rsaiedllidkv, rsaiedlladkv, rsaiedllmdkv, rsaiedllwdkv, and rsaiedllydkv as queries, but the search has not been exhaustive because it would not be too contradictory to any of the current hypotheses if some were found. in the group with the inserted glycine (g) replacement of initial argine (r) by the similar positively charged lysine (k) is common. however, as long as the motif is significantly recognizable, no histidine (h) as opposed to initial arginine (r) has been found.the motif cannot extend to other strains indefinitely as recognizable because at some point the evolutionary tree will bring up virus and hosts subject to quite different selective pressures, and the motif is not the definition of coronaviruses. however, it still persists as recognizable in birds such as duck (e.g genbank kx266757, kc119407 white-eye bird cov hku (nc016991), magpie-robin (shama) cov hku18 (nc016993)) strains, a selction which spans a large range of coronavirus genome sizes. see the alignments below compared with the wuhan seafood market isolate genbank mn908947.3, showing the motif underlined and in bold. :.: .: : :eeyihklnatlvdldwlnrvetyikwpwwvwllitlaivafvvilvtiflctgccggcfg 1188 :. ** ::::*: *. : *:****::** : .: : : : *.**. some indication of the limit of the survival of the motif rsfiedllfnkv as the researcher departs from sars-cov-19 might be given by the nidoviruses other than coronaviruses. somewhat coronavirus-like nidoviruses are common as e.g. reptile viruses. the order nidovirales contains enveloped, positive-strand rna viruses with the largest known rna genomes. nidoviruses have been identified in snakes. they appear to be most closely related to coronavirus subfamily torovirinae, and might be best represented as a genus in this subfamily. sequences suggestive of rsfiedllfnkv, e.g. knfidlllagf do occur in genomes such as the ball python genome, but these really lie beyond the limit of serious detection. for example, clustal omega gives 18% exact match between the wuhan isolate and spike protein nidovirus 1 of the reptile shingleback, but the motif is barely recognizable. including fish nidovirus of the pacific salmon (genbank qeg08239.1) is notable here because it supports the above alignment because it is preserved, but gtlywldy of the salmon nidovirus is far from krsfiedl and the nearest preceding plausible cleavage point is an arginine (r) 10 residues in the n-terminal direction (to the left). however, a similar occurs in some mammalian coronaviruses and so that residue may still play a similar role as an activation cleavage. looking for similar motifs in human proteins has a somewhat different motive. it makes sense in that, if there is significant match with subsequences, they might represent features of proteins to which both the spike protein and other human proteins may bind, irrespective of any other justification for commonality. even if coincidental, as epitopes similar to those in a proposed synthetic vaccine they are always of possible interest in assessing the risk of cross-reaction and inducing autoimmunity in synthetic vaccine designs, and on certain occasion with peptidomimetics that induce an immune response, perhaps by a binding strongly to a human protein that the designer did not intend. as discussed in ref [3] , there is a motif match at 56% identity with 77% coverage is with tumor protein d55 isoform 2 [homo sapiens], id: np_001001874.2, and similarly with tumor protein d52-like 3 [homo sapiens] id: aah33792.1. next match is in regard to neprilsyn entries at only 56% match and 55% coverage. none of these are sufficient close of concern regarding induction of an autoimmune response. some fairly close matches of krsfiedllfnkv and of the "a for f" modified motif rsaiedllfdkv have come to light that might plausibly have a biological significance if supported by biological relevance, but are more likely to be random matches. selecting only for human proteins, hits vary from 100% cover with 50% identity to 62% cover with 92% identity. these hits cannot be considered significant for peptides of this length in isolation from other evidence. however, a few seem worth recording for future reference in regard a potential biological function for the virus. as already noted [3] , rrsfidelafgrg a section of a human semaphorin (genbank np_001243276.1) produced in response to lung disorders. running rsaiedllfdkv itself in blastp generates 100 coronavirus hits. rnareellfd is found in human mhc class ii antigen, genbank axn55588.1. rnareellfd is found in human immunoglobulin heavy chain junction region genbank mcg49633.1. dllfekv is found in human tubulin, gamma complex associated protein 6, isoform cra_d genbank eaw73510.1. e3 is of interest with 75% identity 87% matches for sfleellfin khksfleellf in ubiquitin. the cellular e3 ubiquitin ligase ring-finger and chy zinc-finger domain-containing 1 (rchy1) have been identified as interacting partners of the viral sars-unique domain (sud) and papain-like protease (pl pro ), with the involvement of cellular p53 as antagonist of coronaviral replication. down-regulation of p53 is a major player in antiviral innate immunity [72] . again, however, these matches remain tenuous. genbank has of the order of 0.2 billion nucleic acid sequences but a 13 residue peptide can have 81,920,000 billion sequences.while the krsfiedllfnkv motif remains favored by the author as a target at this time, identifying the amino acid residues in ace2 and the spike protein is important. it may for example involve conserved residues that are not together in a continuous sequence. while a conserved run of amino acid residues is sufficient to be on the list of candidates for an important site, important sites are not necessarily conserved runs of amino acid residues. here is shown that there is some conservation, but significant variation compared with rsfiedllfnkv. subsequences rsfiedllfnkv and pigagicasy…r discussed in ref [3] as motifs associated with activation cleavage sites do not lie in the receptor (ace2) binding domain of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. the relationships between the whole spike protein and the receptor binding domains in pdb entries 6m17 and pdb 6vw1 are shown in the alignment below. note that the above receptor binding domain precedes the above motifs in the sequence. a three dimensional perspective is required for an appreciation of the important sequence features. in fig. 2 , the pdb 6vw1 binding domain is on the right, bound to ace2 on the left. fig. 2 of course, not all the receptor binding domain is interacting intimately with ace2. the sections of the receptor binding domain that do interact with ace2 are also shown (underlined). to facilitate deeper analysis, the loops on the spike protein receptor binding domain were initially classified as loops a,b,c,d,e, and f in order of visual perspective, then joined into three subsequences 1, 2, 3 that contain these loops. the part of the spike glycoprotein sequence that represents the receptor (ace2) binding domain can be shown by considering the proteins used in the two structural determinations 6m17 and 6vw1 in the protein data bank, shown below in an alignment made using clustal omega alignment. note that the above receptor binding domain precedes the above motifs in the sequence. the amino acids residues in bold and underlined font are the subsequences of ace2 that interact with the above spike protein ace2 binding domain loops, which are indicated above each subsequence. these include some longer range electrostatic interactions and potential solvent effects. those also in italics dkfnheaedlfy, dkfnheaedlfy and kgdfr have particularly strong interactions.as a reference perspective, the full sequence for ace2 as angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 isoform x1 [homo sapiens] genbank entry xp_011543851.1, is as follows. the part in the three dimensional structure above is in bold underlined font. note that at least in these particular experimental structures there is an involvement of "glycosylation-like" molecules. for example, in 6vw1 there are well localized n-acetyl-d-glucosamine, β-d-mannose, and 1,2-ethanediol molecules that make significant interactions in a glue-like manner, and essentially "glue around the edges". however there no obvious indication of involvement of glycosylation in the main interior interaction face of the complex. the intimate interactions are proteinprotein, i.e. between amino acid residues.primarily, but not solely, ace2 and spike glycoprotein association involves interaction between the bent α-helix residues 19-54 (stiee…nyntn) of ace2 and an extended chain configuration, effectively a stretched loop, that runs from residue 485-500 (gfncy….ygqpt) of the spike glycoprotein and involves or ends in loops 3a, 3b, and 3f. in the case of ace2 interacting with the ace2 binding domain of the spike glycoprotein, one could in principle imagine blocking the ace2 as receptor with a mimic of the spike protein surface, or blocking the receptor binding site of the spike glycoprotein protein with a mimic of the ace2 receptor surface. in other kinds of infection the former is usually considered more plausible, but the latter would not interfere with normal function of ace2 and it is of course essentially the way in which immune system, and notably antibodies, work. possibly the main argument against this second choice it is that it is essentially equivalent to using antibodies raised against the spike protein, i.e. in effect, passive immunization.at the time of final writing, various news articles are drawing attention to potential use of the upper sequence or parts of it, which is that of the α-helix of ace2 (for example https://scitechdaily.com/mit-chemists-have-developed-a-peptide-that-could-block-covid-19/). in the above "alignment", the helix contains 35 residues and the extended chain below contains 16. they have similar length as is as expected for such structures. an αhelix has a rise of 1.5 å per residue along its axis and there are in typical protein helices with turn variations that imply up to 2.0 å. the β-strand or a similar extended chain in the spike glycoprotein that interacts with it has a rise of circa 3.5 å per residue. this general geometry naturally puts the two sequences above in roughly the one-to-one spatial correspondence shown. note that this is not intended to be a sequence match representation; these chains have to interact. in that respect, there is a lack of charged residues (acidic and basic sidechains) in the extended chain of the spike glycoprotein in structure 6vw1, although an aspartic acid (d) replaces the serine (s) in some strains, arginine (r) replaces asparagine (n) in others, and so on (e.g. see blastp alignments later below). a detailed backbone view is confusingly cluttered, but one may identify residues that interact at the boundary between ace2 and spike protein. all sidechains in the above spike protein subsequence gfncyfplqsygfqpt either make close contact or are likely to have some influence at the interface. it is perhaps useful to have the initial mental picture that, very roughly speaking, the planes of the peptide groups are tangential to the above α-helix surface, rather than constituting an extended chain that makes an edge-on approach. as even fig. 2 suffice to makes clear, however, the extended chain, like any so-called extended chain in proteins in practice, is essentially a visible helix of larger pitch, resembling a very stretched-out α-helix, and is itself slightly supercoiled to wrap around the ace2 α-helix. in this case, this tends to follow the elbow or bend in the α-helix, staying roughly parallel to the local axis of the α-helix, so as to make intimate contact overall.if gfncyfplqsygfqpt is to be use as an epitope analogue, the cysteine (c) may be tested as a convenient linker to a carrier protein, otherwise replaced by serine (s) as a close analogue. as far as peptide antagonists are concerned, the difficulty with using the above sequences stiee…. and gfncy…. is that they are readily degraded by host proteases. this would not occur if the peptide is made entirely of d-amino-acid restudies. a retro-inverso peptide [3, 46] is made up of d-amino acids in a reversed sequence to the subsequence which is seeks to mimic, and in the extended conformation assumes a side chain topology similar to that of the original native peptide, but with backbone n-h and carbonyl c=o groups interchanged.these are peptidomimetics of the subsequences sequences stiee…. in ace2 and gfncy….. in the spike glycoprotein respectively. the cysteine (c) in ….cnfg in the second molecule may be a convenient linker for an epitope for a vaccine but should be replaced by serine (s) in an antagonist. recall that the problem of having the backbone amide n-h and carbonyl c=o groups interchanged is that if, in the original section of backbone being mimicked, any n-h and c=o groups form a hydrogen bond with recipient and donor groups in the protein, those hydrogen bonds are now disrupted in the intended competitive antagonsist, e.g. they would be unstable n-h…h-n or c=o…o=c interactions. it would thus seem a significant advantage in using the ace2 mimic, because that is essentially an α-helix which uses up its backbone amide and carbonyl groups. however, retro-inverso α-helices are not typically found in the areas that have shown some degree of success [47] , such as antigenic mimicry. it would nonetheless seem to be of value to test both of the retro-inverso peptides in laboratory studies.as to developing the above further both as the basis of a synthetic vaccine, or as a peptidomimetic, and as to the worth of extending the studies to small organic drug molecules, everything in the above depends on the extent to which gfncyfplqsygfqpt can produce escape mutations which might soon rend such solutions useless. as in the previous paper, we can relate this to variations of the above sequence bother in closer and much more distant relatives. as the following shows, using blastp we do not have to go very far from sars-cov-2 to find matches with only part of this sequence (coverage) and differences within that area of partial match:in the original wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus isolate wuhan-hu-1, genbank id mn908947.3, the subsequence in this regions is fncyfplqsygf, and the following are examples of coverage as found by blastp. the last of the above blastp at https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast.cgi match results differs in total alignment by clustal omega at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/clustalo/, as follows, but of course this illustrates the high degree of variation that occurs as one proceeds on to coronaviruses less related to the wuhan seafood market isolate that is believed to be associated with the origin of covid-19. phenylalanine (f) commonly immediately precedes many of these matching subsequences ncyfp… ncywp… etc., and the conservative substitution tryptophan (w) substitution for the second phenylalanine (f) is also very common, so it may be worth noting that fnctwp is a subsequence in the mammalian vomeronasal type-2 receptor 1 on sensory cells within the main nasal chamber that detects heavy moistureborne odor particles, and fnctwp is also found in in dynein. many viruses require the minus-end-directed dynein motor complex transport on microtubules from cell surface toward the nucleus, and dynein in addition to kinesins for the transport toward the plasma membrane. however a direct connection to viral infection, while tempting, is far from obvious as to any mechanistic or evolutionary explanation. also, dynein nuclear shuttle transport may be less relevant to the coronavirus (an rna virus), but certainly rna viruses can rely on the dynein system (e.g. hanta virus uses it for endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate compartment). at very least, the above illustrates the kinds of further, perhaps immediately less obvious, functions that the above ace2 binding domain of the spike glycoprotein, and the above motif, might have.within the coronaviruses, there is some degree of conservation that suggests that ncywplndygf is a segment for the virus to conserve, and a hint that fnctwpgf is the key part, but there are soon very clearly significant variations across coronaviruses of different hosts as we depart from the wuhan seafood market isolate compared with the rsfiedllfnkv motif in the s2' cleavage regions [3] . small organic drugs design to mimic this section, or simply designed to designed to antagonize ace2 binding, are thus potentially susceptible to escape mutations, i.e. rapid appearance of drug resistance.binding studies with 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 as model pharmacaphore.11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, which is inhibited by emodin, was an interim model pharmacophore of choice [3] . at this point in the development of the argument for optimal targets for vaccines and therapeutic antagonists, the above target fits in as follows. while the above regarding ace2 binding must be kept in mind for antagonist development, as noted above the motif is not well conserved, and so could be prone to development of escape mutations, i.e. acquired resistance to vaccines and therapeutic antagonists. because of the dominant theme of an ace2 α-helix interacting with an extended chain loop of the spike glycoprotein, the structure of the interaction region is fairly easy to deduce for various sars strains, and there was as yet no obvious strongly recurrent theme of significant conserved residues that are discontinuous (i.e. not together in the same subsequence) that could be interacting closely with ace2. at the same time, while emodin appears to act at the ace2 binding site [59] , it remains of interest because there are complexities [60, 61] as discussed in introduction section 1.6. notably, the ace2 binding domain of the spike protein and the binding sequence discussed above might bind other human proteins and might have other functions that emodin and related compounds, related in the sense that they are at least consistent with pharmacophore features, might inhibit. a priori, the binding properties of emodin and the choice of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 as model pharmacophore could equally relate to the rsfiedllfnkv site, or some other site, or a mix of several. the case for interaction vomeronasal type-2 receptor 1 and dynein discussed above was at best marginal, but these examples illustrated the diversity other kinds of functions, important to the virus, that might apply. in any event, any relations between emodin and similar and potentially related molecules remains of interest to impeding sars-cov-2 entry and the worse casualty would be the continuity of the story developed above, which is intended to illustrate a flow of reasoning in using the standard tools of bioinformatics.11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 is interesting as accommodating a great variety of ligands at the steroid binding site, but not without a degree of specificity as to general features of the ligands, and so far these resemble those of potential sars-cov-2 therapeutics. keeping in mind the refutation principle [3] that a pharmacophore (or contribution to a pharmacophore ensemble) the dehydrogenase is worthy of use until a new ligand or other information proves otherwise. so far pharmacophore validation here, i.e. a demonstration that it is a suitable pharmacophore model until proven otherwise, has been based circumstantially on emodin and compounds looking chemically similar to it, that are known in practice or argued theoretically to interact with sars virus entry in some way and bind at least weakly, experimentally or computationally, to 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 [3] . a review of compounds that are known experimentally to inhibit the dehydrogenase and known experimentally inhibit coronavirus entry, replication and maturation is being prepared. however, validation is also extensively based on a weaker but larger body of preliminary binding studies involving a variety of antagonists of coronavirus infection and very often other kinds of virus infection, that also bind at least very weakly to the dehydrogenase (see discussion on "very weakly" below). most of these, emodin-like and otherwise, were first found by q-uel knowledge gathering tools as used in the initial coronavirus study [3] combined with "very early candidate selection rules" based on estimates of the mean binding strength of groups when binding well. note that a hydrogen bond worth about -4 kcal/mole is nonetheless effectively zero when binding well, because it is relative to binding to water. in contrast aromatic and large aliphatic and are worth circa -3 kcal/mole due to hydrophobic interactions which depend on being considered relative to water. there are more complex electrostatic and intramolecular entropic considerations beyond present scope, noting that at least preliminary study of the interaction with 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 is the arbitrator. weak and very weak candidates are also considered because there may be multiple binding modes that will take a great deal of computer time to explore but which could yield lower binding fre energies.this produces a fairly "mixed bag" of compounds, based on the argument that viruses and coronavirus in particular may use each of its limited number of exposed or exposable sites for several purposes, and the coronavirus seems to be able to readily adjust to new mechanisms under the selective pressure of drugs and vaccines. the details of these molecules and studies are the subject of a further paper that will also discuss some interesting unifying themes. briefly, they include many names as hopedfor drugs against the coronavirus that appear in the news and internet discussion. it is convenient to see them as dividing into three classes (i) quinone-like. a "quinone" is any of a class of aromatic compounds having two carbonyl or ketone c=o functional groups in the same six-membered ring, though in "quinone-like" the author includes include many compounds resembling steroid fragments that may have many or just one carbonyl groups and several rings. this group includes 9,10anthraquinone and derivatives that relate to many important drugs some with suggestive laxative and antiinflammatory functions, collectively called anthracenediones. they include ubiquinone as coenzyme q, and various shorter aliphatic chain forms hydroxyl-decylubiquinone and shorter aliphatic chain forms, laxatives such as dantron, emodin, and aloe emodin, and some of the senna glycosides, antimalarials such as rufigallol, antineoplastics used in the treatment of cancer, such as mitoxantrone, pixantrone, and the anthracyclines. caution is reuired in reading this list as a list of potential therapeutics, because anthraquinone derivatives rhein, aloe emodin or anthrone that lacks the methyl group, parietin (physcion), to some extent emodin itself, and chrysophanol extracted from cassia occidentalis are toxic and known to cause hepatomyoencephalopathy in children. it is a medical term effectively defined to cover lethargy, jaundice, and altered senses of children in india after consumption of cassia seeds.(ii) steroid-like. this group includes some plant steroid-like compounds such as carbenoxolone itself from liquorish (licorice) and others found in soy and sprouts.17βestradiol (the endogenous ligand responsible for the growth and development of many tissues) diethylstilbestrol (a synthetic estrogen); 7-methyl-benz[a]anthracene-3,9-diol (a possible natural product from a common polyaromatic hydrocarbon) is also of interest. this group resembles group (i), but the concern for this group (ii) is that molecules like emodin that are known to antagonize viral or other infections are generally smaller, so it possible that a more relevant pharmacophore would sterically exclude a large steroid-like ring.(iii) quinine-like. these should not be confused with "quinone-like". quinine is an alkaloid derived from cinchona bark, used to treat malaria and as an ingredient of tonic water. a common feature is, nonetheless the abundance of aromatic and other rings that in the quinine-like case include nitrogen, so variously resembling pyrimidines, purines, histidine and tryptophan. this group is of current considerable interest as potential thereputics for covid-19. of particular interest are chloroquine, theophylline, tavipiravir, baloxavir marboxil. some ace and ace2 inhibitors can be classified in this group. they are weak but not very weak binders as discussed later below. camostat, a serine protease inhibitor that has been considered as a potential therapeutic for covi-19 is convenient to place in this class because of its analogues but it does not itself include a nitrogen atom within a ring.there are several possible intriguing biological connections that will be discussed elsewhere. one might be briefly mentioned when considering combined therapeutic use of a member of each set. ubiquinone-like compounds can inhibit ubiquinone sites that work in concert with nadh and nadph cofactor sites. the latter in turn are often inhibited by the quinine-like members.many other above compounds generally bind "very weakly", though steroid-like compounds are strong binders and many quinine-like compounds are medium binders: these are discussed below. binding strength is of course a matter of degree. rt (where r is the gas constant and t the absolute temperature) is 0.593 at 298 o k, i.e. circa 0.6 at biological temperatures, so 1 kcal/mole is not significant above thermal noise. free energies of 2, 3, 4, and 5 correspond to binding association constants of 5, 148, 786, and 4160. the above free energies are usually expressed as negative, for the perspective from the associated system. considering that absolute values are much less reliable than relative values in this field, one might conservatively consider a binding energy of -3.5 kcal/mole as worthy justification for keeping a compound on a list, if one does not wish to reject prematurely, and this seems reasonable if one still has in mind the refutation principle. this includes the mental picture that a model pharmacophore such as 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 has a fairly large cavity which does not provide strong steric inhibition to the candidate ligands, but new evidence might show that a large ligand such as a steroid might be too big to fit the real target which the experimental data is describing. in other words, deficiencies in the pharmacophore model will start to show up when considering larger potential drugs.there is also the benefit of using 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 as model pharmacophore that the present author has a data base of experimental and computational studies on compounds that bind to it. it should be stated, nonetheless, that any case for any common evolutionary relationship between this dehydrogenase and the spike protein binding receptor ace2 would be, at best, marginal. 11βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 has 292 residues and ace2 has 613. there is a 24% identity match of amino acid residues in the region of best possible match of the dehydrogenase. there is also further 19% conservative substitution (clustal ':', i.e. conservation between groups of strongly similar properties with a score greater than .5 on the pam 250 matrix). if taken alone, this would provide some basis for further exploring a relationship. admittedly, the conventional rule of thumb is that any two sequences are considered homologous if they are more than 30% exact amino acid residue matches, and strictly speaking this should apply over their entire lengths (this is discussed in chapter 8 of ref [12] and a brief review of standard tools is given in refs [2] and [38] ). nonetheless, caution is required because the 30% exact match criterion is well known to miss many easily detected homologs and 15-20% is sometime found supported by evidence of evolutionary and functional relationship. for example, alignments between common cold and sars-cov-2 spike proteins already discussed above are in this range, but there is every good reason to believe a common ancestry, there is an overall conformational similarity, and essential features of some sequence motifs are preserved. there is some sense of comparable fold motifs with ace2 comprising two 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 folds. the dehydrogenase is a bundle of some 12 well defined, roughly parallel and antiparallel α-helices of up to about 30 residues, interspersed by 7 short β-pleated sheet strands. ace2 has some 20 well defined, predominantly and very roughly parallel and antiparallel α-helices of up to about 30 residues, interspersed by 6 short β-pleated sheet strands. if there is a common evolutionary origin of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and ace2 domains, it is distant, but it remains marginally possible and more extensive conformational analysis is underway.there is even less evidence of homology between 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and tmprss2, although a serine residue is highly conserved in the catalytic site in both cases, which arguably makes it worthy of some initial exploration. tmprss2 comprises distinct cystine rich scavenger domain (residues 150-242) and a serine protease domain (residues 255-484). clustal o(1.2.4) multiple sequence alignment gives an exact match of amino acid of only 17.5%. there are some grounds for further investigation in the future. there is also further 17.5% conservative substitution (clustal ':', see above). for tmprss2 there are some suggestive short section matches in same order of appearance, e.g. aqyyys with ayyyys, vvshc with vvshc, lyhsd with lfhdd, and gilrqs with galrqe, which by some arguments slightly increase statistical significance. no significant conformational homology is apparent, so it is even more likely to be a chance match, and any argument for similarity between the proteins would be on the basis of some kind of convergent evolution based on certain common ligands, recalling again that the coronavirus might benefit from inhibiting an inflammatory response.preliminary studies on the panel of ligands discussed below suggest some degree of binding (-4.5 kcal/mole and better, i.e. more negative) to both the above and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, but these studies are still not fully complete and low energies may yet be obtained. the most substantial data base of results that can reasonably be considered final is in large part from the original studies [50] . there carbenoxolone was automatically evolved (by automatic editing of its chemical structure) under the combined selective pressure of improve binding to 11βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 while avoiding significant match with compounds covered by all us patents [50] , and subsequent docking and high grade molecular dynamic simulations were carried out on ibm's blue gene [50] . many subsequent studies have, however been carried out on using krunch on a personal computer, because in the initial study it predicted well the blue gene results providing that the krunch binding energies obtained were corrected (or refined) to fit the blue gene results by a linear regression formula [50] .recall again that it is on the basis of similarities between some compounds that antagonize sars virus entry and bind the steroid dehydrogenase, plus a notable commonality in the case of emodin (i.e. it binds both), that this model pharmacophore was chosen. since emodin and many other compounds of interest contain two or three or more aromatic rings, it is reasonable, at least as an initial tactic, that one may regard them as pieces of the steroid ring system and start them in the steroid binding cavity in the same "plane" as the steroid ring. in such a case involving minor variations as sidechains on the original steroid core, the way to make initial fit to using carbenoxolone as guide is obvious. however, the flat view of a steroid is misleading. the steroid ring system can "buckle" in various cis-trans combinations of bonds in the rings, and the longer sidechain conformations preferred on the basis of intramolecular energy are perhaps not obvious. although the rotation barriers for most of the transitions are clearly above the thermal energy (kt) energy conformations (0.6 kcal/mole), the associated energy demands for buckling of parts of the steroid ring system of variously and roughly 2.5 to 5.0 kcal/mole are less that the ligand-receptor binding the associated energy demands are below the gain in energy from ligand-receptor binding to the protein target. this is shown in the high grade quantum mechanical hartree-fock gamess calculations on blue gene in the original study [50] but which have not been described in the literature. minimized energy conformers of steroid-like compounds considered are shown in fig. 3 .calculations.such calculations in vacuo are less reliable for the charged species, but one may obtain a qualitative assessment from relative values and comparative uncharged species. these compounds are also shown more clearly from the chemist's perspective in two dimensional formula format, later below. fig. 4 shows one of early analogues of carbenoxolone (the thioketone derivative cbos1 discussed later below) in the 11βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 steroid binding site. the particular interest in this compound is as follows. since in the original study [50] krunch judged this as the strongest binder at -16.8 kcal/mole, this compound was frequently used as a starting template for initial docking configurations when using krunch. this is even though (a) it is probably an unlikely choice for a chemist to use in practice because of likely oligimerization of the thioketone groups, and even though (b) corphos (also known as cortisol 21-phosphate, cortisol, phosphate, hydrocortisone-21-phosphate or 21-hydrocortisonephosphoric acid) was the strongest at -16.8 kcal mole when using instead the amber force field for molecular dynamics on ibm's blue gene [50] . the thioketone still retained a reasonable binding energy of -16.3 kcal/mole in the latter study, however, i.e. effectively the same binding strength within the state of the art. fig.  4 does not of itself give details of any ligand-protein interactions (but see discussion in refs [3, 49] ), although it does illustrate the tightest of fit. that is, except to the lower right of the thioketone ring of the ligand, which does appear to relate to genuine opportunities for additional groups to be added to carbenoxolone at that position. carbenoxolone and initial closely related derivatives derived in that study [50] are shown in fig. 4 , binding in the range, -17 to -14 kcal/mole. accuracy and limited realism of such methods does not really justify more precise statements on binding energy, and the classification of binding below is as strong, medium, and weak, but see ref [50] for more detail on some of the compounds. authors variously consider binding energies -5 to -9 as a safe requirement for significant binding, but again this is subject to considerations of accuracy and almost all agree that it is only the relative values that are significant. note that while they are often interpreteted as estimates of binding free energy, the entropy component, particularly of the aqueous solvent and solute-solvent intercations, is difficult to estimate. experimental binding values of ligands in general in biological systems typically range from -4 to -16 kcal/mole, though over 95% lie in the range -7 to -13 kcal/mole. the thiioketone derivatives are more of theoretical interest in binding studies because in practice they may cause oligmerization organic compounds binding the pharmacophore. strong binders. from the original study [50] . the estimated binding energy is in the range -17 to -14 kcal/mole. these were deigned from carbenoxolone with the intent to have a stronger or comparable strong binding (-16 kcal/mole). corphos, cbonring, and cbos2 bind at -17 kcal/mole.recall that the two peptide analogues of features of the spike protein of interest [3] are as follows. so far, simulations only show these to be binding relatively weakly at -10 and -8 kcal/mole respectively, but these compounds are highly flexible with a theoretical internal in vacuo conformational entropy corresponding to about -19.5 kcal/mole as discussed in theory section 2, show multiple binding modes and conformers on binding, and may not yet be complete. a high performance computer like ibm's blue gene used in the earlier drug design study [50] would certainly help.in fig. 6 is shown a set of compounds from the zinc data base [69] , and most were identified from the original 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 study [50] and subsequent studies. these bind significantly by usual criteria, but more weakly. they are in the range found for the synthetic peptides of interest, but have much less conformational freedom. a small few not shown here did appear in the original higher grade studies, but the reasonable binding energies could not be reproduced for reasons that are not as yet clear. organic compounds binding the pharmacophore. medium binders. from the zinc data base. the estimated binding energy is in the range -9 to -11 kcal/mole. fig. 7 shows some weaker binding results using krunch [50] . great caution is required in drawing conclusions from the compounds in fig. 3 . camostat is definitely of interest as an inhibitor of the ace2 protein to which the spike protein initially binds for cell entry and does seem effective in blocking entry [74] , and similarly hepsin results are of related interest, e.g. as it is a potential alternative entry point. the ace inhibitors also looked initially interesting by virtue of certain similarities to the other potential ligands, and of course because of their binding in this theoretical study, but most of the traditional ace inhibitors are commonly viewed as not inhibiting ace 2. taking a drug such as valsartan that acts on ace might up-regulate ace2, so facilitating virus entry, [75] but emerging information is revealing a complicated picture: see discussion and conclusions. there are possible explanations that would still allow for competing with spike protein binding, but these seem somewhat unlikely. most probably, the binding is sufficiently weak that the normal substrate, and also the spike protein, displace it. aromatic group interactions may be important here [76] . organic compounds binding the pharmacophore. weak binders. selected known drugs or proposals (caution: use of ace inhibitors might be counterproductive, see text). the estimated binding energy is in the range -5 to -7 kcal/mole. some consideration has been given to prediction of ligand binding site motifs, but so far these have proven essentially negative as regards interesting results that might shed any further light on the above, although some clues may well have been missed. binding sites are often comprised of conserved residues that are not contiguous (continuous in a sequence), which will require further and more detailed study, although subsequences of 2 to 6 amino acid residues in length are worthy of a quick preliminary study because they are commonly involved in ligand interactions. the matches involved in here as judged by blastp and clustal omega are not statistically significant, but one might think of weak matches as ligand binding site predictions in much the same way that one thinks of epitope predictions. in much of the present paper, the structure of emodin, carbenoxolone and related compounds have involved discussion of aromatic rings and hence phenylananine (f), tyrosine (y) and tryptophan (w) and more generally amino acid residues with hydrophobic character. very polar subsequences are also strong binders of charged ligands, or have a role for charged molecules or inorganic ions in some way. as far as such subsequences in the coronavirus spike protein are concerned, very polar charge-pattern motifs such drets and dreds are common in ligand binding some of the molecules that may be of interest as antagonizing sars entry, activation or replication in some way, in the present author's experience. specifically, motifs like this were of initial interest in the present project because sars-cov) nonstructural proteins have zinc finger motifs, and ret and especially red are common in prosite motifs at https://prosite.expasy.org/cgibin/prosite/prosite_search_full.pl, including zinc-finger motifs. this is not considered directly relevant to the spike protein but, for example respectively in genbank entry aia62240.1 and dreds and drets align with srldkv in three-way clustal omega alignment with srldk of the original wuhan spike protein sequence mn908947.3 and drldt of np_073551.1 spike protein. however, these and many similar alignments also illustrate considerable sequence variation, and the weak matches are not close in the sequence to the subsequences of interest neither for coronavirus spike protein nor human proteins of potential discussed above. as far as ace2 is concerned, the closes match with drets and dregs is drkkps, but this weak match again lays well away from regions of current interest, e.g. in the sequence from the region that interacts with the spike glycoprotein. dteta and drfin do occur in the c-terminal half of human 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, but again these are expected to be coincidental matches.like the first vaccines [77] therapeutics too have, of course, been drawn directly or almost directly from nature, until the late 19 th century when chemical synthesis became a science, and only in the 1970s did use begin to made of computers for rational drug design. the advantages of still seriously considering herbal remedies is that they tend to be tolerated by cells because they are produced in cells, they are already subjected to hundreds of years of human trial, are often economic solutions for bulk production, and are leads for further drug development and discovery. the principal non-peptide compounds considered above as possible therapeutics have such convenient and herbal sources. as reviewed previously [3] , the herbal extract emodin is a convenient product extracted from rhubarb, buckthorn, and japanese knotweed, and several fungi. the previous paper [3] also noted that emodin had certain molecular similarities with anti-inflammatory drugs such as carbenoxolone, derived from an extract, glycyrrhizic acid, from liquorish (licorice), that variously inhibit or are believed to inhibit human11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1. the above does not guarantee efficacy of emodin carbenoxolone against sars-cov-2, not least because even the emodin studies concerned sars-cov not sars-cov-2, and the case for the dehydrogenase is circumstantial, but these and related substances are worthy of investigation. indeed, this paper has described a number of compounds that bind the dehydrogenase. importantly, however, recall that the weak binders that are also ace inhibitors may be more dangerous and promote infection because they upregulate ace2 [75] . nonetheless, that situation is not resolved, as follows.the above considerations as to the action and possible usefulness are empirical observations that are largely independent of bioinformatics and molecular computation and they are even independent of whether the correct human protein targets discussed here are correct and relevant; however, it would be valuable to know what might relate ace2 and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, and ideally also understand why both enzymes might "benefit" the coronavirus by interaction with them. also, this paper could not provide any evidence of an evolutionary relationship between these proteins, despite certain similarities, or with tmprss2. so far, there is no obvious relationship with the dehydrogenase, and some other studies by the author on other transmembrane serine proteases do not, as yet, suggest any relationship. without such connections, the dehydrogenase can only be considered as a rather arbitrary model pharmacophore. as such, it is possibly meritorious as correctly representing an ensemble of multiple targets, but that may be fortuitous, and hence only to be used until refuted by evidence.nonetheless, possible clues as to mutual relevance of these human protein targets might come noting their tissue distribution and considering how this may relate to their biological role. as regards ace2, its mrna is known to be present in virtually all organs. studying sars entry into human cells, hamming et al. [78] considered their most remarkable finding to be the substantial surface expression of ace2 protein not only on lung alveolar epithelial cells but also enterocytes of the small intestine, as in arterial and venous endothelial cells and arterial smooth muscle cells in all organ studied (oral and nasal mucosa, nasopharynx, lung, stomach, small intestine, colon, skin, lymph nodes, thymus, bone marrow, spleen, liver, kidney, and brain). there is the attractive prospect that several many herbal remedies considered as laxatives interact with ace2 and inhibit sars-covid-2 entry. recall that emodin is an antagonist of both ace2 [59] [60] [61] and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 [62] . in the past, 11βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 has been considered to be distributed mainly in the human liver, with no detectable levels in the intestine or kidney, mostly membranebound and retained in the liver microsomal fraction [79] . this was not however the finding of bruley et al. 80] . they found it to be highly expressed in glucocorticoid target tissues including liver and notably the lung, and modest levels in the brain. it was also found in modest levels in adipose tissue where it is of medical interest that selective increase expression occurs in obese humans and rodents and is likely to be of pathogenic importance in the metabolic syndrome [80] . lung expression appears to be managed differently: a new promotor that the authors discovered and called p1 predominated in lung while the previously known promotor predominated in liver, adipose tissue, and brain [79] .researchers therefore need to sort out an intriguing web of information. it is possible that a complex web of laxative and anti-inflammatory effect may provide clues by somehow relating to the body's attempts to reject and eject viruses of this kind, and the virus's attempts to resist. it is well known that some covid-19 patients complain of stomach upsets and diarrhea. to recapitulate the essential themes in terms of action in the alimentary tract, recall again that emodin had earlier been shown by several groups of researchers (e.g. ref [79] ) to inhibit sars-cov entry into cells (apparently initially by binding ace2), and emodin is taken as a herbal laxative. licorice has, conversely, been sometimes taken as a soother for alimentary disorders, and carbenoxolone has been used commercially in the past specifically to treat peptic ulcers. intriguingly, carbenoxolone is also known to influence the renin-angiotensin system involving ace2, so at least there appears to be a connection in terms of networks of physiological control. as noted above, while traditionally 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 has been thought of as a liver enzyme, many researchers have indicated that both ace2 and the dehydrogenase are available in both lung and intestinal tract (e.g. refs [78] [79] [80] ). this all hints also that some of the other laxatives that work in a similar stimulatory way might block viral entry on ace2 and perhaps other targets, and should be explored. of course, absolutely nothing should be done by patients without physician direction, because dosages are difficult matters (not least in herbal products) and there are potentially serious side effects on such as salt balance and blood pressure, and some might cause birth defects, all potentially worse than covid-19 would be, for most people. but more worryingly still, the situation is not settled, and physicians and patients could take action in the wrong direction. gurwitz [81] has emphasized that the picture is even more complex. he examined reports from china suggesting that a mechanism of production of lung injury during the viral infection may be due to excess free angiotensin-ii, which might be displaced from ace2 by the sars virus particles. if so, then increasing the amount of ace-2 could be desirable and administering angiotensin receptor antagonists could beneficially upregulate the production of ace-2. it now becomes important to examine medical records of patients who have, and who have not, been infected by sars-cov-2, with a particular eye on who is, and who is not, taking ace inhibitors.as noted in section 1.4, merrifield developed first solid phase peptide synthesis on crosslinked polystyrene beads in 1963 [12] . somewhat like natural compounds discussed above, peptides and petidomimetics are potentially important first steps in more detailed rational design of small organic molecules convenient as traditional "in a pill" drugs. however, as in the present paper, the ability to propose specific peptides and peptidomimetics does depend on bioinformatics, and benefits from some computational chemistry. note that in this case, one is thinking largely not of screening natural products, but now considering truly novel molecules using theoretical methods because they do not yet exist. the variations in the krsfiedllfnkv motif that might be appropriate to synthetic vaccine and peptidomimetic antagonist design suggest the following where the amino acid residues in square brackets [ ] represent alternatives. (g?) means an optional glycine insertion.the above is also valid as a regular expression, i.e. a match query in operating systems and software. more generally and colloquially, (positive charge)-(optional glycine)-serine-hydrophobic-hydrophobic-glutamate-aspartatehydrophobic-leucine-phenylalanine-(hydrophilic or alanine)-lysine-valine considerations at the n-terminus and c-terminus to design a synthetic vaccine, and the retro-inverso approach for a peptidomimetic agonist, are described in ref [3] .other variations appear as the strain becomes more distant; there is not a universal clear indication of any sharp point of departure, although the above glycine (g) insertion is evidence that a significant jump can happen. one may therefore ask what variations should be included. with the emphasis on sars-cov-2, only closely and medium distance relatives are of interest, with the purpose of prevent mutations that escape from vaccines and antagonists, and elude diagnostics. as far as sars-cov-2 is concerned, krsfiedllfnkv is a satisfactory basis because a large number of coronaviruses significantly different from sars-cov-2 preserve it, or in a few cases have very conservative substitutions. it may well be that the fact that residues are, for example, hydrophobic or positively charged is sufficient to for the approach to be applicable to other mammalian coronavirus diseases, if successful for the above basic motif form. attempting to tackle the common cold is not a priority. in other words, it may well be that an immune response against krsfiedllfnkv will also illicit a response against the motif variants, providing of course that krsfiedllfnkv elicits a response itself. it remains that this motif is one of very few subsequences that still recognizable when moving on to rather distantly related coronaviruses such as those of the common cold.one feature of both figs. 5 to 7 is of course the constant appearance of aromatic rings, and this is also noticeable in many of the studies of antagonist's against sars virus binding and activation. of course, the aromatic (i.e. benzene) ring makes copious appearance in many pharmaceutical agents in any event, because they provide rigid scaffolds for added groups supported by many long-established recipes for synthesis. the compounds in figs. 5 to 7 should be distinguished from those such as lopinavar, ritonar, promazine and particularly niclosamide that have been explored for sars viruses in the past, because these are targeted by drug designers against the sars virus own protease required for maturation of the assembling virus. nonetheless, some of these do have a visual similarity to the compounds in fig. 3 , particularly niclosamide (which is normally a medication used to treat tapeworm infestation). also, in the present case, prevalence of aromatic rings in figs 1 to 3 is hardly surprising, since carbenoxolone and derivatives shown in fig. 1 were the starting point for their evolution or selection from the zinc data base. nonetheless, there is, in principle, nothing to constrain the evolution to aromatic chemistry [50] and later unpublished studies did produce molecules departing from aromatic chemistry. however, these bound relatively weakly.with the possible importance of aromatic rings and avoidance of escape mutations by the coronavirus in mind, a question is whether occasional loss of phenylalanine (f) from the krsfiedllfnkv motif discussed above contests the tentative hypothesis that the peptidomimetic candidates derived from krsfiedllfnkv bind to a similar site as the smaller organic ligands considered here, because of two phenylalanine residues (f) in the original motif and a tendency to several benzene rings in the case of organic ligands. the answer is: perhaps. there seems to be a need to have one aromatic ring present in the motif, and no match with a coronavirus in genebank was detected by the author by blast-p using queries with no phenylalanine (f), e.g. rsaiedllldkv, rsaiedllidkv, rsaiedlladkv, rsaiedllmdkv, rsaiedllwdkv, and rsaiedllydkv as queries, though as also noted above, the search has not been exhaustive. it would not be too contradictory to any of the current main hypotheses if some examples were found. the fact that tyrosine (y) does not seem to readily substitute here for phenylalanine (f) (from which it differs only by a hydroxyl -oh, i.e. phenolic group) suggests an important hydrophobic feature of the pharmacophore at that point.of course, many or most drug-like molecules contain at least one aromatic ring and this is almost certainly because they can form especially strong stacking interactions in the binding site. one very relevant report in the same month of writing the present paper emphasizes that the use of protein and other fragments to characterize binding pocket and determine the strengths of ligand-protein interactions is common in both a computational and experimental approach, and that aromatic interactions are both strong and need special attention [76] . because of resonance and the special nature of the π orbitals, the strength of stacking is best calculated using high level quantum mechanical approaches, not empirical force fields [76] . however, as these calculations are performed in vacuum, solvation properties are neglected, and this led to the proposal of a grid inhomogeneous solvation theory (gist) to describe the properties of individual heteroaromatics and complexes; this gave good correlation for the estimated desolvation penalty and the experimental binding free energy, and prediction of binding sites [76] .a main conclusion is that peptide krsfiedllfnkv remains of special interest as well conserved across coronaviruses. other sites and other proteins of the virus may, of course, emerge as the solutions to this formidable problem. all aspects of the virus must be considered. however, even the ace2 binding domain is significantly more prone to accepted mutations. the recurrence of the core features of the krsfiedllfnkv motif over so many diverse species reminds us of zoonotic origins, and it might be recalled that jenner, the inventor of vaccination, consider that many and perhaps all plagues of mankind might ultimately be of animal origin [77] .as of 4 april 2020, 1,139,207 confirmed cases of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid -19) have been reported worldwide [1] . examination of the full-length genome revealed that the coronavirus responsible for covid-19, namely severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is a β-coronavirus in the same subgenus as the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) virus, but in a different clade [2] . the structure of the receptor-binding gene region is very similar to that of the sars coronavirus in which both employ the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) for cell entry [2] . ace2, a negative regulator of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), is a homolog of ace, where its expression can be identified principally in the heart, kidney, and airway epithelial cells [3] . it functions as a carboxypeptidase by converting angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7), thereby opposing the vasoconstrictive effect of angiotensin ii [4] .currently available epidemiological studies have reported an increased prevalence of cardiovascular disease (cvd), including hypertension, among patients who developed a severe subtype of covid-19 [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . for example, the study by guan et al. [5] , which is one of the earliest analyses of the characteristics of chinese patients with covid-19, reported that the prevalence of coronary heart disease was more than fourfold higher among patients who developed the combined primary endpoint of admission to an intensive care unit, mechanical ventilation, or death, relative to patients with less severe outcomes. in addition, more recent studies [9, 10] that evaluated covid-19-associated cardiac injury observed a high prevalence of hypertension (59.8-63.5%), coronary heart disease (29.3-32.7%), cardiomyopathy (15.4%) and chronic heart failure (14.6%) among covid-19 patients complicated with cardiac injury, which is independently associated with mortality with covid-19.since then, researchers tend to favor an association of cvd with the severity of covid-19 [11, 12] . nevertheless, interpreting such an association should be done with caution, since the validity of such an association is hampered by an unclear definition of cvd, including hypertension, adopted in these studies [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . without knowing the baseline cvd status of patients, it is hard to suggest that cvd is an added risk factor for developing severe covid-19 infection. moreover, the available studies originated from china, therefore the generalizability of such an association to the global population is limited. patients with underlying cvd are likely to experience excessive morbidity from any cause because they have diminished circulatory reserve to meet the excessive demands on the cardiovascular system. furthermore, since the prevalence of cvd is increased with age, age may act as a confounding factor; available studies also reported that older patients with covid-19 tend to develop a severe course of the disease, including the development of cardiac injury [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . future studies with age-stratified analysis could shed some light on the association of cvd with the severity of covid-19 infection.on the other hand, some researchers have called to consider the safety of ras inhibitors, including ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii type i receptor blockers (arbs), among patients with covid-19 [11, 12] . there has been speculation that patients with covid-19 who are receiving these agents may be at increased risk for adverse outcomes, given that ace2 is a functional receptor for sars-cov-2 and ras inhibitors can increase ace2 levels [11, 12] . however, an increased level of ace2 upon exposure to ras inhibitors has not been a universal finding. while some animal studies [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] have noticed an increased expression of ace2 upon exposure to ace inhibitors or arbs, other studies reported otherwise [19, 20] . the findings from human studies [21] [22] [23] [24] have discredited the association of levels of ace2 with the use of ace inhibitors and arbs, although one study [25] did notice an increased urinary secretion of ace2 in hypertensive patients treated with the arb olmesartan, but not with other ace inhibitors and arbs. furthermore, another study [26] demonstrated an increased gene expression for ace2 in the small intestine of patients under ace inhibitor/arb treatment compared with untreated controls. in addition, the elevation of serum ace2 was only found in patients with unsatisfactory blood pressure control utilizing ace inhibitor therapy, as reported in a study among hypertensive subjects [27] . therefore, the effect of ras inhibitors on ace2 among human subjects is mainly due to the expression of ace2 in the plasma, kidney and gastrointestinal system, and is not the known effect, if any, of ras inhibitors on the expression of ace2 in human airway epithelial cells. furthermore, increased expression of ace2 did not correspond to increased ace2 activity in an animal study [16] , and it is not known if the biological effect on ace2 would wane immediately upon discontinuation of ace inhibitors and arbs.the role of ace2 in coronavirus infection is still controversial. although ace2 is a prerequisite for infectivity of sars-cov, the presence of other co-factors seems to be important for efficient cellular infection, since sars-cov was also identified in cell types lacking ace2 expression [28] . in addition, the upregulation of ace2 is not entirely harmful, since, paradoxically, an increased level of ace2 might protect against coronavirus-induced lung injury [29] . binding of the coronavirus spike protein to ace2 leads to ace2 downregulation, which in turn results in excessive production of angiotensin ii [30] . as angiotensin ii increases pulmonary vascular permeability, it could produce lung injury and impair lung function [30, 31] . coincidentally, a study that investigated the clinical and biochemical parameters of patients with covid-19 observed that levels of angiotensin ii were higher compared with healthy controls [32] . moreover, angiotensin ii levels were linearly associated with lung injury, supporting the hypothesis that angiotensin ii is responsible for lung injury in covid-19. as previously mentioned, the clinical course of covid-19 can be complicated by cardiac injury manifested by increased biomarkers, which portends a worse prognosis, and ace2 plays a significant role in myocardial recovery response [9, 10, 33] . indeed, in some of the heart samples from patients who died from sars, the presence of viral rna was identified, which was associated with reduced ace2 protein expression [34] .the safety issue of ace inhibitors and arbs has since created great concerns on social media sites, but emerging data are reassuring. a retrospective observational study [35] published in the chinese language reported that the use of ace inhibitors or arbs did not differ significantly between patients who recovered and patients who died from covid-19, suggesting that the use of ras inhibitors may not result in worse prognosis, although a conclusion on the safe use of ras inhibitors could not be firmly drawn from this study due to the limited number of patients receiving ras inhibitors (n = 22). however, another recent retrospective study [36] reported that covid-19 patients with underlying hypertension taking ace inhibitors/arbs had a much lower proportion of critical disease (9.3% vs. 22.9%; p = 0.061) and a lower mortality rate (4.7% vs. 13.3%; p = 0.283) than their hypertensive counterparts not receiving an ace inhibitor/arb. furthermore, patients taking ace inhibitors/arbs had significantly lower levels of c-reactive protein and procalcitonin when compared with patients not receiving an ace inhibitor/arb, suggesting a potential anti-inflammatory function in covid-19.ras inhibitors could be indicated for chronic heart failure or chronic kidney disease, in which self-discontinuation of these agents without prior consultation with physicians may lead to decompensation within days to weeks, further compromising cardiopulmonary reserve in patients at risk of covid-19 [37, 38] . the benefits that are specific to ace inhibitors/arbs may not be recapitulated by other antihypertensive agents for these diseases. while no data have been reported on the effect of temporary discontinuation of ras inhibitors on mortality among patients with covid-19, the shreds of evidence extrapolated from other patient settings suggest harm, in which studies from the veterans affairs healthcare system showed that non-resumption of arbs table 1 position statements of selected major cardiovascular societies on the use of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors in the context of covid-19 [ american heart association, heart failure society of america, american college of cardiology "… recommend continuation of raas antagonists for those patients who are currently prescribed such agents for indications for which these agents are known to be beneficial, such as heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease"17 march 2020 https ://www.acc.org/lates t-in-cardi ology /artic les/2020/03/17/08/59/hfsa-acc-aha-state ment-addre sses-conce rns-re-using -raas-antag onist s-in-covid -19 within 2 days, or ace inhibitors within 14 days, after surgery was associated with higher 30-day mortality rates [39, 40] . the risk of fall in the elderly population from abruptly stopping long-term medication (e.g. ace inhibitors) could result in significant adverse consequences by increasing the risk of fractures and bleeding.in conclusion, although cvd has been reported as one of the most common comorbidities among patients with severe covid-19, the association of cvd with the severity of covid-19 has yet to be confirmed, since, thus far, there is no biological connection between cvd and viral replication. in addition, the established benefits of ace inhibitors and arbs in cvd outweigh the uncertain risks among patients at risk of covid-19 since available evidence demonstrated no direct pathological relationship between ras blockade and covid-19. therefore, we echo the position statements ( table 1 ) of some of the major cardiovascular societies [41] to discourage the discontinuation of ace inhibitors or arbs in patients with covid-19. such statements should provide reassurance to clinicians who would like to continue using ace inhibitors and arbs among patients at risk of covid-19. furthermore, an ongoing clinical trial of covid-19-infected patients receiving an ace inhibitor/arb randomized to either an alternative antihypertensive medication or continuation of the ace inhibitor/arb therapy may provide a definitive answer to this debate [42] .funding no external funding was used in the preparation of this manuscript.clinical outcomes observed with raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients.human covs (hcovs) belong to the coronavirinae subfamily that are classified into 4 phylogenic clusters: α, β, γ, and δ covs (s. f. zhang, et al., 2018) . among all covs, 7 prominant strains from the α and β subgroups can infect humans (madjid, safavi-naeini, solomon, & vardeny, 2020) . of these 7 human-infectious covs, 4 (hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43 and hcov-229e) cause self-resolving upper respiratory tract infections that are the second-most common cause (15%-30%) of the common cold (killerby, et al., 2018; su, et al., 2016) . clinical manifestation vary in different strains of covs.hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43 and hcov-229e mainly cause mild symptoms, but can cause organ damage in some individuals. for example, giacomo et al. reported that hcov-oc43 triggered fulminant myocarditis in a 51-year-old woman (veronese, et al., 2020) . van doremalen, falzarano, & munster, 2016) . while these three viruses can induce respriratory distress, they each have distinctive properties (table 1) . sars-cov-2 is most infectious, with a reproductive number (r 0 ) estimated by the who of 2.0-2.5. by comparison, sars-cov and mers-cov have respective r 0 estimates of 1.7-1.9 and 0.7, respectively (petrosillo, sars-cov-2 binds to the same surface protein (ace2) while mers-cov enters host cells via binding to dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) (petrosillo, et al., 2020) . relative to the sars-cov spike protein, the sars-cov-2 spike protein contains several amino acid changes which increase salt bridge formation and hydrophobic interactions and strengthen ace2 binding (gheblawi, et al., 2020) .these changes may contribute to virulence and the considerably larger global spread of sars-cov-2 compared to sars-cov (gheblawi, et al., 2020) .ace2 is a transmembrane protein that plays a central role in downregulation of raas (gheblawi, et al., 2020) . when co-expressed with transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), ace2 acts as receptor for sars-cov-2 cell entry (guzik, et al., 2020) . ace2 expression is considerably reduced after sars-cov and sars-cov-2 infection (jung, choi, you, & kim, 2020) . interaction between ace2 and the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the s1 subunit on the viral spike protein facilitates virus entrance. endocytosis of sars-cov-2 along with ace2 into endosomes reduces surface ace2 expression (k. wang, gheblawi, & oudit, 2020) . viral entry of sars-cov-2 subsequently upregulates adam metallopeptidase domain 17 (adam-17), which mediates ectodomain shedding of ace2 (patel, et al., 2014) . adam-17 activation also mediates liberation of membrane bound cytokine precursors, including il-4 and ifn-γ which repress ace2 mrna expression (k. . sars-cov-2 activation of raas combined with reduced ace2-mediated conversion of angiotensin ii (ang ii) to ang-(1-7) results in increased angii accumulation. ang ii activates the angiotensin receptor type 1 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f receptor (at1r) to trigger a signaling cascade whereby activation of erk/p38 map kinase signaling results in upregulation of adam-17 to initiate a positive feedback loop that limits ace2 expression (patel, et al., 2014) . in addition, inflammation-induced lung injury leads to apoptosis of clara cells and type ii alveolar epithelial cells, which are major ace2-expressing cell subsets.reduced survival of these cells also contributes to the down-regulation of ace2 ( figure 2) (wiener, cao, hinds, ramirez, & williams, 2007) .clinical outcomes in covid-19 patients are strongly associated with the pre-existing health status of infected patients. cvd comorbidities increase mortality of patients with covid-19 (shahid, et al., 2020) . cvd comorbidities have direct consequences upon sars-cov2 infection. for example, patients with abnormally high blood pressure may exhibit increased apoptosis, not only in the heart but also in the kidney, which may be exacerbated by the additional stress of sars-cov2 infection (a. gonzalez, et al., 2003; hamet, et al., 1995) .over the course of severe covid-19, biomarkers indicating heart injury become elevated (mehta, et al., 2020; . in a washington state case series of 21 critically ill covid-19 patients, 7 patients (33%) developed cardiomyopathy and 4 (19%) developed acute renal injury (arentz, et al., 2020) . ace2 expression in human heart might be one potential mechanism underlying heart injury during infection with sars-cov-2; however, sars-cov-2 infection-induced cytokine storm may also contribute to cardiovascular injury (l. chen, li, chen, feng, & xiong, 2020) .tissue kallikrein produces kinin and bradykinin peptides by cleaving its j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f substrate kininogen. in addition to its role in production of angiotensin ii, ace mediates bradykinin degradation. thus, both kinin and bradykinin are increased with use of ace inhibitors ( figure 3 ). increased bradykinin levels are believed to be responsible for the dry cough adverse effect observed in some patients on ace inhibitors. moreover, kinin and bradykinin peptides can also participate in shock and respiratory allergy. thus, well-known side effects suggest that ace inhibitors may aggravate lung inflammation and cause lung dysfunction during covid-19.despite the potential adverse effect of dry cough on respiratory tract, the kallikrein/kinin system (kks) has many positive functions which may ameliorate cvd ( figure 3 ). in experimental models, the expression of human tissue kallikrein caused significant reduction of blood pressure in fructose-induced hypertension rats, but did not affect blood pressure of non-fructose-fed normal rats (yao, yin, shen, chao, & chao, 2007) .accumulating evidence indicates that the kks is capable of exerting organ protection apart from its blood pressure-lowing effect. an in vivo study showed that the infusion of kinin improved renal function of hypertensive rats and lowered the corresponding increase in capase-3 activity .recombinant adeno-associated virus (raav) mediated human tissue kallikrein exerted a protective effect on myocardial apoptosis in spontaneous hypertensive rats (shrs), specifically by modulating the activity of caspase-3 through the b2 receptor (yan, wang, & wang, 2009 ). tissue kallikrein not only reduced blood pressure, but also attenuated remodeling of the myocardium, large blood vessels and kidney (t. wang, et al., 2004) . in addition, tissue kallikrein efficiently protected against diabetic nephropathy and chronic renal j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f failure (tu, et al., 2008; yuan, et al., 2007; zhao, et al., 2003) . it has also been suggested that tissue kallikrein prevents apoptosis and ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction (yao, et al., 2007) .in summary, bradykinin may improve blood pressure regulation and provide organ protection in hypertensive patients. since organ injury often determines mortality in hypertensive patients infected with sars-cov-2, we hypothesize that the 'by product' of increased bradykinin levels induced by ace inhibition may provide more benefit than harm in cvd-comorbid covid-19 patients.many studies have demonstrated that ang ii-induced hypertension and the accompanying vascular inflammation result in organ damage (d. chen, et al., 2019; f. chen, et al., 2017; g. e. gonzalez, et al., 2015; yang, et al., 2018) .il6 markedly attenuates the cardiac injury and inflammation induced by ang ii, which suggests that il-6 acts downstream of the ang ii effector (d. chen, et al., 2019; f. chen, et al., 2017; g. e. gonzalez, et al., 2015; yang, et al., 2018) .ang ii also induces the production of other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tnf-α and il-1β (guo, et al., 2011) . several studies suggest that ang ii not only acts as a vasoactive peptide that regulates blood pressure but also works as an inflammatory cytokine causing cardiovascular remodeling (gibbons, pratt, & dzau, 1992; griendling, minieri, ollerenshaw, & alexander, 1994; sadoshima & izumo, 1993) . during the immune response activated by sars-cov-2, a cytokine storm is often observed. in severe cases, serum j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including il-6, il-2r, and il-1β are elevated qin, et al., 2020; xu, et al., 2020) . increased markers of this cytokine storm, such as serum il-6, predict poor outcome in patients with severe covid-19 (cao, 2020) . covid-19 patients also have elevated ang ii levels which are positively associated to viral load and lung injury . thus, sars-cov-2 infection dysregulates ang ii, over-activates the immune response and augments the cytokine storm that causes organ damage. the inhibition or the blockage of raas may be helpful to attenuate the inflammatory storm and prevent end-organ damage.ace2 plays an important role in the regulation of angiotensin signaling.the generation of ang ii is well understood. liver-derived angiotensinogen (atg) is cleaved by renin into ang i, which is further processed by ace to ang ii, and is converted by ace2 into ang-(1-7). ang-(1-7) is generally considered cvd-protective; it counters the action of ang ii through a g protein-coupled sars-cov-2 uses ace2, abundantly expressed in pulmonary epithelium, kidney and heart, for intracellular entry (figure 3 ). after infection by sars-cov-2, ace2 expression is reduced (crackower, et al., 2002; kuba, et al., 2005) . animal models of infection with sars-cov showed that ace2 downregulation resulted in pro-inflammatory responses, including lung injury and cardiac contractility impairment (crackower, et al., 2002; imai, et al., 2005; kuba, et al., 2005) . if sars-cov-2 infections progress similarly to sars-cov, the virus may deteriorate a patient's condition via two production and contribute to tissue damage in covid-19. although ace inhibitors and arbs do not directly affect ace2, they can indirectly lead to increased ace2 activity and ang-(1-7) expression (hanff, harhay, brown, cohen, & mohareb, 2020) . a study by ferrario and co-workers showed that ace inhibitor caused a 2.5-fold rise of plasma ang-(1-7) concentrations and an approximately 25% increase of ace2 expression in the left ventricle (ferrario, et al., 2005) . thus, the usage of ace inhibitors and arbs may have a potential benefit in preventing covid-19-triggered organ damage via its upregulation of ang-(1-7) and depletion of ang ii.in conclusion, dysregulation of raas due to increased ang ii and decreased ace2 can lead to a harmful inflammatory response and worsening j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f of elevated blood pressure. ace inhibitors and arbs may have a potential role in preventing the harmful effects by directly countering ang ii and upregulating ace2.acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is a common and devastating (orfanos, et al., 2000) . ace activity is considerably elevated in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf) of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f patients with ards (idell, et al., 1987) . a polymorphic insert that reduces ace expression and activity is associated with reduced ards severity (marshall, et al., 2002) . ace expression activates macrophage function and stimulates interleukin (il) formation . covid-19 is associated with an increased proportion of mononuclear phagocytes which are regulated by the raas (merad & martin, 2020) . in addition, alveolar macrophages are associated with tissue repair and fibrosis generation in covid-19 patients (ramachandran, et al., 2019) . lastly, ace inhibitors decrease oxygen free radical production generated by lung alveolar macrophages (suzuki, et al., 1999 (yamamoto, et al., 1997) .ang ii can also induce endothelial expression of il-8, e-selectin, p-selectin, cc-chemokine ligand-5 (ccl5) and ccl2 which increase pulmonary leukocyte recruitment and retention (bernstein, et al., 2018) . moreover, ang ii induces nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (nadph) oxidase in vascular smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells to increase reactive oxygen species (ros) and cause vascular injury (bernstein, et al., 2018) . in addition, ang ii reduces alveolar epithelial cell survival by accelerating cellular j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f apoptosis with an ec 50 of just 10 nm (r. wang, et al., 1999) . epithelial apoptosis is linked to subsequent fibrotic responses (shetty, et al., 2017) . (uhal, et al., 2012) . finally, during the severe ards or covid-19, patients often suffer from septic shock.prolonged ang ii signaling induces at1r phosphorylation and desensitization which is a major cause of the vascular hyporesponsiveness that leads to pulmonary vasoplegia (levy, et al., 2018) . together, this data suggests that ang ii may be a potential therapeutic target for the treatement many vascular pathophysiologies of covid-19.ang ii. lower ace2 has deleterious cardiovascular consequences and also worsens lung functional decline. compared to wt mice, ace2-deficient mice had impaired lung function and higher mortality in sepsis-induced lung injury . severe lung failure in ace2-deficient mice could be rescued j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f by inactivation of ace and at1r blockage . arbs can prevent downregulation of ace2 during lps-induced ards, suggesting that raas inhibitors may also protect against lung damage in patients with sars (wosten-van asperen, et al., 2011) . furthermore, downregulation of ace2 can lead to elevated activation of ace and ang ii (li, et al., 2008; simoes e silva, et al., 2013) , which can exacerbate the physiological progression of ards in covid-19. thus, despite acting as the receptor for sars-cov-2, ace2 activity is likely protective during covid-19 disease progression.in conclusion, elevation of ace and ang ii and down-regulation of ace2can exacerbate sars-cov-2 induced ards. drugs that target ace and ang ii, ace inhibitors and arbs, may play an important role in abrogating the inflammatory response, vasoconstriction and v/q mismatching that causes clinical deterioration in patients with covid-19.animal models and clinical experience suggest both beneficial and deleterious effects of ace inhibitors and arbs in patients suffering from covid-19. this uncertainty raises concerns regarding the overall effect of raas inhibitors after sars-cov-2 infection (sriram & insel, 2020) . such concerns should not be ignored. examination of clinical outcomes of raas inhibitor application in covid-19 patients should be a top priority (g. l. zhou, et al., 2013) .accumulated clinical data demonstrates that hypertension is associated with higher mortality in patients with covid-19, sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) (d. . inhibitors in covid-19-related outcomes in south korea (jung, et al., 2020) .among the 5,179 confirmed sars-cov-2 patients, raas inhibitor use did not alter mortality (adjusted or, 0.88; 95% ci, 0.53-1.44; p=0.60) (jung, et al., 2020) . among hospitalized covid-19 patients with hypertension, in-hospital mortality was lower (9%) in patients given raas inhibitors than those not treated with raas inhibitors (13%) although this difference was not statisticaly significant (p=0.14) (jung, et al., 2020) . multivariate analysis that adjusted for baseline co-morbidities revealed no independent association between raas inhibitor use and risk mortality among hypertensive covid-19 patients (adjusted or, 0.71; 95% ci, 0.40-1.26; p=0.25) (jung, et al., 2020 (mancia, et al., 2020) . these data suggest that treatment with ace inhibitors/arbs did not increase the inhibitor-treated subjects may seek more routine or intensive medical care or have heightened awareness that leads to more diligent hygiene and/or social distancing. in addition, these findings may not replicate in other populations.geographically and ethnically diverse cohorts and randomized, controlled clinical trials are needed to better understand the specific effect of raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients.two recent studies suggest the interesting finding that, while ace inhibitors might reduce covid-19 morbidity, arbs have a less pronounced effect. khera et al. reported that of 2,263 hypertensive sars-cov-2 patients, those treated with ace inhibitors were 40% less likely to be hospitalized than those not treated with ace inhibitors, while there was no reduction in hospitalization in patients treated with arbs (khera, et al., 2020) . milne et al. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f analyzed gene expression of 1,051 lung tissue samples and discovered that ace inhibitor treatment was associated with significantly lower expression of the ace2 co-receptor tmprss2. in contrast, tmprss2 expression was not altered in patients treated with arbs (milne, yang, timens, bosse, & sin, 2020) . these data provide a potential mechanistic explanation for a protective role of ace inhibitors, but not arbs, in covid-19 treatment.our review of the recent literature suggests potential for protective effects of continued treatment of cvd covid-19 subjects with ace inhibitors and/or the authors have declared that no competing interests exist. and arb, angiotensin-receptor blocker. the recent severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) due to coronavirus 2 (cov-2) infection pandemic and subsequent spread of the disease called covid-19 brought back to discussion a topic already highlighted during the sars-cov-1 and coronavirus-related sars known as the middle east respiratory distress syndrome (mers) of 2002 and 2013. during those outbreaks it was observed a particularly elevated incidence of cardiovascular disease among patients, who were also characterized by being elderly and, in particular during the mers, prevalently male [1, 2] .another main topic of the discussion is the role of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2. indeed, this carboxypeptidase has been identified as a functional receptor for the spike protein of the coronaviruses' outer membrane, including sars-cov-2 [3]. ace2 is strongly expressed in the epithelium of different organs, such as the kidney, heart, and lungs.ace2 shares a large affinity to the amino peptidase ace that is target to the ace inhibitors, a class of antihypertensive drugs. ace inhibitors represent the most used class of cardiovascular agents in the world, for the treatment of epidemic cardiovascular conditions such as hypertension and heart failure. although not directly inhibited by ace inhibitors, ace2 is affected by chronic treatment with this class of drugs, which leads to an increase in ace2 expression in several tissues [4] . interestingly, this feature is also shared by another class of drugs, the angiotensin receptor-1 blockers (arbs), whose chronic administration is as well able to increase the level of expression of ace2 and also its activity, as assessed by the circulating levels of the ace2 product, angiotensin 1-7 [5] . these findings support the concern that the treatment with renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors could make covid-19 symptoms more severe due to increased expression of ace2. remarkably, both issues have been re-proposed in the occurrence of the present epidemic of covid-19. in particular, the issue of the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases among covid-19 patients is proposed by observational data obtained in chinese [6] and italian patients [7] . in this context, we still lack the analysis of the confounding effects of age on the apparent association between cardiovascular disease covid-19 infection and clinical severity. indeed, the observed prevalence of male and elderly patients, observed especially in the italian covid-19 population, is a confounding factor that needs to be corrected for before any conclusive association is drawn. this concern has been expressed by many [8] [9] [10] .similarly, the ace2 upregulation argument has never been demonstrated in humans. indeed, while there is conflicting evidence from animal studies that arbs (probably not ace inhibitors) may upregulate membrane-bound ace2 in tissue-specific manners (e.g., heart but not kidney), these data cannot be extrapolated to humans, and are not sufficient to support facilitation of sars-cov-2 entry [9] . in particular, it has never been demonstrated that the ace2 upregulation in the human lung occurs upon ras inhibition, and even less that this causes a worsening of the covid-19 disease. furthermore, it can also be speculated that ace2 upregulation is protective. indeed, it has been shown that the binding of coronavirus to ace2 leads to the downregulation of ace2 [11] , which in turn causes an ace/ace2 imbalance and to the excessive production of angiotensin ii by the related ace enzyme. this excess of angiotensin ii stimulates angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at1r) and might cause an increase in pulmonary vascular permeability and lung damage [12] . therefore, according to this hypothesis, the upregulation of ace2, caused by the chronic intake of at1r and ace inhibitors, could be protective through two mechanisms: first, by blocking the increased production of angiotensin 1-7, which has been advocated as a possible mechanism of protection for the lung; second, by reducing the production of angiotensin ii, it removes a cause of lung damage [13] .in this context of uncertainty, there are advocates within the scientific community raising their voices for the cessation of ace inhibitors and arbs among patients taking these drugs, that is claimed for both the prevention of the infection and the attenuation of the symptoms in case of infection. these speculative claims are then taken over by the laical press, starting a word of mouth that sustains panic behaviors among the general population.the italian society of hypertension (siia) therefore takes a clear and firm position, in line with statements by other international societies (see table 1 furthermore, siia reiterates that subsequent points:a. acute suspension without medical control of cardiovascular therapy and specifically of antihypertensive treatment increases the occurrence of acute events, including hypertensive emergencies, heart failure decompensation, heart attacks, and stroke. b. the favorable effects of ace inhibitors and arbs on the control of the progression of cvds in general and in particular of hypertensive patients have been confirmed for many years and for this reason ras inhibitors represent central agents for the management of cardiovascular conditions that cannot be easily substituted [10] . c. in hypertensive patients with covid-19 or at risk of covid-19 infection, ace inhibitors and arbs treatment should be maintained according to the recommendations contained in the 2018 esc/esh guidelines [10] . d. similarly, in all patients currently on therapy with ace inhibitors, arbs and in the case of patients with heart failure, also the arnis, these drugs must not be suspended. e. in patients with covid-19 with severe symptoms or sepsis, ace inhibitors and arbs, like all other antihypertensive drugs, should be used or discontinued on a case by case basis, taking into account current guidelines.siia hopes and promotes further research that analyzes the constantly increasing data on the impact of hypertension and antihypertensive drugs, in particular ace inhibitors and arbs, on the clinical course of covid-19 infections, in order to update these positions as new evidence becomes available.in particular, to clarify which mechanism is prevalent and has a role in the clinical manifestation of covid-19, siia has launched a fact-finding investigation to verify the impact of therapy with inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system on the onset and clinical manifestation of the disease covid-19. this observational research is based on an online questionnaire made of 18 questions to collect information on medical history and the evolution of the disease in covid19 patients (id: nct04331574; clinicaltrials.gov).conflict of interest on behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by-nc/4.0/. the recent severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) due to coronavirus 2 (cov-2) infection pandemic and subsequent spread of the disease called covid-19 brought back to discussion a topic already highlighted during the sars-cov-1 and coronavirus-related sars known as the middle east respiratory distress syndrome (mers) of 2002 and 2013. during those outbreaks it was observed a particularly elevated incidence of cardiovascular disease among patients, who were also characterized by being elderly and, in particular during the mers, prevalently male [1, 2] .another main topic of the discussion is the role of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2. indeed, this carboxypeptidase has been identified as a functional receptor for the spike protein of the coronaviruses' outer membrane, including sars-cov-2 [3]. ace2 is strongly expressed in the epithelium of different organs, such as the kidney, heart, and lungs.ace2 shares a large affinity to the amino peptidase ace that is target to the ace inhibitors, a class of antihypertensive drugs. ace inhibitors represent the most used class of cardiovascular agents in the world, for the treatment of epidemic cardiovascular conditions such as hypertension and heart failure. although not directly inhibited by ace inhibitors, ace2 is affected by chronic treatment with this class of drugs, which leads to an increase in ace2 expression in several tissues [4] . interestingly, this feature is also shared by another class of drugs, the angiotensin receptor-1 blockers (arbs), whose chronic administration is as well able to increase the level of expression of ace2 and also its activity, as assessed by the circulating levels of the ace2 product, angiotensin 1-7 [5] . these findings support the concern that the treatment with renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors could make covid-19 symptoms more severe due to increased expression of ace2. remarkably, both issues have been re-proposed in the occurrence of the present epidemic of covid-19. in particular, the issue of the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases among covid-19 patients is proposed by observational data obtained in chinese [6] and italian patients [7] . in this context, we still lack the analysis of the confounding effects of age on the apparent association between cardiovascular disease covid-19 infection and clinical severity. indeed, the observed prevalence of male and elderly patients, observed especially in the italian covid-19 population, is a confounding factor that needs to be corrected for before any conclusive association is drawn. this concern has been expressed by many [8] [9] [10] .similarly, the ace2 upregulation argument has never been demonstrated in humans. indeed, while there is conflicting evidence from animal studies that arbs (probably not ace inhibitors) may upregulate membrane-bound ace2 in tissue-specific manners (e.g., heart but not kidney), these data cannot be extrapolated to humans, and are not sufficient to support facilitation of sars-cov-2 entry [9] . in particular, it has never been demonstrated that the ace2 upregulation in the human lung occurs upon ras inhibition, and even less that this causes a worsening of the covid-19 disease. furthermore, it can also be speculated that ace2 upregulation is protective. indeed, it has been shown that the binding of coronavirus to ace2 leads to the downregulation of ace2 [11] , which in turn causes an ace/ace2 imbalance and to the excessive production of angiotensin ii by the related ace enzyme. this excess of angiotensin ii stimulates angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at1r) and might cause an increase in pulmonary vascular permeability and lung damage [12] . therefore, according to this hypothesis, the upregulation of ace2, caused by the chronic intake of at1r and ace inhibitors, could be protective through two mechanisms: first, by blocking the increased production of angiotensin 1-7, which has been advocated as a possible mechanism of protection for the lung; second, by reducing the production of angiotensin ii, it removes a cause of lung damage [13] .in this context of uncertainty, there are advocates within the scientific community raising their voices for the cessation of ace inhibitors and arbs among patients taking these drugs, that is claimed for both the prevention of the infection and the attenuation of the symptoms in case of infection. these speculative claims are then taken over by the laical press, starting a word of mouth that sustains panic behaviors among the general population.the italian society of hypertension (siia) therefore takes a clear and firm position, in line with statements by other international societies (see table 1 furthermore, siia reiterates that subsequent points:a. acute suspension without medical control of cardiovascular therapy and specifically of antihypertensive treatment increases the occurrence of acute events, including hypertensive emergencies, heart failure decompensation, heart attacks, and stroke. b. the favorable effects of ace inhibitors and arbs on the control of the progression of cvds in general and in particular of hypertensive patients have been confirmed for many years and for this reason ras inhibitors represent central agents for the management of cardiovascular conditions that cannot be easily substituted [10] . c. in hypertensive patients with covid-19 or at risk of covid-19 infection, ace inhibitors and arbs treatment should be maintained according to the recommendations contained in the 2018 esc/esh guidelines [10] . d. similarly, in all patients currently on therapy with ace inhibitors, arbs and in the case of patients with heart failure, also the arnis, these drugs must not be suspended. e. in patients with covid-19 with severe symptoms or sepsis, ace inhibitors and arbs, like all other antihypertensive drugs, should be used or discontinued on a case by case basis, taking into account current guidelines.siia hopes and promotes further research that analyzes the constantly increasing data on the impact of hypertension and antihypertensive drugs, in particular ace inhibitors and arbs, on the clinical course of covid-19 infections, in order to update these positions as new evidence becomes available.in particular, to clarify which mechanism is prevalent and has a role in the clinical manifestation of covid-19, siia has launched a fact-finding investigation to verify the impact of therapy with inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system on the onset and clinical manifestation of the disease covid-19. this observational research is based on an online questionnaire made of 18 questions to collect information on medical history and the evolution of the disease in covid19 patients (id: nct04331574; clinicaltrials.gov).conflict of interest on behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by-nc/4.0/. as of 24 may 2020, over 5 millions people in the world have been confirmed as having the 2019 novel coronavirus disease , an infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (initially called 2019-ncov before 11 february 2020) which is part of the coronaviridae family of positive-sense single-stranded rna viruses that includes sars-cov and mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus), both of which also cause severe respiratory infections. the death count in china so far has been over 1700, but the number is expected to go higher with the increasing this article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the creative commons attribution (cc by) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). number of confirmed and non-confirmed cases. the medical research community is vigorously seeking a treatment to control the infection and save the lives of severely infected patients.just a few weeks after the covid-19 outbreak, the complete genome of sars-cov-2 was determined and reported to genbank (accession mn908947). viruses were also isolated from patients to understand the genomic characteristics and mechanism of the viral infection. as revealed by the analysis, the sars-cov-2 shared 79% sequence identity to sars-cov. in one study, sars-cov-2 was found to be closely related to two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-like coronaviruses, with 87.5% and 87.6% shared identity [1] . in another study, sars-cov-2 was 96% identical at the whole-genome level to a bat coronavirus [2] .despite the high sequence identity between the sars-cov-2 and the sars-cov in the open reading frame regions, the envelop spike protein (s-protein) [3] , which mediates the infection of sars-cov via the human host protein ace-2, has only about 80% shared sequence identity between the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [1] . within the s-protein, the receptor docking domain has a higher divergence, with four out of five critical ace-2 interacting amino acid residues replaced in the sars cov-2. however, structural modeling indicated that the four residues in the sars-cov-2 retain a structural conformation similar to that of sars-cov, and the sars-cov-2 s-protein should be able to bind ace-2 with reasonable affinity 4 . indeed, studies by zhou et al. using cells expressing human ace-2 confirmed that the sars-cov-2 could infect cells via the same protein on ace-2 as sars-cov did [2] . thus, one option to treat the infection is to search for an inhibitor that can prevent the interaction of the sars-cov-2 s-protein with human ace-2. the availability of the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 allows us to establish structural models for the sprotein [4] .the rna of coronaviruses encodes polyproteins that can be processed by viral proteases to yield mature proteins. the same mechanism is shared by picornaviruses and retroviruses. patients treated with protease inhibitors appeared to have much better clinical outcomes than without using the inhibitors (sars death: 28.8% vs. 2.4%) [5] . molecular dynamics simulations have revealed that, by molecular docking to the active site of the main protease 3cl of sars-cov, both lopinavir and ritonavir could induce conformation changes and potentially interfere with infection by sars virus [6] . we expect the same will apply for sars-cov-2. the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 protease (3cl pro ) was just recently reported by liu et al. [7] . thus, another option to treat the sars-cov-2 infection is to search for inhibitors of the sars-cov-2 3cl pro .with these models and crystal data, we performed in silico studies of potential inhibitors of the sars-cov-2 s-protein and 3cl pro .all calculations were operated on dell poweredge c6220 servers. the chemical structures were prepared by autodocktools-1.5.6 [8] , chimera 1.14 [9] , and avogadro [10] . the docking studies were performed with autodock 4.2.6, autodock4, autodocktools4 [11] , and autodock vina 1.1.2 [12] .the 3cl protease's three-dimensional crystal structure was retrieved from the protein data bank (pdb id: 6lu7), and it was applied as the receptor for molecular docking after a cleaning with chimera. the ligands observed, i.e., fda-approved drugs (2454 structures in total), were retrieved from the bindingdb (https://www.bindingdb.org), and the structures of the ligands were further optimized with avogadro. the force field applied for geometry optimization was mmff94.the sars-cov-2/ace-2 structure was retrieved using the function of the comparative modeling of the chimera interface with the modeler (version 9.23) [13] . for the preparation of the sars-cov-2/ace-2 structure, the target template sequence was retrieved from zhang et al.'s work and the sars-cov/ace-2 (pdb id: 6acd) served as a template, as it was also the top candidate from basic local alignment search tool (blast) results. because sars-cov and sars-cov-2 have an 88% similarity, the 3d structure can be predicted with a high accuracy. next, the sequence alignments were performed using sars-cov as a template. then, the model was built followed by refining the loops, side chain optimization, and model optimization. when the homology model was generated, it was further validated using the whatcheck/procheck program [14] for basic parameters like torsion angle, rotational angle, bond length, etc. finally, this model was used as receptor for docking purposes. the loop refinement and side chain optimization were performed using chimera 1.14 by selecting the active region; all the parameters were the default of the version.it is noteworthy that this calculated work was performed before the crystal structure of the covid-19 s-protein was released (6lzg, 6vw1, etc.). after the crystal structures were released, their structures were compared with ours and the structures overlaid well ( figure  1 ), with 93.22% of its residues in the allowed region and a minor difference on the top right loop, which was not a site that interacts with the ace-2, so a re-calculation was not conducted using the new crystal structures.for the sars-cov-2 3 cl inhibition calculation, the input files for autodock vina were prepared in the receptor's original file (pdb format) and ligands files (sdf format) using autodocktools-1.5.6. after minimizing, the grid box was set at 22.00 å × 22.00 å ×22.00 å along the x, y, and z axis, respectively. the docking site was defined at 1.00 å when using the autodock vina. the grid box was set into the docking site at the h41, c145, and e166 regions according to the docking site of the coronavirus main proteinase (3 cl ) of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). then, the receptor file (pdbqt format, for docking purposes) was prepared by the addition of polar only hydrogen atoms, the removal of all water molecules, and the calculation of the gasteiger charge. the instructed command prompts were used for the docking process. the docking output file includes the docking energy (in kcal/mol, which is an indication of the binding affinity/efficiency of one specific ligand to the receptor molecule) and the interaction of the ligands with the receptor (hydrogen bond, pi-pi stacking, etc.).for the sars-cov-2 s-protein inhibition calculation, the pdb files of the sars-cov-2 sprotein were generated using the homology modeling method in chimera; the template used for this was the sars-cov s-protein. after minimization, the input file was prepared using autodocktools-1.5.6. the grid box, which was a rectangular shaped area that covered all the possible docking sites of the sars-cov-2 s-protein with its receptor ace-2, was chosen as 22.00 å × 42.00 å ×22.00 å along the x, y, and z axis, respectively. the docking site was defined at 1.00 å when using the autodock vina. then, the receptor file (pdbqt format, for docking purposes) was prepared by the addition of polar only hydrogen atoms, the removal of all water molecules, and the calculation of the gasteiger charge.the docking results were ranked in the order from high to low in different modes according to the docking scores (docking energy, kcal/mol). the ligands with the most negative docking scores-i.e., the highest affinities-were selected for the visualization of the docked complexes using chimera [9] .the docking energies of the sars-cov-2 s-protein and human ace-2 were calculated using bioluminate [15] [16] [17] , and then compared to the docking energies of the sars-cov s-protein and human ace-2. to verify whether those ligands can be used for blocking the interaction of the s-protein with human ace-2, the docking energies of the sars-cov-2 sprotein/ligands and human ace-2 were also calculated. the solvation model used was vsgb [18] , and the force field chosen was opls_2005 [19] for all the docking energy predictions. table 1 shows the binding affinity of several ligands with sars-cov-2 3 cl protease sorted according to the docking scores (binding affinities) calculated from the autodock vina; figure 2 shows the docking of those with high docking scores-tadalafil, dasatinib, and saquinavir-with the protease in the docking sites of the protease.we modeled ligands that may bind at a large docking area on the top of the s-protein that interacts with ace-2 (red cycle in figure 3a ). table 2 shows the binding affinities of several ligands with the highest docking scores toward the top docking side of the s-protein. figure  3b -i shows the dockings of several ligands with the sars-cov-2 s-protein.to understand whether these ligands are reasonably good inhibitors that block the interaction of the sars-cov-2 s-protein with ace-2, the docking energy of the s-protein/ligand complex with ace-2 was calculated and the results are listed in table 3 . for comparison, the docking energy between the sars-cov s-protein and ace-2 was also calculated and the score was −92.7 kcal/mol, which was close to the −78.6 kcal/mol reported by xu et al.'s work [4] . the docking energy between the sars-cov-2 s-protein and ace-2 was calculated to be −82.2 kcal/mol, suggesting a slightly weaker interaction than that of the sars-cov s-protein with ace-2. the observation is similar to that reported by xu et al.'s work [4] . table 3 shows that more than half of those ligands docking onto the sars-cov-2 s-protein do not significantly change the interaction of the sars-cov-2 s-protein with ace-2-i.e., they are not inhibitors to block the interaction of the sars-cov-2 s-protein with ace-2. however, ergotamine, amphotericin b, vancomycin, zafirlukast, and lanicor showed that once they were bound to the s-protein, the interactions of these complex with ace-2 were no longer energetically favored interactions-i.e., these ligands acted as desired inhibitors that can efficiently block the interaction of the sars-cov s-protein with ace-2. among these, ergotamine and amphotericin b are most promising, since they demonstrate the highest docking energy to the sars-cov-2 s-protein (table 2) . thus, they are strongly suggested as the core drugs for clinical trials to treat covid-19 patients. considering the severe and potentially lethal side effects of amphotericin b [28] , ergotamine and vancomycin seem be the top choices.disulfiram, lopinavir, and ritonavir are the three approved and active protease inhibitors against sars and mers. indeed, lopinavir and ritonavir were successfully used to treat a patient in thailand in jan. 2020. our results show that among these ligands, saquinavir, tadalafil, rivaroxaban, sildenafil, dasatinib, vardenafil, montelukast are most promising due to their higher docking scores (< −8.5 kcal/mol, which coresponds to < 1 μm ic50) than others. all of these scores appear better than that of the antiviral drug lopinavir (−8.2 kcal/ mol). as a comparison, the docking scores reported for lopinavir with the viral rna polymerase is −8.3 kcal/mol [18] . it is a remarkable observation that some sars-cov-2 inhibitors such as indinavir could not block the interaction of the sars-cov-2 s-protein with ace-2, while other inhibitors, such as ergotamine and amphotericin b, can effectively inhibit such interaction. this is somewhat confusing, since all of these three compounds dock on the same docking site that is marked by the red circles in figure 3 -the grove between an extended insertion that contains the β5/β6 strands and the receptor-binding motif (rbm) loop [28] . to comprehend what caused the significant difference, we overlaid the structures of the three docked compounds and ace-2 on the sars-cov-2 spike protein in figure 4 . the comparison clearly shows that ergotamine (red) and amphotericin b (blue) extend further out toward the ace-2 and thus effectively block the interaction of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with ace-2 while indinavir (green) clings to the sars-cov-2 spike protein, leaving room for ace-2 to interact with the spike protein.for the inhibition of the sars-cov-2 3 cl protease, saquinavir, tadalafil, rivaroxaban, sildenafil, dasatinib, vardenafil, and montelukast are most promising due to their high docking scores (<− 8.5 kcal/mol), which were more negative than those of other ligands.among these that showed an excellent inhibiting property to block the interaction of sars-cov-2 s-protein with ace-2 in table 3 , ergotamine, amphotericin b, and vancomycin are the most promising since they are also among the highest to bind to the sars-cov-2 sprotein, as shown in table 2 .for more active results, a combination of 3 cl protease inhibitors and ergotamine may be considered.the comparison of the crystal structures of the sars-2 spike protein (6vw1, pink color) with our homology modeling (light brown color) using the sars-2 template. an overlay of the modeled structures of amphotericin, ergotamin, indinavir, and ace-2 with the sars-cov-2 spike protein. the renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays a key role in maintaining blood pressure homeostasis, as well as fluid and salt balance. angiotensin ii, a key effector peptide of the system, causes vasoconstriction and exerts multiple biological functions. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) plays a central role in generating angiotensin ii from angiotensin i, and capillary blood vessels in the lung are one of the major sites of ace expression and angiotensin ii production in the human body. the ras has been implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary fibrosis, both commonly seen in chronic lung diseases such as chronic obstructive lung disease. recent studies indicate that the ras also plays a critical role in acute lung diseases, especially acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). ace2, a close homologue of ace, functions as a negative regulator of the angiotensin system and was identified as a key receptor for sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) coronavirus infections. in the lung, ace2 protects against acute lung injury in several animal models of ards. thus, the ras appears to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury. indeed, increasing ace2 activity might be a novel approach for the treatment of acute lung failure in several diseases.for many decades, the roles of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) have been studied in physiology and multiple disorders, in particular cardiovascular diseases [1, 2] . angiotensin ii (ang ii), a key effector peptide of the ras, exerts multiple biological functions including the vasoconstriction and sodium balance involved in blood pressure homeostasis. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) plays a central role in generating ang ii from angiotensin i (ang i) [3, 4] (figure 1 ), and ace inhibitors or ang ii receptor blockers exhibit beneficial effects in cardiovascular diseases. capillary blood vessels in the lung are a major site of high-level expression of ace [5] . thus, the lung is an important organ in generating circulating ang ii, acting as a classical circulation-borne endocrine system. in contrast to this endocrine ras model, numerous studies have highlighted the importance of local rass [6] . for example, an increase in endothelial ace expression in the muscularized intraacinar arteries of lungs was shown both in patients with pulmonary hypertension [7] and in rats with hypoxiainduced pulmonary hypertension [8] . in addition to ace, other components of the ras are expressed in lungs, including renin [9] , angiotensinogen [10] and ang ii receptors [11] .in 2000, ace2, a homologue of ace, was identified; its discovery instantaneously added a new complexity to the ras [12, 13] . although ace2 functions similarly to ace as a carboxypeptidase, ace2 has a different substrate specificity [12] [13] [14] , shown by in vitro analyses using recombinant ace2 protein. whereas ace removes dipeptides from the c-terminus of peptide substrates, generating the octapeptide ang ii from the decapeptide ang i [3, 15] , ace2 cleaves a single residue from ang ii, generating angiotensin-(1-9) [12, 13] , and a single residue from ang ii to generate angiotensin-(1-7) [12] . genetic inactivation of ace using homologous recombination results in a phenotype characterized by spontaneous hypotension, reduced male fertility and kidney malformation [16] . by contrast, targeted disruption of murine ace2 resulted in increased systemic ang ii levels and impaired cardiac contractility in aged mice [17] . loss of ace on an ace2 background reversed this cardiac phenotype [17] . thus, ace2 appears to be a negative regulator of the ras and counterbalances the function of ace ( figure 1 ).the importance of the ras in lung diseases has recently re-emerged since the identification of ace2 as a severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus receptor. during several months of 2003, sars -a newly identified illness -spread rapidly from china throughout the world, causing more than 800 deaths [18, 19] . a novel coronavirus was identified as the sars pathogen, which triggered atypical pneumonia characterized by high fever and severe dyspnea [18, 19] . the death rate following sars coronavirus exposure approached almost 10% of infected people owing to the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). ards is the most severe form of acute lung injury and is characterized by pulmonary oedema, accumulation of inflammatory cells and severe hypoxia [20, 21] . clinical as well as experimental animal studies have implicated ace in the pathogenesis of ards [22] [23] [24] . ace2 is expressed in the lungs of healthy and diseased humans [25] , and recent ards and sars studies have shown that ace2 protects murine lungs from severe acute injury [26 ,27 ] . importantly, these experiments also revealed that ace2 is an essential receptor for sars infections in vitro and in vivo [27 ,28] . in this review, we review the role of the ras, in particular of the sars receptor ace2, in lung diseases, focusing on pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary fibrosis and acute lung injury. the possible applications of blocking the ras and/or modulating ace2 for the treatment of lung diseases are discussed.pulmonary hypertension is characterized by elevations in pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance caused by multiple etiologies, including primary pulmonary hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), high altitude or pulmonary embolism. abnormal pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary vascular remodeling are major pathological features seen in most forms of pulmonary hypertension [29, 30] . although ang ii is well known as a potent vasopressor peptide, in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension ang ii seems to play a role in pulmonary vascular remodeling rather than pulmonary vasoconstriction. in in vitro cell culture models, ang ii has been shown to directly cause growth/proliferation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells largely through ang ii type i (at 1 ), rather than through type ii (at 2 ), receptors [31] ( figure 1 ). in pulmonary hypertension in vivo, the expression of ace is increased in the endothelial layer of small, as well as elastic, pulmonary arteries [7, 32] . in addition, in hypoxic, but not monocrotaline-treated [33] , pulmonary hypertensive rats, both ang ii binding and the number of at 1 receptors are increased [34, 35] .in human patients, an association between an ace insertion/deletion polymorphism (the d allele of the human ace gene confers increased ace activity in plasma) and pulmonary hypertension has been reported; this association is, however, controversial. for instance, one study showed that the ace d/d genotype is associated with less right ventricular hypertrophy [36] , whereas another reported a correlation between the ace d/d genotype and the severity of symptoms [37] . pharmacologic treatment of animals with either an ace blocker or an ang ii receptor antagonist inhibited pulmonary vascular remodeling associated with the development of pulmonary hypertension in chronically hypoxic rats or mice [38, 39] or in monocrotaline-treated rats [40] . by contrast, tissue ace-deficient mice, which exhibit undetectable lung ace activity but retain 34% of the ace activity in plasma, show the same remodeling of pulmonary arterioles as do wild-type mice [41] . in addition, despite earlier studies of acute ace inhibition [42] [43] [44] , a recent pilot study on patients with pulmonary hypertension secondary to copd showed that treatment with the at 1 receptor blocker losartan (50 mg) showed no statistically significant beneficial effect in terms of pulmonary artery pressure, exercise capacity or breathlessness score [45] . the discrepancy between hypoxic rat studies and this human trial might be caused by differences in the pathogenesis of hypoxic rats versus patients with copd-related pulmonary hypertension. further studies are required to solve these important issues.pulmonary fibrosis is a frequent response to insults or injuries to the lung. etiologies include idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis, irradiation-induced pneumonitis or ards. excess deposition of extracellular matrix proteins is a key feature of interstitial fibrosis in the lung. the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis includes endothelial and epithelial cell injury, influx of inflammatory cells and the production of chemical mediators leading to the proliferation and activation of fibroblasts [46, 47] . although there are various initiating mechanisms and etiologies, the terminal phases of fibrosis are commonly characterized by the proliferation and progressive 272 respiratory figure 1 current view of the ras in pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary fibrosis. ang i serves as a substrate for both ace and ace2. ang ii is known to act as vasoconstrictor as well as a mitogen for smooth muscle cells or fibroblasts, mainly through the at 1 receptor. the function of angiotensin-(1-9) is not well understood. both ace and ace2 are involved in the production of the vasodilator peptide angiotensin-(1-7).accumulation of connective tissue replacing normal functional parenchyma.ang ii immunoreactivity is also significantly increased within lung fibroblasts, macrophages and bronchiolar and alveolar epithelium after irradiation [48] . in addition, angiotensinogen is produced by fibroblasts from fibrotic but not normal human lung. ang ii upregulates the expression of the profibrotic cytokine transforming growth factor-b1, which is involved in both the conversion of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts and the accumulation of collagen [49] (figure 1 ). an in vivo role for ang ii in pulmonary fibrosis has been implied from animal models with bleomycin-or irradiation-mediated lung injury. in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats or mice, ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers can attenuate epithelial apoptosis, interstitial fibrosis and collagen deposition [50] [51] [52] . in irradiation-induced lung fibrosis, ace inhibitors attenuate endothelial dysfunction and fibrosis in rats [53] . conversely, retrospective comparison of the incidence of irradiation-induced lung injury between subjects who took ace inhibitors and those who did not, failed to reveal a protective effect [54] . however, serum concentrations of ace inhibitors used by subjects in the human study would be expected to be considerably less than those achieved in the animal models cited above. as there are no published prospective or retrospective studies regarding the use of other ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers in human pulmonary fibrosis induced by factors other than irradiation, it is therefore still unclear if inhibition of the ras would indeed have beneficial effects on lung fibrosis.ards is the most severe form of acute lung injury, and affects approximately one million individuals worldwide/ year with a mortality rate of at least 30-50% [20, 21] . ards can be triggered by multiple diseases such as sepsis, aspiration, trauma, acute pancreatitis, or pneumonias following infections with sars coronavirus or avian and human influenza viruses. recent cohort studies of ards showed a significant association between an ace insertion/deletion polymorphism and the susceptibility and outcome of ards [23, 24] . the d/d genotype frequency was increased in patients with ards compared with a control cohort [23] . in addition, the ace d/d allele was significantly associated with mortality in the ards group [23] . another study showed that patients carrying the ace i/i genotype have a significantly increased survival rate [24] . thus, from the results of inhibitor experiments in rodents [22] and ace allelic correlation studies in humans [23, 24] , it has been suggested that the ras could play a role in acute lung failure.our group has investigated the role of ace2 in ards by using ace2 knockout mice. in acid-aspiration-induced ards, endotoxin-induced ards and peritoneal sepsis-induced ards, ace2 knockout mice exhibited severe disease compared with control mice that express ace2 [26 ] . loss of ace2 expression in mutant mice resulted in enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, neutrophil accumulation and worsened lung function. importantly, treatment with catalytically active, but not enzymatically inactive, recombinant ace2 protein improved the symptoms of acute lung injury in wild-type mice, as well as in ace2 knockout mice [26 ] . thus, ace2 plays a protective role in acute lung injury. mechanistically, the negative regulation of ang ii levels by ace2 accounts, in part, for the protective function of ace2 in ards. for example, at 1 receptor inhibitor treatment or additional ace gene deficiency on an ace2 knockout background rescues the severe phenotype of ace2 single mutant mice in acute lung injury [26 ] . in addition, ace knockout mice and at 1a receptor knockout mice showed improved symptoms of acute lung injury [26 ] . therefore, in acute lung injury, ace, ang ii and at 1 receptors function as lung injury-promoting factors [26 ,55] , whereas ace2 protects against lung injury [26 ] (figure 2 ). these findings suggest that the beneficial effects of ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers in lung injury models induced by bleomycin or irradiation, observed in the earlier studies, derive largely from their effects on the acute phase of those injuries.within a few months following the publication of the sars-cov genome [56, 57] , ace2 was identified as a potential receptor in cell line studies in vitro [28] . ace2 has been demonstrated to bind sars-cov spike and to support 'syncytia formation', the fusion of spike-proteinexpressing cells into large multinucleated cells that can also be seen in 'real' sars infections. using a mouse sars infection model with ace2 knockout mice, our group provided evidence that ace2 is indeed essential for sars infections in vivo [27 ] . when ace2 knockout mice are infected with the sars coronavirus, they become resistant to virus infection [27 ] . virus titers from the lung tissues of infected ace2 knockout mice were 10 5 -fold lower than those isolated from the lung of sars-cov-infected wild-type mice [27 ] . the lung histology from ace2 knockout mice challenged with sars coronavirus showed no signs of inflammation [27 ] , whereas some (but not all) sars-infected wild-type mice displayed mild inflammation with leukocyte infiltration [27 ,58] . thus, ace2 is an essential receptor for sars infections in vivo.despite many studies on sars-cov, the reasons why sars-cov infections trigger severe lung disease with such a high mortality, in contrast to other coronaviruses, remain a mystery. accumulating evidence indicates that severe sars infections are dependent upon the burden of viral replication as well as on the immunopathologic consequences of the host response (for review, see [59, 60] ). in addition to the aberrant activation of immune systems, our own studies have implicated the involvement of the ras in sars pathogenesis: firstly, ace2 is a critical sars receptor in vivo; and secondly, ace2 and other components of the ras play a central role in controlling the severity of acute lung failure once the disease process has been initiated [27 ] (figure 2) . intriguingly, wild-type mice infected with sars-cov showed markedly downregulated ace2 expression in lungs [27 ] . similarly, treatment with recombinant sars-spike protein, in the absence of any other virus components, downregulates ace2 expression in vitro and in vivo [27 ] . thus, sars-cov-infected or spike proteintreated wild-type mice resemble ace2 knockout mice, and, similar to ace2 mutant mice, spike-treated wild-type mice show markedly more severe pathology of acute lung injury. additionally, in spike-treated mice, ang ii peptide levels were increased and the worsened ards symptoms could be partially reversed by at 1 receptor blocker treatment [27 ] . by contrast, spike does not affect the ards symptoms in ace2 knockout mice [27 ] . thus, the downregulation of ace2 expression in sars-cov infections might play a causal role in sars pathogenesis, especially in disease progression to ards.ang ii plays roles in tissue remodeling and fibrotic changes through acting on fibroblasts or smooth muscle cells, thereby contributing to the pathogenesis or progression of pulmonary fibrosis or pulmonary hypertension. this notion is strongly supported by the successful treatment of these disease conditions using ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers in animal models. however, pilot clinical trials have failed to observe significant beneficial effects of ace inhibitors on radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis or positive effects of at 1 receptor blockers on copd-related pulmonary hypertension. recently, the critical importance of the ras in the pathogenesis of acute lung disease (i.e. ards/acute lung injury) has emerged. hypothetically, the ras appears to contribute to the initial severity of lung diseases rather than to later stages that define chronic fibrosis and tissue remodeling. in line with this notion, the d/d polymorphism of the ace gene has been associated with the incidence of pneumonias in japanese elderly patients [61] and mortality of ards patients [23, 24] . importantly, ace2 has been identified as a key sars receptor, and ace2 protects murine lungs from acute lung injury induced by acid aspiration, endotoxin shock, peritoneal sepsis or sars spike challenge. these findings might provide the opportunity to develop ace2 as a novel drug for ards that develops in emerging lung infectious diseases such as avian influenza a (h5n1) [62] or other diseases that affect lung function [63] . because ace2 is an non-specific protease, it would also be interesting to investigate the role of ace2 and its metabolites, including angiotensin-(1-7), des-arg(9)-bradykinin, apelin and dynorphin, in ards [14] . we look forward to the use of angiotensin system-modulating agents/molecules, in particular ace2, schematic diagram of the proposed role of the ras in development of severe ards. in acute lung injury such as sars-cov infections, acid aspiration, pneumonias or sepsis, the generation of ang ii from ang i is enhanced by ace. ang ii contributes to acute lung failure through stimulation of the at 1 receptor, whereas ace2 and the at 2 receptor negatively regulate this pathway and protect from acute lung failure. however, additional ace2-regulated, but ang ii-independent, pathways seem to also contribute to ards. as novel therapeutic agents to treat severe acute lung failure, a syndrome that currently affects millions of people without any effective drug treatment.the novel coronavirus outbreak, covid-19 caused by sars-cov2, originated from the wuhan, hubei providence in central china in december 2019 and was declared a pandemic by the who on march 11 th 2020 [1] . compared to sars-cov which caused the [2002] [2003] outbreak, sars-cov2 appears to have a stronger rate of transmission. whereas the sars infection exhibits a prolonged clinical course predominantly involving respiratory manifestations, the clinical course of the novel coronavirus is unclear. further clinical insights from wuhan suggest that some patients with covid-19 exhibit severe cardiovascular damage, and those with underlying cardiovascular disease appear to have an increased risk of death [1, 2] .both sars-cov and cov2 belong to the beta-coronavirus phylogeny [3] . although bats may be natural reservoirs for sars-like coronavirus [3] , interspecies transfer of sars-cov and sars-cov2 could have occurred through civets [4] and pangolins [5] , respectively. both sars-cov strains have been identified to use angiotensin converting enzyme ii (ace2) receptor as the portal of entry into the affected cell [1, 4] . ace2 is a key modulator of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) which is a signaling pathway involved in the regulation of vascular function including the regulation of blood pressure, natriuresis, and blood volume control [6] . normally, the ras system involves the formation of angiotensin ii (ang ii) through ace, which contributes to multiple cardiovascular physiological and pathophysiological functions including hypertension, myocardial hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis, inflammation, vascular remodeling, and atherosclerosis [7] [8] [9] . given adverse cardiovascular effects of ras system upregulation, its inhibition through ace inhibitors, angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs), and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (mras) has been critical for the management of various cardiovascular diseases. in the last two decades, the identification of ace2 and its involvement in the counter regulation of the classic ras system has offered a potentially new therapeutic target [10] [11] [12] . ace2 exists both as a membrane-bound and soluble form, the former of which mediates sars-cov2 infection via s protein binding [13, 14] . it is unclear whether sars-cov2 interferes with ace2 in a manner that contributes to the pathogenesis of sars or the cardiovascular damage observed [1, 2] . this raises the question of whether ras inhibition in cardiovascular patients should be reassessed in the setting of this novel coronavirus.classically, the ras system involves the conversion of angiotensinogen by renin into angiotensin i (ang i). ang i is metabolized to angiotensin ii (ang ii) via the dipeptide carboxypeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace). the proinflammatory effects of ang ii [7] [8] [9] are mediated through ang ii type i (at1) receptors. recently, the ace2 receptor and its signaling pathway have been identified as an important counter regulatory mechanism to the classic ras system. ace2 is a type i integral membrane glycoprotein [15] expressed predominantly in the bronchus, lung parenchyma, heart, endothelium, kidneys, duodenum, and small intestine [16] .ace2 is a monocarboxypeptidase unlike its homolog ace which is a dipeptidase, and ace2 is not antagonized by ace inhibitors [17] . whereas ace contains two active catalytic domains, ace2 has a single catalytic domain with 42% identical residues [18, 19] . the major substrate of ace2 is ang ii which upon c-terminus cleavage produces angiotensin 1-7 (ang1-7) and lphenylalanine [20] . other substrates for ace2 include ang i, apelin-13, and dynorphin-13, which are catalyzed at much lower affinities [21] . the non-catalytic c-terminal domain of ace2 shares a 48% sequence homology to collectrin, a protein involved in neutral amino acid reabsorption from the intestine and the kidney [22, 23] . in the presence of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17), also known as tnfα-converting enzyme (tace), ace2 exhibits ectodomain shedding [24] resulting in the formation of a soluble enzyme. ace2 also contains a calmodulin domain on its cytoplasmic tail which influences ectodomain shedding [25] .ang i is a decapeptide that is converted into the octapeptide ang ii by ace. unlike ace, ang i can be converted to ang1-9 by ace2, and more importantly ang ii is converted to ang 1-7 through ace2 [17] . ang1-7 has a range of anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, vasodilatory, and natriuretic effects that are mediated by gpcr mas receptor [26] [27] [28] . ang1-7 may be produced directly from ang i through the alternative pathways involving a zinc metallopeptidase neprilysin (nep) or conversion of ang1-9 to ang 1-7 via ace, though at a significantly lower efficiency [17] . genetic deletion studies have established ace2 as an essential regulator of cardiovascular function [29] . studies focused on the regulation of ace2 in cardiac myocytes and cardiac fibroblasts have demonstrated that whereas ang ii significantly reduced ace2 activity and downregulated ace2 mrna in cardiac myocytes, it only reduced ace2 activity in fibroblasts [30] . in myocytes, endothelin-1 [et-1] also significantly decreased ace2 mrna production. this reduction in ace2 mrna by ang ii or et-1 was blocked by inhibitors of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (mapk1), suggesting ang ii and et-1 activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase erk1/erk2 to reduce ace2 [31] . further in vivo murine studies showed ang ii mediated loss of membrane-bound cardiomyocyte ace2 correlated with the upregulation of tace/adam17 activity which was prevented with at1 receptor blockade [32] . cardiac fibroblasts and coronary endothelial cells also express ace2 and tace and this reciprocal relationship extends to these cell types as well [32, 33] . ang ii activates several other signaling cascades such as pkc and jak2-stat3 signaling pathways, which results in myocardial hypertrophy and increased fibrosis [34] . the binding of ang1-7 to the c-terminal domain also inhibits the proteolytic function of ace enzyme and promotes bradykinin function [35] . studies in human vascular and cardiac tissue and plasma show ang1-7 has a higher affinity to ace than ang i, suggesting ang1-7's inhibitory effects on ace may contribute to its protective effects [36] . the treatment of ace2 knock out mice with ang ii infusion and recombinant ace2 (rhace2) eliminated erk1/2, jak2-stat3, and pkc signaling by rhace2 and was at least partially responsible for attenuation of ang ii induced myocardial hypertrophy and fibrosis and improvement in diastolic dysfunction [37] . other studies have highlighted the role of ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas axis in modulating the expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as tnf-α, il-1β, il-6, mcp-1 and tgf-β in cardiac/lung fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, and vascular remodeling [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] (figure 1 ).given the importance of the ras system in cardiovascular disease, its regulation via ace inhibitors, arbs, and mras has played an essential role in the management of cardiovascular diseases (central illustration).several studies have elucidated the role of these drug classes on the modulation of the ace2/ang1-7/mas axis. mouse peritoneal macrophages (mpms) treated in vitro with aldosterone, demonstrated significantly increased ace activity as well as ace mrna, and significantly reduced ace2. however, in mpms treated with nadph oxidase inhibitor, aldosterone could not increase ace or decrease ace2 suggesting these effects to be mediated in part by nadph oxidase [43] . these effects were also attenuated with treatment with an mraeplerenone [43] . human monocyte-derived macrophages obtained from patients with heart failure before and after one month of treatment with another mra-spironolactone (25 mg/d), showed 47% reduction in ace activity and 53% reduction in ace mrna expression; at the same time, ace2 activity increased by 300% and ace2 mrna expression increased by 654% [43] . in mice treated for two weeks with eplerenone, cardiac ace2 activity increased two-fold and was paralleled by increased ace2 activity in macrophages [43] . this study demonstrated that the mra reduced oxidative stress, decreased ace activity, and increased ace2 activity/expression, suggesting their protective role played by increased generation of ang 1-7 and decreased formation of ang ii. overall, aldosterone decreased ace2 transcription through a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase-mediated pathway [43] and in vascular smooth muscle cells, potentiated ang ii signaling with increased phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (erk1/2) and c-jun kinase (jnk) which are also dependent on reactive oxygen species generation [44] . thus, the beneficial effects of mras are likely associated with reduction of oxidative stress and differential control of these angiotensinases. mras appeared to promote membrane ace2 expression and suppress the peripheral effects of ang ii; however, the effect of mras on soluble ace2 remains unclear.similar upregulation of ace2 was observed in studies focused on the effects of arb treatment. spontaneously hypertensive rats (shr) treated with olmesartan demonstrated a 5-fold greater expression of ace2 mrna and increased ang1-7 in thoracic aorta, while those treated with atenolol and hydralazine exhibited no change in ace2 expression or ang1-7 [45] .comparison of vessel wall dimensions showed that olmesartan selectively reduced the thoracic aorta media-to-lumen ratio, while vascular hypertrophy was unchanged in shr given atenolol or hydralazine [45] . there was no change in ace2/ang1-7 expression/activity in the carotid arteries of the treated animals. the possibility that the effects of olmesartan on vascular ace2 gene and protein expression were the result of reduced arterial blood pressure was ruled out given the comparative effect observed in mice treated with atenolol or hydralazine [45] . sprague-dawley rats treated on a 4-week course of ang ii infusion showed ang ii upregulated at1 receptor, downregulated at2 receptor, ace2 activity, enos expression and increased cd44 expression and hyaluronidase [46] . however, rats treated with telmisartan exhibited significantly increased ace2 activity and enos expression in intracardiac vessels and intermyocardium as well as downregulated local expression of at1 receptor. treatment with telmisartan also inhibited membrane cd44 expression and reduced tgfβ and smad expression [46] . studies in normotensive rats with post coronary artery ligation left ventricular remodeling and dysfunction, exhibited partial resolution following losartan and olmesartan treatment while augmenting plasma concentrations of the angiotensins [47] . this was associated with recovery of cardiac at1 receptor mrna and increased ace2 mrna post myocardial infarction, implying the beneficial effects of arbs on cardiac remodeling were accompanied by direct blockade of at1 receptors and increased ace2 expression/activity [47] . the literature offers conflicting results pertaining to arb use and the level of ace2 expression on myocardium; most of the controversy arises from the difference in the ace2 cell surface expression and the plasma ace2 levels. in the sprague-dawley rats with left coronary artery ligation and myocardial infarction, plasma ang ii and ang 1-7 were not elevated but plasma ace2 was elevated along with enhanced cardiac ace2 and at1 receptor mrna at the infarct border [48] . receptor upregulation was not observed in the remote myocardium [48] . treatment with ramipril and valsartan resulted in increased plasma ang i and ang ii and suppression in plasma ace and ace2 activity, however, neither monotherapy nor combination therapy affected ace2 or at1 receptor expression, both of which remained at levels comparable to non-myocardial infarction control [48] . however, a prior study in the same murine model showed ace and ace2 upregulation in the border, infarct zones and in viable myocardium after myocardial infarction, and treatment with ramipril reduced ace expression while ace2 remained elevated compared to non-infarcted control [49] . a recent study in the same murine model demonstrated that treatment with olmesartan or telmisartan increased both cardiac ace2 mrna and protein expression while augmenting plasma ang 1-7/ang ii ratios resulting in improved cardiac function and alleviated collagen disposition [40] . these experiments suggest that both ace inhibitors and arbs variably upregulated ace2 expression [50] . arbs inhibit binding of ang ii to at1 receptor, permitting circulating ang ii to be shunted to ace2 for conversion to ang1-7.these studies suggest the ace2/ang1-7 axis collaborates with or is regulated by at1 receptor and may be important in mediating vascular and cardiac remodeling effects of ang ii.the mechanisms by which ace inhibitors act are complex. although ace2 is not inhibited by ace inhibitors [19] , an increase in ang 1-7 suggests their clinical effects are partly mediated by the angiotensinases. ace inhibitors inhibit the conversion of ang i to ang ii and inhibit the hydrolysis of bradykinin. ace inhibition promotes the vasodilatory effects of bradykinin, improved endothelium-dependent vasodilation through increased prostaglandin and nitric oxide production, and down regulation of at1 receptor [51] [52] [53] . studies elucidating the effect of ace inhibition on the ace2 gene have shown that the inhibition of ang ii synthesis regulated ace2 mrna, but not ace2 activity [54] . however, ace inhibition alone or in combination with losartan has demonstrated to increase plasma ang1-7 while reducing plasma ang ii [54] . compared to the degree of ace2 mrna upregulation seen post losartan monotherapy, combination of losartan and lisinopril resulted in suppressed upregulation of ace2 mrna suggesting ace inhibitors may override a signal which regulates ace2 transcription [54] . although ang ii is the predominant substrate, ace2 can also convert ang i into ang 1-9 which in turn could be converted to ang 1-7 via ace; ang i can be directly converted into ang 1-7 via nep [17] , though with less favorable kinetics at baseline. thus, one can assume ace inhibitors disrupt the balance between catalytically active ace and ace2, resulting in favored activation of the ace2/ang1-7/mas axis.overall, given the demonstrated anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, anti-thrombotic effects associated with ace2/ang1-7/mas axis upregulation could serve as a valuable therapeutic target. multiple murine studies demonstrated rhace2 modulates the ras pathway, though it is unclear if these effects translate to humans. a clinical study (nct00886353) assessing the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of soluble rhace2 treatment in healthy volunteers with no known comorbidities showed a decrease in plasma ang 1-8 and increased ang 1-7 and ang 1-5 with no effect on blood pressure and heart rate [55] . common side effects included diarrhea and headache. no antibodies to rhace2 developed, suggesting there was no elicit immune response to single or repeated dosing [55] ; however, further studies investigating the immunogenicity of rhace are required.in patients with ards and sepsis, serum levels of ace and ang ii are elevated [56, 57] .studies focused on microvascular dysfunction in sepsis showed that the degree of elevation in plasma renin and ang ii correlated with the extent of organ failure and degree of microvascular dysfunction, especially in patients receiving exogenous vasoconstrictors [57] ; there was also a negative correlation between reoxygenation rates and both concentrations of plasma renin and ang ii [57] . in a pilot clinical trial (nct01597635), patients with ards that were treated with rhace2 exhibited decreased plasma ang ii and elevated plasma ang 1-7 and surfactant protein-d, which is involved in innate immunity [58] . il-6 concentrations in treated patients were also reduced, albeit statistically insignificantly which was owed to intrasubject variability and baseline imbalance. although rhace2 attenuated ras mediators, infusions of the medication did not show improvement in physiological or clinical measures of ards in this study [58] .an additional pilot study (nct101884051) investigated the effects of rhace2 in human pulmonary arterial hypertension which is characterized by reduced ace2 activity [59] .treatment with rhace2 showed improved cardiac output which coincided with maximum suppression of plasma cytokines and reduction in nitrotyrosine levels, improved peripheral vascular resistance as well as improved renal perfusion [59] .ongoing clinical studies assessing the modulation of ras axis include 1) the assessment of the relative activity of ace and ace2 in diabetic patients following treatment with candesartan (nct00192803) and 2) the overexpression of ace2/ang 1-7 in cardiac progenitor cells to assesses for enhancement in reparative function and potential to attenuate myocardial ischemia-induced cardiac damage (nct02348515). it is evident that targeting the ace2/ang1-7/mas axis is going to be interesting in clinical settings given the observed cardioprotective effects in the in vivo murine and in vitro cell culture models. however, further investigation is required to demonstrate whether these favorable experimental effects could be translated into clinical benefit.several reports have noted covid-19 is associated with cardiac involvement. in cohort studies of hospitalized patients with confirmed covid-19, several patients presented with elevated troponin i, c-reactive protein, and nt-probnp suggestive of myocardial injury [60] [61] [62] .anecdotal studies have reported patients presenting with cardiac magnetic resonance imaginingverified acute myopericarditis with systolic dysfunction masquerading as diffuse st-elevation myocardial infarction with elevated cardiac markers in the absence of obstructive coronary disease [60] . in a cohort study of 139 covid-19 confirmed hospitalized patients in wuhan, china, 7.2% had acute myocardial injury, 8.7% had shock, and 16.7% had an arrhythmia [63] .of the observed patients, those with cardiac injury were found to have a high risk of death both from time of symptom onset and time of admission [62] . as more epidemiological studies emerge from china, italy, and other affected areas, more data will be available to elucidate the clinical presentation of patients and the cardiovascular damage associated with this novel coronavirus.with regard to covid-19, there are currently several clinical studies investigating the effects of ras inhibition and ace2 regulation. an ongoing study will assess the impact of ace inhibitor and arb treatment on the severity and prognosis of patients with covid-19 (nct04318301, nct04318418). along these lines, there are two recently launched trials testing the effects of losartan among patients hospitalized with covid-19 (nct04312009) and those who are ambulatory (nct04311177). further studies have been launched to evaluate the effect of continuation verses replacement (nct04330300) or withdrawal (nct04329195) of ras inhibitors on the clinical outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease and covid-19. there is also an ongoing pilot study assessing the effects of rhace2 treatment in patients with covid-19 (nct04287686). currently, there is no data to support any conclusive effects of the use of ras inhibitors in patients with covid-19.sars-cov which emerged in the guangdong province, china and sars-cov2 which emerged in wuhan, china are closely related beta-coronaviruses whose affected receptor is ace2 [1, 3, 4] . at this time, it is unknown if the approximate 76% sequence similarity between strains of viruses translates into similar biological properties [14] . recent studies have confirmed covid-19 exploits ace2 for entry and thus may target a similar spectrum of cells as sars-cov [14] . sars-cov2 binds to ace2 via its spike (s) protein [13, 14] . the surface unit s1, of the s protein binds to ace2, which facilitates viral attachment to target cells. following receptor binding, the virus must gain access to host cytosol, which is accomplished by acid-dependent proteolytic cleavage of the s protein by cellular serine protease tmprss2, which is similar to s protein priming in sars-cov [14, figure 2 ].given the sequence similarity between sars-cov and sars-cov2, their affected receptor, and recently confirmed tmprss2-mediated viral entry, it is reasonable to hypothesize that sars-cov2 may act similarly with respect to utilizing host endocytosis machinery, subsequent virus propagation and further infection. upon binding to ace2, cleavage of the s protein at the s1/s2 sites and s2 allows for fusion of viral and cellular membranes. sars-cov is then internalized and penetrates early endosomes in a clathrin-dependent manner [64] . viral binding to ace2 appears to affect tnfα activity, which in the presence of calmodulin inhibitors promotes ectodomain cleavage [65] . in the case of sars-cov2, it is possible this shedding is also mediated by tnfα given one of the clinical features noted in covid-19 patients was the presence of a cytokine storm with increased plasma concentrations of il2, il7, il10, gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα [61] . it is also possible that ace2 shedding may be mediated by other cytokines dysregulated in covid-19. this shedding contributes to the down-regulation of membrane-bound ace2 observed in severe acute lung injury [66] . ectodomain shedding increases the concentration of plasma ace2, which remains catalytically active, though the function of soluble ace2 remains unclear. in patients with advanced heart failure, plasma ace2 activity is increased in direct proportion with worsening clinical status and reduction in ejection fraction and correlates with adverse clinical outcomes [67] . since down-regulation of bound ace2 is observed in severe acute lung injury [67] and post myocardial infarction [47] , and concentrations of soluble ace2 appears to correlate with clinical outcomes of heart failure patients [31] , it is possible to suggest that concentrations of soluble ace2 may correlate to the extent of tissue damage sustained and may correlate to the degree by which systemic inflammatory pathways are upregulated. there is some evidence to suggest soluble ace2 is able to regulate systemic ang ii. clinical trials have shown rhace2 could convert systemic ang ii to ang 1-7 [58, 59] , and play some pathological, compensatory, or counter regulatory roles.if sars-cov2 does induce ace2 ectodomain shedding resulting in the reduction of ace2 entry sites on the infected cell, it is possible that following transcription s proteins fuse directly at the host cell membrane and directly promote infection of neighboring cells resulting in the formation of multinucleated syncytia [68] . formation of multinucleated cells would allow the virus to spread without being detected or neutralized by virus-specific antibodies [68] .otherwise, following replication and transcription, complete virion assembly in the golgi would result in transportation of the virus in vesicles and release by exocytosis [68] . in the setting of full virion assembly and exocytosis, it is unclear if ace2 ectodomain shedding would be favorable for further propagation and infection.regardless of how sars-cov2 completes virion assembly, it is clear that membranebound ace2 would play a physiological role in the replication of the novel virus. the question remains whether the use of ace inhibitors, arbs, and mras should be avoided in the setting of sars-cov infection given each agent [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] 54] upregulates ace2 expression and activity.lipopolysaccharide (lps)-induced acute lung injury (ali) mouse models, exhibited decreased expression of ace2, lung and inflammatory injury, however, this was ameliorated by the injection of cells transfected with ace2 and results in the improvement of lung function and lung injury. treatment of these mice with ace inhibitors and arbs also alleviated lps-induced pneumonic injury [69] . prior studies have shown the sars-cov s protein can exaggerate acute lung failure through deregulation of the renin-angiotensin system. however, sars-cov spikemediated lung failure could be rescued by inhibition of at1 receptor [69] . again, adequate data on the effects of ras inhibition in covid-19 patients is not available, and the ongoing clinical/observations studies are being conducted (nct04318301, nct04318418, nct04312009, nct04311177, nct04287686, nct04330300, nct04329195).if sars-cov2 downregulates membrane-bound ace2 by promoting adam17 mediated ectodomain shedding resulting in increased concentrations of soluble ace2 without compromising viral propagation, we hypothesize this would result in the overall downregulation of the ace2/ang1-7/mas pathway which would contribute to the severity of inflammation and systemic dysregulation observed in sars-cov2. thus, in patients with cardiovascular disease and sars-cov2, the use of ace inhibitors, arbs, or mras may be favorable as a method to endogenously upregulate ace2 as a compensatory mechanism that provides anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic and anti-thrombotic support as well as reduction in progression of vascular/cardiac remodeling and heart failure. several societies including the american college of cardiology, american heart association, heart failure society of america [70] , european society of cardiology [71] , have recommended continuing ras system antagonists given the lack of conclusive data on a link between upregulation of systemic or tissue ace2 and the increased susceptibility to covid-19 in patients with cardiovascular disease. based on our review, we hypothesize cardiovascular patients with covid-19 should remain on ras system inhibitors given the protective effects of the ace2 pathway until ras blockade is proven to increase the risk to covid-19.• covid-19 has been associated with cardiac involvement. sars-cov2 requires binding to ace2 in the ras system.• ace2/ang1-7/mas pathway counterbalances the ras system resulting in activation of antiinflammatory pathways.• ace inhibitors, arbs, and mras upregulate ace2 activity and expression.• more data is required to determine if regulation of ace2 in patients with cardiovascular disease and covid-19 would help improve clinical outcomes. central illustration. the ras system interaction with covid-19. normally, ang i is converted to ang ii via ace which could be inhibited by ace inhibitors. the proinflammatory effects of ang ii are mediated through at1r in several ways 1) in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal medulla it stimulates aldosterone secretion and binding to mineralocorticoid receptors to promote water reabsorption and increase salt retention; it is inhibited by mras, 2) in posterior pituitary ang ii stimulates antidiuretic hormone secretion to promote water retention and 3) inthe median age was 69 years for men and 75 years for women. the strongest predictor of elevated concentrations of ace2 in both cohorts was male sex (estimate = 0.26, p < 0.001; and 0.19, p < 0.001, respectively). in the index cohort, use of ace inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), or mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (mras) was not an independent predictor of plasma ace2. in the validation cohort, ace inhibitor (estimate = -0.17, p = 0.002) and arb use (estimate = -0. 15 , p = 0.03) were independent predictors of lower plasma ace2, while use of an mra (estimate = 0.11, p = 0.04) was an independent predictor of higher plasma ace2 concentrations.in two independent cohorts of patients with heart failure, plasma concentrations of ace2 were higher in men than in women, but use of neither an ace inhibitor nor an arb was associated with higher plasma ace2 concentrations. these data might explain the higher incidence and fatality rate of covid-19 in men, but do not supportthe world is currently faced with the outbreak of a new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov). the new virus, sars-cov-2, emerged in december 2019 in the city of wuhan, china, and is the causative agent of a respiratory syndrome now known as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). 1, 2 efforts aimed at curbing the spread of sars-cov-2 and finding effective treatments are ongoing.early epidemiological observations indicate that sars-cov-2 infects all age groups, but older men with chronic illnesses may be more severely affected. there is a preponderance of men (58.1%) compared with women (41.9%) testing positive for covid-19 2 and, in the previous sars-cov epidemic in 2003, men had a higher mortality than women (21.9% vs. 13 .2%; p < 0.0001) 3 .whether men with the current sars-cov-2 virus also have a worse mortality outcome is becoming apparent as recent report indicate that 70% of patients that died of covid-19 in italy were men, 4 and mainly elderly.the increased vulnerability of older people with cardiovascular disease and comorbid conditions could be related to increased concentrations of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), 5, 6 and ace2 is known to be increased in heart failure. 7 ace2 is not only an enzyme but also a functional receptor on cell surfaces for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2, and is highly expressed in the heart, testis, kidneys, and lungs, [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] and shed into the plasma. some reports have suggested that inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) increase plasma ace2 concentrations, 5, 13 although these speculations are not supported by a substantial body of research . we therefore investigated plasma concentrations of ace2 in two large and independent cohorts of men and women with heart failure according to the use of raas inhibitors.from the biology study to tailored treatment in chronic heart failure (biostat-chf), 14 we measured ace2 concentrations in 1485 men and 537 women with heart failure in 11 european countries. results were validated in another, independent biostat-chf cohort consisting of 1123 men and 575 women with heart failure enrolled in scotland. only participants with sufficient plasma samples were used for this research. the design and baseline characteristics of both cohorts of biostat-chf have been published elsewhere. 14 inclusion criteria were the same in the index and validation cohorts; the only exception was that when the left ventricular ejection fraction (lvef) was >40%, patients had to have a b-type natriuretic peptide bnp >400 ng/l or n-terminal probnp (nt-probnp) >2000 ng/l in the index cohort, but not in the validation cohort.the study complied with the declaration of helsinki and was approved by the medical ethics committees of participating centres. 14 ace2 was measured using the olink proseek analysis service (olink proteomics, uppsala, sweden). the olink platform 15 utilizes a highthroughput multiplex immunoassay based on a proprietary proximity extension assay (pea) technology, where each biomarker is addressed by a matched pair of antibodies, coupled to unique, partially complementary oligonucleotides, and measured by quantitative real-time pcr. results are expressed in the form of relative quantification (normalized protein expression or npx) which are logarithmically related to protein concentration but cannot be converted to absolute protein concentrations. interpretations are therefore relative and not absolute. analytical validation of the sensitivity and specificity of the olink assay for this study was achieved by comparing available routine laboratory measurements of two protein biomarkers, growth differentiation factor 15 (gdf-15) (pg/ ml) and nt-probnp (pg/ml), with those measured using olink (npx). nt-probnp is a canonical biomarker in cardiovascular disease biology. 16 all statistical analyses were performed using r 17 version 3.6.2. in group comparisons, categorical variables were depicted as numbers with percentages. normally distributed variables were depicted as means ± sd, and non-normally distributed variables as median and interquartile range (iqr) defined as the first and third quartile (q1-q3). the means for continuous variables were compared by oneway analysis of variance (anova) or the kruskal-wallis test, while categorical variables were compared by the v 2 test. multivariate models were based on backward stepwise regression. baseline tables were made using the r-based comparegroups 18 package. in general, a two-tailed p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.diabetes, a higher heart rate, and a lower systolic blood pressure (supplementary material online, table s1 ). in the index cohort, only 0.3% (6/2022) of patients received both an ace inhibitor and an angiotensin receptor blocker (arb). in the validation cohort, only 0.4% (7/1691) received both an ace inhibitor and an arb.among patients that were not treated with raas inhibitors, men were predominant in the uppermost quartile of ace2 (supplementary material online, table s2 and s3). ace2 concentrations were higher in men than in women in 9 out of 11 countries but were similar by ace inhibitor/arb use (supplementary material online, figures s1 and s2 ).in both study cohorts, routine lab concentrations of two golden standard biomarkers (gdf-15 and nt-probnp) showed a strong correlation with those measured using olink (spearman's rho 0.77-0.92, p < 0.001; supplementary material online, figure s3 ).the ace2-raas-covid-19 axis is summarized in figure 1 . in both cohorts, plasma ace2 concentrations (in npx units) were higher in men than in women. in the index cohort, the mean plasma concentration was 5.38 in men compared with 5.09 in women (p < 0.001). in the validation cohort, the mean plasma concentration was 5.46 in men compared with 5.16 in women (p < 0.001). figure 2 shows plasma ace2 concentrations in those treated with or without blockers of the raas. in the index cohort, mean plasma concentration was 5.32 in patients who used an ace inhibitor 5.29 in those who did not (p = 0.59. in the validation cohort, the mean plasma concentration was 5.32 in those who used an ace inhibitor vs. 5.4 in those who did not (p = 0.0033). in the index cohort, the mean plasma concentration was 5.23 in patients who used an arb compared with 5.31 in those who did not (p = 0.16). in the validation cohort, the mean plasma concentration was 5.3 in those who used an arb vs. 5 .37 in those who did not (p = 0.38). in the index cohort, mean plasma concentration was 5.35 in patients who used an mra compared with 5.25 in those who did not (p = 0.003). in the validation cohort, the mean plasma concentration figure 1 summary of the raas pathway. was 5.4 in those who used an mra vs. 5.34 in those who did not (p = 0.036).age and sex interaction analyses indicated that men who used mra have an increased ace2 concentration (p < _ 0.01, for unadjusted models, and those adjusted for ace inhibitor use, arb use, age, diabetes, and atrial fibrillation). this was statistically significant only in the index cohort. in the validation cohort, men who used an ace inhibitor had lower ace2 concentrations (p < 0.05; for unadjusted models, and those adjusted for ace inhibitor use, arb use, age, diabetes, and atrial fibrillation). all similar interaction tests were not statistically significant.the strongest predictor of elevated plasma concentrations of ace2 in the index and validation cohort was male sex (estimate = 0.26, p < 0.001; and 0.19, p < 0.001, respectively). in the index cohort, neither ace inhibitors, arbs, nor mras were associated with plasma ace2 concentrations ( table 2 ). in the validation cohort, ace inhibitors (estimate = -0.17, p = 0.002) and arbs (estimate = -0.15, p = 0.03) were associated with lower plasma ace2 concentrations, but mras (estimate = 0.11, p = 0.04) were associated with higher concentrations (supplementary material online, table s4 ).in two large independent cohorts of patients with heart failure, we found that plasma ace2 concentrations were higher in men than in women. in addition, those receiving ace inhibitors or arbs did not have higher concentrations of ace2, and an increase in those taking mra in the validation cohort was not confirmed in the index cohort.there is an increased susceptibility of elderly people with chronic comorbidities to sars coronaviruses, and men appear to be especially vulnerable to sars-cov-2. 1, 2, 19 given that a typical heart failure patient belongs to this high-risk group, we sought to uncover factors that could explain the sex-based susceptibility to sars-cov-2 in this vulnerable population.baseline characteristics of the two cohorts presented are typical for patients with heart failure and confirm that these are elderly patients that often have comorbidities, including diabetes, hypertension, renal disease, and copd. the spectrum of comorbidities involves most of the organs affected in covid-19, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, and liver. 1 covid-19 patients and other patients with such underlying diseases are in a hyperinflammatory state. as such, it might well be that patients with various kidney diseases have high endothelial ace2, 20 making ace2 a damage marker. furthermore, plasma ace2 activity is increased in patients with heart failure. 21 post-transcriptional events of ace2 in the testis ace2 is widely distributed in tissues, including lung alveolar epithelial cells, vascular endothelium, heart, kidney, and testis. 8, 11, 20, 22 for the readers' convenience, we provide supplementary material online, figures s4 and s5 showing the gene structure of ace2, and its isoforms and tissue distribution. ace2 protein and, interestingly, also the non-coding isoforms are highly expressed in the testis 22 (take home figure, supplementary material online, figure s6 ). isoform transcription could possibly affect protein translation in this male-specific tissue, e.g. via microrna (mirna) competition. previous studies indicate that ace2 may be subject to post-transcriptional regulation via mir-421 23 which could be exploited as a novel potential therapeutic target to modulate ace2 expression in disease. how the testis-expressed ace2 protein, or that expressed in other organs, enters the circulation is largely unknown. the tissue-specific transcriptional regulation of ace2 could partially explain higher ace2 protein concentrations and why a coronavirus would flourish in men. recently, it was suggested that the higher prevalence and fatality rate in patients with cardiac diseases, such as hypertension or diabetes, was related to the concomitant use of ace inhibitors and arbs that were suggested to increase ace2 concentrations. the authors speculated that this might be due to increased expression of ace2, but offered no evidence for this. 5, 6, 24, 25 in animal models, selective blockade of either angiotensin ii synthesis or activity induced increases in cardiac ace2 gene expression and cardiac ace2 activity; 13 whether this translates to humans needs to be validated.to the best of our knowledge, this is the first substantial study to examine the association between plasma ace2 concentrations and the use of raas blockers in patients with cardiovascular disease. in contrast to previous reports, 5,6,24,25 ace inhibitors and arbs were not associated with increased plasma concentrations of ace2 in the present study. indeed, if anything, the use of ace inhibitors and arbs predicted lower concentrations of ace2 in the validation cohort, although these findings were not replicated in the index cohort. taken together, these data do not support withholding ace inhibitors or arbs in patients at risk for sars-cov-2 infection.in the validation cohort, mra use was associated with a weak but statistically significant increase in plasma ace2 concentrations. univariate and multivariate-adjusted analyses indicated a significant sex-based interaction, with men on mra having higher ace2 concentrations. a similar association was not found in the index cohort. the effect of an mra on plasma ace2 is therefore not clear. one study found a trend (p = 0.07) towards increased plasma ace2 activity in patients treated with an mra. 21 in addition, one mechanistic study using macrophages reported an increase of ace2 activity after mra, 26 but further data are not available. clearly, our findings do not suggest that mras should be discontinued in patients with heart failure, in whom sars-cov-2 infection is found. moreover, even if mras are consistently found to increase plasma ace2 concentrations, it still needs to be established whether their use is associated with higher vulnerability to or more severe consequences of sars-cov-2 infection. mras are a very effective treatment for heart failure, and these hypothetical effects on viral infection should be weighed carefully against their proven benefits.the equilibrium between soluble and membrane-bound ace2 might influence covid-19 pathogenesis and treatment options. previous studies indicate adam17-mediated ace2 shedding, 27, 28 but how this would affect coronavirus infectivity during concomitant use of raas inhibitors warrants separate research. a study on dogs with heart disease indicated that ace2 shedding is not an important factor in the total extent of tissue-bound ace2 activity, but rather a loss of tissue ace2 into the circulation would tend to decrease the overall compensatory potential of ace2. 29 further work is required to show whether this translates to humans.in two large cohorts of patients with heart failure, plasma ace2 concentrations were higher in men than in women, possibly reflecting higher tissue expression of this receptor for sars coronavirus infections. this could explain why men might be more susceptible to infection with, or the consequences of, sars-cov-2. patients receiving ace inhibitors or arbs did not have higher plasma concentrations of ace2, and any effect of mras was small and inconsistent, supporting the continued use of these agents in patients with heart failure during the current sars-cov-2 pandemic.the conclusions drawn in this analysis are mainly restricted to heart failure, albeit a group of patients at high risk for covid-19. secondly, since our patients are not coronavirus infected, we cannot provide a direct link between the course of covid-19 disease in patients with low vs. high plasma ace2 concentrations, and the influence of age and raas blockers on the course of the disease. thirdly, we measured plasma ace2 concentrations and not membrane-bound ace2. we can only speculate that circulating concentrations are associated with tissue concentration, since there is no compelling evidence for this.supplementary material are available at europeaan heart journal online.this work was supported by a grant from the european commission (fp7-242209-biostat-chf).conflict of interest: b.t.s reports grants from the dutch heart foundation (2019t094), during the conduct of this study. j.g.f.c. reports grants and personal fees from amgen, novartis, pharmacosmos, and vifor, and personal fees from servier, outside the submitted work. s.d.a. reports personal fees from bayer, boehringer ingelheim, cardiac dimension, impulse dynamics, novartis, servier, st. jude medical, and vifor pharma, and grant support from abbott vascular and vifor pharma, outside the submitted work. g.f. reports being a committee member in trials sponsored by medtronic, vifor, servier, novartis, and bi, outside the submitted work. m.m. reports personal fees from consulting honoraria for participation to trials' committees or advisory boards from abbott vascular, amgen, astra-zeneca, bayer and vifor pharma in the last 3 years, personal fees from fees for public speeches in sponsored symposia from abbott vascular and edwards therapeutics, outside the submitted work. all other authors have no conflicts to declare.the coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2), has abruptly reached pandemic proportions. sars-cov-2 is a member of the betacoronavirus family, as well as sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus) and mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus). since the beginning of 2020, the number of confirmed cases of covid-19 has dramatically increased worldwide, leaping to more than a million by march 2020 [1] . although the majority of covid-19 patients develop mild to moderate clinical features [2] , severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multi-organ failure, leading to high death rate, may develop. notably, marked sex differences have emerged in covid-19 prevalence and prognosis. in particular, the age-specific risk of disease is reported to be significantly higher in males than in females, except under the age of 50 years. moreover, the age-specific risks of death and hospitalization is at least two fold higher in males than in females among all age ranges [3] . furthermore, patients with advanced age and underlying pathologies, mainly hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease (cvd), are more prone to experience severe form of the disease [4] . even though the overall mortality considerably varies among countries, the fatality-rate by age groups displays very similar patterns, rising consistently in the 60-69-year age group [5] . importantly, the presence of comorbidities further increases mortality. in a sample of 355 patients who died of covid-19 in italy, the prevalence of diabetes was 35.5% [5] . not so differently from covid-19, the spread of diabetes has known no boundaries, and the number of affected people has reached nearly half a billion worldwide [6] . the number of deaths attributed to diabetes and its complications was around 4.2 million in 2019 [6] . notably, more than 65% of diabetic patients are over 65 years old [7] . thus, although with extremely different connotations, covid-19 and diabetes are two pandemics that share the burden of a wide diffusion in the elderly population and a dramatic impact on global mortality and economic health resources.this short review is focused on some open questions emerging from the effort to fully understand the link between covid-19 and diabetes, mainly in the context of possible harmful or beneficial effects of commonly used drugs in patients with diabetes on the course of covid-19 infection.diabetes is reportedly a major cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide. a conceivable link between diabetes and infectious diseases has been postulated. in particular, lower respiratory tract infections are known to be rather common and severe in the elderly with type 2 diabetes (t2d) [8] . although evidence suggests that diabetes is unlikely to significantly increase the susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection, a higher risk of worse covid-19 progression and outcomes has been observed [9] . the mechanisms underlying this association are not completely clear yet, but the exacerbated pro-inflammatory cascade and the impaired immune response in diabetic patients with covid-19 are suspected to be crucially involved. in particular, increased levels of pro-inflammatory markers, such as leukocyte and neutrophil count, pro-calcitonin, c-reactive protein, ferritin, and circulating cytokines that trigger the cytokine storm, namely il-6, il-8, il-2 receptor, tnf-α, have been detected in diabetic patients with severe covid-19 compared to patients without diabetes [10] . furthermore, an altered immune response in diabetic patients, possibly due to impaired lymphocyte, neutrophil and monocyte/macrophage function, has been long hypothesised, especially in the presence of poorly controlled glycaemia [11, 12] . higher concentrations of d-dimer and fibrinogen, hallmarks of severe forms of covid-19, have been also reported in patients with diabetes compared to patients without diabetes, suggesting that these patients might be more prone to develop coagulation abnormalities in the course of the infection, known to be significantly associated with worse prognosis [10, 13] .in a recent retrospective study involving chinese patients (n = 904) with moderate, severe or critical disease, the major risk factors for mortality and poor outcomes were evaluated. among the enrolled patients 15% (n = 136) had diabetes, including t2d, type 1 diabetes and gestational diabetes. overall, diabetes increased the odds of in-hospital death and poor prognosis. diabetic patients were older and had significant alterations of several laboratory parameters associated with poor prognosis compared to patients without diabetes. in particular, they had higher levels of d-dimer, while female diabetic patients had increased ldh and neutrophil count, compared to non-diabetic patients. cvd was more common in men with diabetes than in non-diabetic men. notably, in multivariable regression analysis, insulin therapy was independently associated with poor prognosis. c-reactive protein was the only independent risk factor for either mortality or poor prognosis in patients with covid-19 and diabetes [14] . besides this, further research is also needed to clarify whether hypoglycaemia might also contribute to adverse outcomes and increased mortality in covid-19 patients with diabetes [15] .patients with diabetes have high prevalence of high blood pressure and are at increased risk of cvd [16] . hence, the treatment of hypertension largely includes drug classes that have demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular events, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) [17] . since ace converts angiotensin i into angiotensin ii, a potent vasoconstrictor and sodium-retentive agent, the blockage of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) leads to an effective reduction in blood pressure. ace shows homology with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), the receptor to which the transmembrane spike glycoprotein on the surface of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 binds, allowing the internalization of the virus by the alveolar cells and other cell types [18] . ace2, which is clearly not a direct target of ace inhibitors, is a ubiquitous mono-carboxypeptidase that converts angiotensin ii into the anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic angiotensin-(1-7), contrasting its potent vasoconstrictor, sodium-retentive, pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic effects. indeed, angiotensin-(1-7) binding to the mas receptor induces nitric oxide release, protecting against tissue injury [19] . another known substrate of ace2 is angiotensin i, which is converted into angiotensin-(1-9) [20, 21] . the latter is in turn converted into angiotensin-(1-7) by ace, therefore competing with angiotensin ii for its binding [22] . limited animal and in vitro studies have reported an upregulation of ace2, induced by arbs and, to a far lesser extent, by ace inhibitors, predominantly in the heart and in the kidney. the effect is partly explained by an increase in local levels of angiotensin ii, induced by arbs, but not by ace inhibitors [20] . indeed, arbs block angiotensin ii type 1 (at1) receptors and, consequently, increase the availability of the substrate angiotensin ii, which upregulates ace2 [21] . based on this assumption, it has been speculated that the treatment with arbs and ace inhibitors might favour the entry of sars-cov-2 into the lung cells, therefore increasing the risk for adverse outcomes and severe forms of covid-19 infection.conversely, a beneficial effect of a background therapy with arb on the course of the disease has been supposed. two complex mechanisms might support this hypothesis. firstly, angiotensin ii, by binding to its receptor at1, might enhance the shedding of trans-membrane ace2, promoted by adam17, a disintegrin and metalloprotease, therefore releasing soluble ace2 locally. the soluble form of ace2 is unable to mediate sars-cov-2 internalization, as it is no longer annexed to the cell membrane [21] . secondly, the up-regulation of ace2, probably induced by arbs might not necessarily have negative effects. as sars-cov-2 internalization in the lung cells inevitably induces the downregulation of ace2, the increase in its substrate, angiotensin ii, a potent vasoconstrictor and pro-inflammatory agent, might contribute to an exacerbation of lung injury. indeed, in animal models of lung injury, a clear association between the activation of the angiotensin ii-at1 signalling and the severity of lung damage has been observed, while the detrimental effects of this cascade are counterbalanced by the activation of the ace2-angiotensin-(1-7)-mas receptor axis [23] . specifically, in models of sepsis or acid aspiration, which frequently cause acute lung injury and ards, ace2 knockout mice experienced a more severe tissue damage, characterized by marked inflammatory cell infiltration, increased vascular permeability, lung oedema and bleeding, compared to wild-type mice. similarly, angiotensin ii type 2 (at2) receptors knockout mice had a more marked lung damage. in the same models, the injection of recombinant human ace2 protein into ace2 knockout mice considerably decreased the severity of lung injury [24] . in line with these findings, the pre-treatment with recombinant human ace2 was able to reduce inflammatory cell infiltration and tissue injury in a mouse model of respiratory syncytial virus infection [25] . evidence from clinical studies is still rather limited. in patients with ards, recombinant human ace2 increased angiotensin-(1-7) and decreased angiotensin-ii concentrations, even though the study was prematurely discontinued for the lack of clinical improvement [26] . overall, evidence from animal models suggests a conceivable pneumo-protective role of both ace2 and at2 receptor in the context of lung injury. a loss of pulmonary ace2 might therefore have harmful effects, exacerbating inflammation and promoting respiratory distress and fibrosis. in the same way, the activation of ace, angiotensin ii and at1 receptor axis might exert detrimental effects, worsening lung damage. the rationale of raas inhibition is therefore counterbalancing these effects, by reducing angiotensin ii and increasing ace2. notably, arb and ace inhibitors attenuated lpsinduced lung injury in several preclinical studies [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . recently, milne et al. analysed gene expression of ace2, ace, agtr1 (encoding for at1), tmprss2 (transmembrane protease serine 2, requested cofactor for the internalization of sars-cov-2) and adam17 in a large number of healthy lung tissue samples collected from patients undergoing lung resection for cancer. a significant association between use of ace inhibitors and reduced ace2 gene expression was observed. differently, the use of arbs was not linked to relevant changes in ace2 expression, but was significantly correlated to increased ace and decreased agtr1 expression [32] . although these findings are quite in contrast with data from animal studies, it should be highlighted that gene expression rather than protein concentration was analysed, and that the collected tissue samples did not exhibit lung injury or ards. covid-19 results in severe lung damage and an imbalance of the raas system in this context cannot be excluded. recently, in a pilot study, covid-19 patients were found to have higher levels of circulating angiotensin ii compared to healthy subjects, and a correlation between angiotensin ii concentration and the severity of the disease was observed as well [33] . thus, the effects of ace inhibitors and arbs might be very different in extremely damaged context, and should be therefore explored in animal models of covid-19.mounting evidence from recent clinical studies suggests that raas inhibitor use is not related to an increased risk of covid-19 infection or poor outcomes. in a retrospective cohort study of 18,472 patients screened for covid-19, test positivity was not significantly associated with ace inhibitor or arb therapy [34] . similarly, in a us study no relationship emerged between prior ace inhibitor or arb use and the increased likelihood of a positive sars-cov-2 test result, adjusting for relevant confounding factors [35] . in an italian community-based case-control study, no association was found between ace inhibitor or arb treatment and covid-19 infection, although the use of these drugs was rather frequent, due to high prevalence of cvd [36] . overall, these findings excluded an increased risk of covid-19 infection in patients already treated with raas inhibitors.other studies have evaluated the link between covid-19 progression and raas inhibitor therapy. in a recent korean population-based cohort study, involving 5179 covid-19 patients, the use of ace inhibitors or arbs was not associated with a higher mortality risk, after adjustment for confounders [37] . in a recent systematic review, including a total of n = 23,565 covid-19 patients from different countries, ace inhibitor or arb use was not associated with increased severity of covid-19 illness [38] . interestingly, in a meta-analysis of more than 19,000 covid-19 patients from seven cohort studies and five case-control studies, the use of raas inhibitors was not linked to a higher risk of covid-19 infection, severity or mortality, whereas mortality risk was significantly lower in patients treated with ace inhibitors or arbs compared to those treated with other antihypertensive drugs [39] .taking together, data from observational studies indicates that raas inhibitor therapy is unlikely to have a negative impact on the course of the infection. however, whether patients with covid-19 might take advantage of initiating these drugs or not in terms of disease progression and outcomes should be explored in clinical trials, which are still ongoing.cvd is a well-known major complications of diabetes. the risk of developing cvd is 2-to fivefold higher in patients with t2d than in non-diabetic patients, mainly due to diabetes-related coronary atherosclerosis [40] . in addition, diabetic cardiomyopathy may occur independently of coronary artery disease, likely developing from t helper 1 driven responses within the cardiomyocyte [41, 42] . besides the common clinical features of covid-19, cardiovascular damage may occur in nearly 12% of patients [43] , being a cause of major concern, due to a high related mortality. the mechanisms underlying this complication are largely unknown. the direct viral damage and the destabilization of coronary plaques, reportedly, are suspected to play a consistent role. notably, in a sample of 187 patients with covid-19, guo et al. observed that the presence of background coronary heart disease or cardiomyopathy was associated with frequent occurrence of myocardial damage, highlighted by a marked increase in serum troponin t in the course of the disease [44] . accordingly, mortality was considerably higher among patients with myocardial injury and concomitant cvd (69.4%) than in patients without cvd (37.5%). remarkably, a considerable percentage of patients displaying myocardial injury had diabetes (30%), compared to patients without myocardial injury (8.9%). myocardial injury may therefore contribute to the poorer outcomes observed in diabetic patients with covid-19 [45] . of note, patients with myocardial injury were more prone to develop malignant arrhythmias, ards, coagulopathy and acute kidney injury, which explained high mortality [44] . importantly, ace inhibitors and arbs were broadly used in patients with myocardial injury, but mortality did not significantly differ between treated and non-treated patients. although consistent evidence excluding harms or suggesting benefits of raas inhibitors on covid-19 patients with hearth injury is lacking, most arbs were able to increase ace2 expression in the hearts of animal models of arterial hypertension [46] . even in this pathological context, the possible effects of these drugs should be further elucidated, as the downregulation of ace2 in cardiomyocytes and in blood vessels, induced by sars-cov2 internalization, might exacerbate myocardial injury and endothelial dysfunction, compromising heart function in patients with diabetes and underlying cvd [20, 47] .in addition, patients with t2d have high rate of lipid alterations and statins are the first line therapy for dyslipidaemia. remarkably, evidence from preclinical studies suggests that statins might modulate ace2 expression in several tissues, including the heart. it has been observed that atorvastatin increased ace2 protein expression in the heart and in the kidney of rabbits with atherosclerosis [48] . in another study, diabetic rats displayed significantly lower expression of ace2 and impaired systolic and diastolic function compared to control rats, and the combined treatment with insulin and fluvastatin was associated with higher levels of ace2, compared to non-treated diabetic rats [49] .ace2 is a multi-substrate enzyme and is a targeted by several molecules. although extremely limited, there is evidence in animal studies that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (ppar-γ) agonists, which are insulinsensitizer drugs for the treatment of type 2 diabetes (t2d), might increase the expression of ace2 in different tissues. in an animal model of hypertension, the insulin-sensitizer rosiglitazone modulated the ace2/angiotensin-(1-7)/angiotensin ii axis in aortic tissue and lowered blood pressure by increasing the expression of ace2 [50] . similarly, in high fat diet fed rats, an animal model of obesity, pioglitazone increased the expression of ace2 in insulin-sensitive tissues (liver, adipose tissue and skeletal muscle) likely through the modulation of renin-angiotensin system [51] .ace2 is widely distributed in human tissues and, remarkably, its expression was found to be even lower in the lung than in other sites [4] . hence, other mediators are thought to play a role in facilitating sars-cov-2 infection. the priming by the serine protease tmprss2 is requested for the binding of ace2 and the internalization of sars-cov-2. tmprss2 cleaves the s protein in s1 and s2 subunits, a necessary step for membrane fusion and viral internalization, which contextually drags ace2 into the alveolar cells [18] . in light of this, both antibodies targeting s-protein and tmprss2 inhibitors might prevent sars-cov-2 entry in lung cell [18] . individuating other possible candidate co-receptors is, therefore, of great importance for the development of new therapeutic strategies to contrast the infection.dpp4 is a ubiquitously expressed cell surface exopeptidase with important metabolic functions. it mainly regulates the bioactivity of gut-derived hormones, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (glp-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (gip). they stimulate insulin secretion in response to oral glucose administration, known as the incretin effect [52] . the dpp4 inhibitors (dpp4i) are commonly used drugs for the treatment of t2d. they prevent the degradation of incretins by inhibiting the catalytic activity of dpp4. as a result, ß-cell insulin secretion is potentiated and glycaemia is significantly reduced. independently of its catalytic function, dpp4 displays inflammatory and immune functions [53] . indeed, it is expressed mainly by t-lymphocytes and is involved in their activation and proliferation [54] . interestingly, pro-inflammatory factors significantly increase dpp4 expression in circulating immune cells [55] . unlike sars-cov and sars-cov-2, which binds to ace2 to entry into lung cells, dpp4 is the functional receptor for mers-cov [56] . hence, several mouse and human monoclonal antibodies preventing protein s binding to dpp4 have given promising results for the treatment of mers [57] . of note, it has been recently reported that dpp4 shares patterns of expression with ace2 in the lung, precisely in alveolar type 2 cells, the main target of sars-cov-2 [58] . vankadari et al. have recently set up a docking model of dpp4 and the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein [59] . they predicted several dpp4 residues that might be involved in the interaction with sars-cov-2 s1 domain of the spike protein, also targeted by other coronaviruses that enter the host cells through the functional receptor dpp4. however, further validation is needed to draw conclusions and to establish whether the possible adhesion between dpp4 and spike protein may play a role in sars-cov-2 infection. consequently, there are some important issues to be addressed before claiming possible beneficial effects of dpp4 modulation on covid- 19 [60] . according to data from chen et al., in patients with diabetes and moderate-severe covid-19 the use of dpp4i did not significantly impact on mortality and clinical outcomes [14] .the presence of diabetes considerably influences the course of covid-19 infection, being a risk factor for poor outcomes. in limited preclinical studies, ace2 expression was found to be modulated by several players in different tissues. most of them are largely employed in the treatment of diabetes, such as antihypertensive and, to a considerably lesser extent, insulin-sensitizers and statins. in light of this, the potential harmful or protective effects of these treatments in covid-19 infection might be an interesting soil for further research. to date, data supporting that these drugs clearly interfere with sars-cov-2 access in lung cells or in other tissues are completely lacking. it should be stressed that in the absence of evidence from consistent clinical studies, the discontinuation or the adoption, of these therapies in the attempt to influence the course of the infection is strongly discouraged.hypertension so that we could have an active comparator, other antihypertensive agents. also, to provide information about the association in inpatients, we conducted a study of the association of ace inhibitors and arbs on mortality among people with hypertension who were hospitalized with covid-19. we stratified all our assessments by insurance groups due to substantial differences between the two populations.we conducted 2 studies of patients with hypertensionthe first study included individuals who tested positive for sars-cov-2 as an outpatient and the second included patients hospitalized with covid- 19 . in addition to a diagnosis of hypertension, we prespecified our study population to include individuals that were receiving at least 1 antihypertensive agent. further, to account for medical comorbidities, we created robust propensity score matched cohorts of patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other antihypertensive agents. we evaluated the success of our matching algorithms through explicit assessments of covariate balance across all comparisons and evaluation of exposure groups on falsification endpoints.due to systematic differences among enrollees in medicare advantage and commercial insurance programs, and the enhanced risk of adverse outcomes with covid-19 among older individuals who are overrepresented in medicare, [10] [11] [12] [13] we evaluated the association of these drugs with outcomes in analyses stratified by insurance groups.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprintwe used de-identified administrative claims for medicare advantage and commercially insured members in a research database from a single large us health insurance provider. the database contains medical (emergency, inpatient, outpatient) and pharmacy claims for services submitted for third party reimbursement, available as international classification of diseases, tenth revision, clinical modification (icd-10-cm) and national drug codes (ndc) claims, respectively. these claims are aggregated after completion of care encounters and submission of claims for reimbursement.there were two additional data sources that included information on covid-19 and could be linked to the claims. first, the limited outpatient testing dataset included information on sars-cov-2 test results for members who underwent outpatient testing for sars-cov2 at 49 hospital-based, free-standing outpatient and third-party labs in all states across the united states, with over 90% of tests submitted by third-party lab vendors. second, the inpatient covid-19 dataset included a daily-updated record of covid-19 inpatient admissions for all insurance enrollees with claims information, representing those admitted to a hospital with a primary or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 (etable 1), along with their current disposition (admitted, discharged, transferred, expired, or unknown).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint we constructed cohorts of patients for each of the two studies. first, for the outpatient study, we identified outpatients who tested positive for sars-cov-2. we included individuals at least 18 years of age, with at least 6 months of enrollment in medicare advantage or commercial insurance from january through december 2019 and available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims and receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and tested positive for sars-cov-2 positive in an outpatient setting. between march 6, 2020 and may 3, 2020 (efigure 1). thedatabase that satisfied the inclusion criteria. we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the risk of hospitalization in this outpatient cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.second, for the second inpatient study, we identified an inpatient cohort of adults hospitalized with covid- 19 . this included all patients (age ≥18 years) with at least 6 months of health insurance enrollment in 2019 with available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims, were receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and were hospitalized with a principal or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 between january 5, 2020 and may 10, 2020 (efigure 2). we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the mortality of hospitalized individuals in this cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.for both studies, a diagnosis of hypertension was based on icd-10 codes (etable 1), and drug treatment for hypertension was defined by the receipt of one or more agents included in the 2017 american heart association hypertension . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint guidelines. 14 these include first-line agents of ace inhibitors, arbs, thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics, and dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, as well as second-line agents of beta-adrenergic antagonists, alpha blockers, centrally acting alpha agonists, loop diuretics, potassium sparing diuretics, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and direct vasodilators (individual drugs listed in etable 2). the information on the latter was derived from pharmacy claims and was defined by a cumulative supply greater than 30 days between july 1, 2019 and december 31, 2019.we identified 2 mutually exclusive exposure groups (1) patients receiving ace inhibitors, and (2) those receiving arb, with or without other agents. we used an active comparator for these analyses that included all remaining patients with a diagnosis of hypertension who received one or more anti-hypertensive agents from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb. these agents include all first and second line antihypertensive agents based on the 2017 aha guidelines for hypertension, 14 with the use of individual agents defined by one or more pharmacy claims for at least 30 days of medication supply for the agent between july and december 2019. in sensitivity analyses, we restricted the control group to individuals receiving at least one first line anti-hypertensive agent from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020 we combined information from inpatient and outpatient claims in 2019 to identify potential confounders of the association of the ace inhibitors and arb use and patient outcomes. we included patient age, sex, race, conditions that would represent potential indications for selective use of ace inhibitors or arbs (diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), and each of the additional comorbidities included in the charlson comorbidity index (peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, hemi-or paraplegia, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, rheumatologic disease, diabetes with chronic complications, malignancy, metastatic solid tumor, mild liver disease, moderate-to-severe liver disease, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or human immunodeficiency virus). the icd-10 codes corresponding to these variables are included in etable 1 (appendix). race was available only for medicare advantage members. we included information on the total number of anti-hypertensive agents prescribed to patients using pharmacy claims. finally, regional clustering of cases was identified using location of sites submitting claims for laboratory testing for sars-cov-2 and hospital site for in-hospital outcomes.in the outpatient study, the primary outcome was inpatient hospitalization for covid-19, defined as a hospitalization with a principal or a secondary diagnosis of covid-19 in a linked inpatient dataset (etable 1). we assessed mortality during this inpatient hospitalization as a secondary outcome.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in the inpatient study, the primary outcome was in-hospital mortality. in addition, we evaluated a secondary composite outcome of death or discharge to hospice and hospital length of stay.in both outpatient and inpatient studies, we created propensity score-matched cohorts of patients with hypertension, treated with ace inhibitors, arbs or other antihypertensive medications. for this, we constructed a non-parsimonious multivariable logistic regression model with receipt of ace inhibitors, arb or other antihypertensive as the dependent variable. for example, we modeled the receipt ace inhibitor or another other anti-hypertensive (excluding arb) to determine each patient's likelihood of receiving these agents based on their measured clinical characteristics. we applied this strategy to different pairs of treatment comparisons (ace inhibitor vs others, arb vs others, and ace inhibitor vs arb). briefly, we performed 1:1 matching between recipients based on propensity scores with a caliper width of one-tenth of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score. 4 we pursued 100 iterations to find the lowest mean absolute standardized difference among matched variables. we matched our cohorts on age, gender, race, insurance type, conditions that may lead to selective use of ace inhibitors and arbs (i.e., diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), each of the comorbidities in the charlson comorbidity index, and the number of anti-hypertensive agents used for the patient. to account for regional clustering of care practices and response to the covid-19. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint pandemic, we explicitly accounted for census region of lab testing site or inpatient facility in our models.we evaluated the performance of propensity score matching using several strategies. first, we assessed the propensity score distributions in the unmatched and matched cohorts and calculated an equipoise metric to summarize the degree of overlap in characteristics of patients receiving these drugs. 15, 16 this represents the proportion of individuals in the unmatched groups that had a propensity score between 0.3 and 0.7, representing a state of equipoise between the two drugs. a value greater than 0.5 implies two drugs are in empirical equipoise, with a higher a value indicating a lower likelihood of confounding by indication. 15 next, we evaluated the standardized difference between matched covariates before and after propensity score matching.specifically, we evaluated whether our matching algorithm achieved a standardized difference of <10% between matched cohort suggestive of adequately matched groups. 16,17 second, we evaluated the success of our matching algorithm using a priori defined negative control outcomes. we chose two negative control or falsification endpointsclaims for gastroesophageal reflux disease and ingrown nail -that are unlikely to be affected by the treatment assignment and a directional effect would represent covariate imbalance. 16 third, we evaluated whether our propensity matched cohort were also adequately matched on other therapeutic classes for nonantihypertensive agents that were not directly included in the matching algorithm. these strategies were designed to evaluate the potential for residual confounding after creating propensity score matched cohorts. finally, we evaluated our observations for robustness by assessing treatment effects in 100 iterations of the propensity score . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint matching algorithm, evaluating whether our findings were consistent across these iterations that varied on the degree of matching of individual covariates.we describe differences between patients treated with ace inhibitors and arbs compared with other anti-hypertensive agents, and between those treated with ace inhibitors using chi square test for categorical variables and t-test for continuous variables. as the duration of follow up was expected to vary across individuals in both outpatient and inpatient covid-19 cohorts, we evaluated their effects in time-to-event analyses with cox-proportional hazards models in both unadjusted and propensity score-matched cohorts. to reduce bias from residual differences in matched covariates in our evaluation of patient outcomes, we included the covariates included in our propensity score matching algorithm as independent variables in these models. 18 we repeated these analyses without this additional covariate adjustment.for the outpatient study, the index date was represented by the day of positive covid-19 test as an outpatient, the period of the study was measured in days from the positive covid-19, and the outcome of interest was hospitalization. for the inpatient study, the index date was represented by the first day of hospitalization with covid-19, the period of the study was measured in days from admission, and the outcome of interest was death. since hospitalization could end with either patient's death or being discharged alive, we created a cause-specific cox proportional hazards model, which is a competing risk analysis. [19] [20] [21] both analyses were censored at the end of the observation period on may 10, 2020.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint given systematic differences between patients enrolled in medicare advantage and commercial insurance, particularly with older age, higher comorbidity burden, and higher risk of covid-19 complications among medicare advantage enrollees, we evaluated quantitative and qualitative interactions between insurance type and treatment groups for the assessment of our outcomes. we also created propensity score-matched cohorts within the each of the two insurance subgroups.analyses were performed using open source r 3.4.0 (cran) and python 3.8.2.all hypothesis tests were 2-sided, with a level of significance set at 0.05, except for interaction tests where the level of significance was set at 0.10. given the exploratory nature of study, statistical tests were not adjusted for multiple testing. the yaleaffairs exempted this study from other review as all activities were limited to retrospective analysis of de-identified data and accessed in accordance with health insurance portability and accountability act regulations. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint median age of these individuals was 69.0 years and 52.5% were women. of medicare advantage patients, 29.6% were african american. patients receiving ace inhibitors or arbs were more likely to be men, have diabetes with or without chronic complications, and be receiving more than 1 antihypertensive drugs ( table 1) . they were less likely to have chronic heart failure or moderate-to-severe renal disease, compared with patients receiving other anti-hypertensive treatments. patients receiving ace inhibitors were similar to those receiving arbs but had a higher rate of dementia and peripheral vascular disease ( table 1) . we matched 441 patients receiving ace inhibitors to 441 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5), achieving <10% standardized differences for all covariates (figure 1) . similarly, we matched 412 patients receiving arb to 412 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5). the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 3) .among 12,566 patients who were hospitalized for covid-19 with linked claims data, 7,933 had had a diagnosis of hypertension and had an outpatient prescription for at least one antihypertensive drug (efigure 2). the inpatient cohort included patients from 47 states in the us (efigure 3). of the included patients, 92.0% were medicare advantage enrollees. the median age of hospitalized individuals was 77.0 years, 54.6% were women; 29.9% of medicare advantage enrollees were african american.differences between hospitalized patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other agents are included in table 2 . in the inpatient cohort, 1731 patients receiving ace . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint inhibitors and 1560 patients receiving arbs that were propensity score-matched to patients receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (efigure 5), with covariate standardized differences of <10% after matching (figure 1) . the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 4) .in the outpatient cohort, over a median 30 (iqr 19, 40) days from sars-cov-2 testing, patients receiving ace inhibitors were less frequently hospitalized than those receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (10.7% vs 14.4%, p = 0.03). there was no significant association between arb therapy and hospitalization rates (12.7% vs 14.4% in individuals with other insurance, p 0.36). in propensity score-matched cohorts (efigure table 3 ). there were no differences in the a priori chosen falsification endpoints between propensity scorematched populations (etable 3).there were differences between the association of ace inhibitors and hospitalization risk across insurance groups (p for interaction, 0.09), with a lower risk of hospitalization in medicare advantage patients (hr, 0.61 [0.41, 0.93], p = 0.02) that was not observed in commercially insured individuals (hr, 2.14 [0.82, 5.60], p = 0.12).( table 3) .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in propensity score-matched analyses, arb use was not associated with significantly lower hospitalization risk than individuals receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (hr, 0.88 [0.61, 1.26], p = 0.48) (figure 2 ). there were no significant differences in hospitalization rates between propensity score matched cohorts of patients receiving ace inhibitor, compared with arb (hr 0.91, 0.65 to 1.29; p = 0.60).there were no significant interactions by insurance-type and the association of arb with outcomes (p-interaction = 0.55) among the individuals in the outpatient cohort who were hospitalized, there was no association with ace inhibitor or arb use with subsequent in-hospital mortality (etable 4).of the 7933 patients hospitalized with covid-19, 1128 (14.2%) died during hospitalization, 4722 (59.5%) were discharged alive, and 2083 (26.3%) were still hospitalized at the end of the observation period. a majority of deaths (90.1%) were among the medicare advantage population. the median length of stay (including patients who died as well as discharged alive) for covid-19 hospitalizations was 6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days, which was similar across patients who died (6 (iqr: 3 to 10) days) or discharged alive (6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days) during the observation period.overall, the proportion of covid-19 patients who died did not differ significantly in those on ace inhibitor therapy before hospitalization, compared with those on other anti-hypertensive agents (13.5% vs 13.9%, p = 0.68). in the propensity matched-cohort of patients receiving ace inhibitors before hospitalization, in-hospital mortality was not . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. table 4 ). similarly, arb did not have a significantly different risk of mortality compared with other anti-hypertensive agents (1.15 (0.95, 1.38); p = 0.15). there were no significant differences in mortality between patients receiving ace inhibitors and arbs in the overall population, without a significant interaction between insurance group and treatment assignment and patient outcome (figure 3, table 4 ).these findings were consistent in for our secondary outcome of in-hospital death or discharge to hospice (etable 4). there was also no association between treatment with ace inhibitor or arb on hospital length of stay (etable 5).sensitivity analyses that focused on individuals receiving at least one first line antihypertensive agent in the control group, and that varied the covariate adjustment strategies were consistent with the primary analysis (etables 6-8) . the 100 iterations of propensity score matching algorithm found a lower risk of hospitalization with ace inhibitors across all iterations, with a p-value of less than 0.05 in 97 of 100 iterations in the medicare advantage population.in this first national study of ace inhibitors and arbs in outpatients testing positive for sars-cov-2, we found that overall these drugs did not confer additional risk or benefit.however, among those in medicare advantage, ace inhibitors were associated with an almost 40% significantly lower risk of hospitalization for covid-19, an effect not observed with arbs. among those hospitalized for covid-19, we did not find a benefit or a harm of these medications. collectively, the findings do not support a change to the current use of these medications but, given the lack of effective therapies to mitigate the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint harm of the virus, this study does provide a rationale for testing the use of ace inhibitors in older patients to reduce the risk of severe sars-cov-2 infection.our design has several attributes that should provide confidence about the findings even though it is observational. our study was restricted to people with hypertension who were receiving at least one anti-hypertensive agent, thereby limiting our assessment to individuals receiving treatment for the same chronic illness, and therefore, equally likely to seek care for healthcare needs for covid-19. in all analyses, we explicitly compared individuals with equipoise for receiving either drug treatment.moreover, we did not find any evidence of confounding by disease severity in choice of therapy in our assessment of a priori defined falsification endpoints. further, our study included individuals from across the united states, thereby limiting the effect of hospital or regional care practices that may bias an evaluation of treatment effects.our observations extends the prior evidence of supporting safety of ace inhibitor treatment in covid-19. 4, 7, 9, 22 we show the safety of these agents in outpatient sars-cov-2 infected individuals, which complements the studies of those who were hospitalized. 4, 7, 22 also, ours is a national study, which complements the single center or single region studies. 23 our study does have an intriguing finding. in the subgroup of individuals enrolled in medicare advantage, we find that ace inhibitors were associated with a significantly lower risk of hospitalization following an infection with sars-cov-2 in the outpatient setting. these patients are older, more frequently have comorbidities, and were more vulnerable to severe covid-19 disease. 4, 7 these findings are particularly relevant as the medicare advantage group represented over 90% of all covid-19 hospitalizations . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in our inpatient cohort. also, interestingly, we did not find the same association for arbs despite clinical equipoise in the use of these drugs. our findings are consistent with prior evidence from randomized clinical trials that a reduced risk of pneumonia with ace inhibitors that is not observed with arb. 5 our study of in-hospital outcomes adds to the literature on studies that have reached contrasting conclusions regarding the role of ace inhibitor therapy and inhospital mortality among hospitalized covid-19 patients. we did not find a significant association with mortality, consistent with others that have not found such an association. 4, 23, 24 however, our findings contrast with certain studies that have found lower mortality in hospitalized covid-19 patients treated with ace inhibitors. 7, 22 notably, the studies that have evaluated mortality risk with covid-19 before have not consistently been designed to detect potential causal association of drug therapy with outcomes, 7 relied on case control designs, 22 pursued potentially biased assessment by using comparators not receiving any therapy, 4, 7 or are based on data from single health centers. 4,23 moreover, some have studied both ace inhibitors and arbs together despite potentially different mechanisms and effects on patient outcomes. 5 there some rationale for why there may be a specific ace inhibitor effect. there is preclinical evidence that suggests a possible protective role for ace inhibitors in covid-19. ace inhibitors, but not arbs, are associated with the upregulation of ace-2 receptors. 3, 25 these receptors modulate the local renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system interactions in the lung tissue. 26 the presence of ace2 receptors, therefore, exerts a protective effect against the development of acute lung injury in infections with sars coronaviruses, which lead to dysregulation of these mechanisms and endothelial . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. our study has important implications for 4 ongoing randomized trials as none of them align with the observations of our study. 6 of the 4 trials, 3 are testing the use of ace inhibitors or arbs in the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients, and 1 is using a 10-day course of arbs after a positive sars-cov-2 test to prevent hospitalization. 6 however, our study suggests that the most appropriate strategy to test in a trial would be the prophylactic use of ace inhibitor to prevent hospitalization, which is not being tested in any current study.the findings of our study should be interpreted in light of the following limitations.first, the study is observational, and despite robust methods, and explicit assessments of residual confounding, understanding the potential protective role of ace inhibitors in covid-19 requires a dedicated randomized controlled trial. second, we do not know the proportion of patients receiving these antihypertensive agents that continued to be treated with these drugs during the illness and the association of their continued use or cessation with patient outcomes. third, all included data elements are contingent upon individuals seeking care for that ailment or filling a medication using their insurance provider and would not be captured if they chose to self-pay. however, we do not expect that any sizeable proportion of insured individuals would defer insurance coverage for their care. fourth, we cannot account for differences in timing of . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint presentation of patients relative to their symptom onset. however, we limited the effect of differential presentation by patients across exposure groups by focusing on patients receiving treatment for the same medical comorbidity, i.e. hypertension, and only varying the class of drugs. moreover, we included patients across the us and accounted for clustering of patients, thereby limiting the effect of local practice patterns that may affect hospitalization thresholds. therefore, it is unlikely patient's care seeking . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint ant ihypert ensi e agent s use roups before propensit y score m at ching roups aft er propensit y score m at ching . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint  inclusion criteria  icd-10 codes  hypertension  i10%, i11%, i12%, i13%, i15%, i16%, i67 g468, i690, g462, i606, g452, i682, i613, i634, i650, i668, i662, i670, g463, i679, i673,  h340, i607, i669, g464, i692, i699, g454, i691, i620, i660, i658, i605, i635, i608, g461,  i602, i616, g458, i676, i604, i699, i621, i600, i677, i672 hypertension so that we could have an active comparator, other antihypertensive agents. also, to provide information about the association in inpatients, we conducted a study of the association of ace inhibitors and arbs on mortality among people with hypertension who were hospitalized with covid-19. we stratified all our assessments by insurance groups due to substantial differences between the two populations.we conducted 2 studies of patients with hypertensionthe first study included individuals who tested positive for sars-cov-2 as an outpatient and the second included patients hospitalized with covid- 19 . in addition to a diagnosis of hypertension, we prespecified our study population to include individuals that were receiving at least 1 antihypertensive agent. further, to account for medical comorbidities, we created robust propensity score matched cohorts of patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other antihypertensive agents. we evaluated the success of our matching algorithms through explicit assessments of covariate balance across all comparisons and evaluation of exposure groups on falsification endpoints.due to systematic differences among enrollees in medicare advantage and commercial insurance programs, and the enhanced risk of adverse outcomes with covid-19 among older individuals who are overrepresented in medicare, [10] [11] [12] [13] we evaluated the association of these drugs with outcomes in analyses stratified by insurance groups.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprintwe used de-identified administrative claims for medicare advantage and commercially insured members in a research database from a single large us health insurance provider. the database contains medical (emergency, inpatient, outpatient) and pharmacy claims for services submitted for third party reimbursement, available as international classification of diseases, tenth revision, clinical modification (icd-10-cm) and national drug codes (ndc) claims, respectively. these claims are aggregated after completion of care encounters and submission of claims for reimbursement.there were two additional data sources that included information on covid-19 and could be linked to the claims. first, the limited outpatient testing dataset included information on sars-cov-2 test results for members who underwent outpatient testing for sars-cov2 at 49 hospital-based, free-standing outpatient and third-party labs in all states across the united states, with over 90% of tests submitted by third-party lab vendors. second, the inpatient covid-19 dataset included a daily-updated record of covid-19 inpatient admissions for all insurance enrollees with claims information, representing those admitted to a hospital with a primary or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 (etable 1), along with their current disposition (admitted, discharged, transferred, expired, or unknown).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint we constructed cohorts of patients for each of the two studies. first, for the outpatient study, we identified outpatients who tested positive for sars-cov-2. we included individuals at least 18 years of age, with at least 6 months of enrollment in medicare advantage or commercial insurance from january through december 2019 and available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims and receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and tested positive for sars-cov-2 positive in an outpatient setting. between march 6, 2020 and may 3, 2020 (efigure 1). thedatabase that satisfied the inclusion criteria. we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the risk of hospitalization in this outpatient cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.second, for the second inpatient study, we identified an inpatient cohort of adults hospitalized with covid- 19 . this included all patients (age ≥18 years) with at least 6 months of health insurance enrollment in 2019 with available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims, were receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and were hospitalized with a principal or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 between january 5, 2020 and may 10, 2020 (efigure 2). we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the mortality of hospitalized individuals in this cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.for both studies, a diagnosis of hypertension was based on icd-10 codes (etable 1), and drug treatment for hypertension was defined by the receipt of one or more agents included in the 2017 american heart association hypertension . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint guidelines. 14 these include first-line agents of ace inhibitors, arbs, thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics, and dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, as well as second-line agents of beta-adrenergic antagonists, alpha blockers, centrally acting alpha agonists, loop diuretics, potassium sparing diuretics, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and direct vasodilators (individual drugs listed in etable 2). the information on the latter was derived from pharmacy claims and was defined by a cumulative supply greater than 30 days between july 1, 2019 and december 31, 2019.we identified 2 mutually exclusive exposure groups (1) patients receiving ace inhibitors, and (2) those receiving arb, with or without other agents. we used an active comparator for these analyses that included all remaining patients with a diagnosis of hypertension who received one or more anti-hypertensive agents from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb. these agents include all first and second line antihypertensive agents based on the 2017 aha guidelines for hypertension, 14 with the use of individual agents defined by one or more pharmacy claims for at least 30 days of medication supply for the agent between july and december 2019. in sensitivity analyses, we restricted the control group to individuals receiving at least one first line anti-hypertensive agent from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020 we combined information from inpatient and outpatient claims in 2019 to identify potential confounders of the association of the ace inhibitors and arb use and patient outcomes. we included patient age, sex, race, conditions that would represent potential indications for selective use of ace inhibitors or arbs (diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), and each of the additional comorbidities included in the charlson comorbidity index (peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, hemi-or paraplegia, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, rheumatologic disease, diabetes with chronic complications, malignancy, metastatic solid tumor, mild liver disease, moderate-to-severe liver disease, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or human immunodeficiency virus). the icd-10 codes corresponding to these variables are included in etable 1 (appendix). race was available only for medicare advantage members. we included information on the total number of anti-hypertensive agents prescribed to patients using pharmacy claims. finally, regional clustering of cases was identified using location of sites submitting claims for laboratory testing for sars-cov-2 and hospital site for in-hospital outcomes.in the outpatient study, the primary outcome was inpatient hospitalization for covid-19, defined as a hospitalization with a principal or a secondary diagnosis of covid-19 in a linked inpatient dataset (etable 1). we assessed mortality during this inpatient hospitalization as a secondary outcome.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in the inpatient study, the primary outcome was in-hospital mortality. in addition, we evaluated a secondary composite outcome of death or discharge to hospice and hospital length of stay.in both outpatient and inpatient studies, we created propensity score-matched cohorts of patients with hypertension, treated with ace inhibitors, arbs or other antihypertensive medications. for this, we constructed a non-parsimonious multivariable logistic regression model with receipt of ace inhibitors, arb or other antihypertensive as the dependent variable. for example, we modeled the receipt ace inhibitor or another other anti-hypertensive (excluding arb) to determine each patient's likelihood of receiving these agents based on their measured clinical characteristics. we applied this strategy to different pairs of treatment comparisons (ace inhibitor vs others, arb vs others, and ace inhibitor vs arb). briefly, we performed 1:1 matching between recipients based on propensity scores with a caliper width of one-tenth of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score. 4 we pursued 100 iterations to find the lowest mean absolute standardized difference among matched variables. we matched our cohorts on age, gender, race, insurance type, conditions that may lead to selective use of ace inhibitors and arbs (i.e., diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), each of the comorbidities in the charlson comorbidity index, and the number of anti-hypertensive agents used for the patient. to account for regional clustering of care practices and response to the covid-19. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint pandemic, we explicitly accounted for census region of lab testing site or inpatient facility in our models.we evaluated the performance of propensity score matching using several strategies. first, we assessed the propensity score distributions in the unmatched and matched cohorts and calculated an equipoise metric to summarize the degree of overlap in characteristics of patients receiving these drugs. 15, 16 this represents the proportion of individuals in the unmatched groups that had a propensity score between 0.3 and 0.7, representing a state of equipoise between the two drugs. a value greater than 0.5 implies two drugs are in empirical equipoise, with a higher a value indicating a lower likelihood of confounding by indication. 15 next, we evaluated the standardized difference between matched covariates before and after propensity score matching.specifically, we evaluated whether our matching algorithm achieved a standardized difference of <10% between matched cohort suggestive of adequately matched groups. 16,17 second, we evaluated the success of our matching algorithm using a priori defined negative control outcomes. we chose two negative control or falsification endpointsclaims for gastroesophageal reflux disease and ingrown nail -that are unlikely to be affected by the treatment assignment and a directional effect would represent covariate imbalance. 16 third, we evaluated whether our propensity matched cohort were also adequately matched on other therapeutic classes for nonantihypertensive agents that were not directly included in the matching algorithm. these strategies were designed to evaluate the potential for residual confounding after creating propensity score matched cohorts. finally, we evaluated our observations for robustness by assessing treatment effects in 100 iterations of the propensity score . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint matching algorithm, evaluating whether our findings were consistent across these iterations that varied on the degree of matching of individual covariates.we describe differences between patients treated with ace inhibitors and arbs compared with other anti-hypertensive agents, and between those treated with ace inhibitors using chi square test for categorical variables and t-test for continuous variables. as the duration of follow up was expected to vary across individuals in both outpatient and inpatient covid-19 cohorts, we evaluated their effects in time-to-event analyses with cox-proportional hazards models in both unadjusted and propensity score-matched cohorts. to reduce bias from residual differences in matched covariates in our evaluation of patient outcomes, we included the covariates included in our propensity score matching algorithm as independent variables in these models. 18 we repeated these analyses without this additional covariate adjustment.for the outpatient study, the index date was represented by the day of positive covid-19 test as an outpatient, the period of the study was measured in days from the positive covid-19, and the outcome of interest was hospitalization. for the inpatient study, the index date was represented by the first day of hospitalization with covid-19, the period of the study was measured in days from admission, and the outcome of interest was death. since hospitalization could end with either patient's death or being discharged alive, we created a cause-specific cox proportional hazards model, which is a competing risk analysis. [19] [20] [21] both analyses were censored at the end of the observation period on may 10, 2020.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint given systematic differences between patients enrolled in medicare advantage and commercial insurance, particularly with older age, higher comorbidity burden, and higher risk of covid-19 complications among medicare advantage enrollees, we evaluated quantitative and qualitative interactions between insurance type and treatment groups for the assessment of our outcomes. we also created propensity score-matched cohorts within the each of the two insurance subgroups.analyses were performed using open source r 3.4.0 (cran) and python 3.8.2.all hypothesis tests were 2-sided, with a level of significance set at 0.05, except for interaction tests where the level of significance was set at 0.10. given the exploratory nature of study, statistical tests were not adjusted for multiple testing. the yaleaffairs exempted this study from other review as all activities were limited to retrospective analysis of de-identified data and accessed in accordance with health insurance portability and accountability act regulations. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint median age of these individuals was 69.0 years and 52.5% were women. of medicare advantage patients, 29.6% were african american. patients receiving ace inhibitors or arbs were more likely to be men, have diabetes with or without chronic complications, and be receiving more than 1 antihypertensive drugs ( table 1) . they were less likely to have chronic heart failure or moderate-to-severe renal disease, compared with patients receiving other anti-hypertensive treatments. patients receiving ace inhibitors were similar to those receiving arbs but had a higher rate of dementia and peripheral vascular disease ( table 1) . we matched 441 patients receiving ace inhibitors to 441 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5), achieving <10% standardized differences for all covariates (figure 1) . similarly, we matched 412 patients receiving arb to 412 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5). the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 3) .among 12,566 patients who were hospitalized for covid-19 with linked claims data, 7,933 had had a diagnosis of hypertension and had an outpatient prescription for at least one antihypertensive drug (efigure 2). the inpatient cohort included patients from 47 states in the us (efigure 3). of the included patients, 92.0% were medicare advantage enrollees. the median age of hospitalized individuals was 77.0 years, 54.6% were women; 29.9% of medicare advantage enrollees were african american.differences between hospitalized patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other agents are included in table 2 . in the inpatient cohort, 1731 patients receiving ace . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint inhibitors and 1560 patients receiving arbs that were propensity score-matched to patients receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (efigure 5), with covariate standardized differences of <10% after matching (figure 1) . the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 4) .in the outpatient cohort, over a median 30 (iqr 19, 40) days from sars-cov-2 testing, patients receiving ace inhibitors were less frequently hospitalized than those receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (10.7% vs 14.4%, p = 0.03). there was no significant association between arb therapy and hospitalization rates (12.7% vs 14.4% in individuals with other insurance, p 0.36). in propensity score-matched cohorts (efigure table 3 ). there were no differences in the a priori chosen falsification endpoints between propensity scorematched populations (etable 3).there were differences between the association of ace inhibitors and hospitalization risk across insurance groups (p for interaction, 0.09), with a lower risk of hospitalization in medicare advantage patients (hr, 0.61 [0.41, 0.93], p = 0.02) that was not observed in commercially insured individuals (hr, 2.14 [0.82, 5.60], p = 0.12).( table 3) .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in propensity score-matched analyses, arb use was not associated with significantly lower hospitalization risk than individuals receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (hr, 0.88 [0.61, 1.26], p = 0.48) (figure 2 ). there were no significant differences in hospitalization rates between propensity score matched cohorts of patients receiving ace inhibitor, compared with arb (hr 0.91, 0.65 to 1.29; p = 0.60).there were no significant interactions by insurance-type and the association of arb with outcomes (p-interaction = 0.55) among the individuals in the outpatient cohort who were hospitalized, there was no association with ace inhibitor or arb use with subsequent in-hospital mortality (etable 4).of the 7933 patients hospitalized with covid-19, 1128 (14.2%) died during hospitalization, 4722 (59.5%) were discharged alive, and 2083 (26.3%) were still hospitalized at the end of the observation period. a majority of deaths (90.1%) were among the medicare advantage population. the median length of stay (including patients who died as well as discharged alive) for covid-19 hospitalizations was 6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days, which was similar across patients who died (6 (iqr: 3 to 10) days) or discharged alive (6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days) during the observation period.overall, the proportion of covid-19 patients who died did not differ significantly in those on ace inhibitor therapy before hospitalization, compared with those on other anti-hypertensive agents (13.5% vs 13.9%, p = 0.68). in the propensity matched-cohort of patients receiving ace inhibitors before hospitalization, in-hospital mortality was not . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. table 4 ). similarly, arb did not have a significantly different risk of mortality compared with other anti-hypertensive agents (1.15 (0.95, 1.38); p = 0.15). there were no significant differences in mortality between patients receiving ace inhibitors and arbs in the overall population, without a significant interaction between insurance group and treatment assignment and patient outcome (figure 3, table 4 ).these findings were consistent in for our secondary outcome of in-hospital death or discharge to hospice (etable 4). there was also no association between treatment with ace inhibitor or arb on hospital length of stay (etable 5).sensitivity analyses that focused on individuals receiving at least one first line antihypertensive agent in the control group, and that varied the covariate adjustment strategies were consistent with the primary analysis (etables 6-8) . the 100 iterations of propensity score matching algorithm found a lower risk of hospitalization with ace inhibitors across all iterations, with a p-value of less than 0.05 in 97 of 100 iterations in the medicare advantage population.in this first national study of ace inhibitors and arbs in outpatients testing positive for sars-cov-2, we found that overall these drugs did not confer additional risk or benefit.however, among those in medicare advantage, ace inhibitors were associated with an almost 40% significantly lower risk of hospitalization for covid-19, an effect not observed with arbs. among those hospitalized for covid-19, we did not find a benefit or a harm of these medications. collectively, the findings do not support a change to the current use of these medications but, given the lack of effective therapies to mitigate the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint harm of the virus, this study does provide a rationale for testing the use of ace inhibitors in older patients to reduce the risk of severe sars-cov-2 infection.our design has several attributes that should provide confidence about the findings even though it is observational. our study was restricted to people with hypertension who were receiving at least one anti-hypertensive agent, thereby limiting our assessment to individuals receiving treatment for the same chronic illness, and therefore, equally likely to seek care for healthcare needs for covid-19. in all analyses, we explicitly compared individuals with equipoise for receiving either drug treatment.moreover, we did not find any evidence of confounding by disease severity in choice of therapy in our assessment of a priori defined falsification endpoints. further, our study included individuals from across the united states, thereby limiting the effect of hospital or regional care practices that may bias an evaluation of treatment effects.our observations extends the prior evidence of supporting safety of ace inhibitor treatment in covid-19. 4, 7, 9, 22 we show the safety of these agents in outpatient sars-cov-2 infected individuals, which complements the studies of those who were hospitalized. 4, 7, 22 also, ours is a national study, which complements the single center or single region studies. 23 our study does have an intriguing finding. in the subgroup of individuals enrolled in medicare advantage, we find that ace inhibitors were associated with a significantly lower risk of hospitalization following an infection with sars-cov-2 in the outpatient setting. these patients are older, more frequently have comorbidities, and were more vulnerable to severe covid-19 disease. 4, 7 these findings are particularly relevant as the medicare advantage group represented over 90% of all covid-19 hospitalizations . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in our inpatient cohort. also, interestingly, we did not find the same association for arbs despite clinical equipoise in the use of these drugs. our findings are consistent with prior evidence from randomized clinical trials that a reduced risk of pneumonia with ace inhibitors that is not observed with arb. 5 our study of in-hospital outcomes adds to the literature on studies that have reached contrasting conclusions regarding the role of ace inhibitor therapy and inhospital mortality among hospitalized covid-19 patients. we did not find a significant association with mortality, consistent with others that have not found such an association. 4, 23, 24 however, our findings contrast with certain studies that have found lower mortality in hospitalized covid-19 patients treated with ace inhibitors. 7, 22 notably, the studies that have evaluated mortality risk with covid-19 before have not consistently been designed to detect potential causal association of drug therapy with outcomes, 7 relied on case control designs, 22 pursued potentially biased assessment by using comparators not receiving any therapy, 4, 7 or are based on data from single health centers. 4,23 moreover, some have studied both ace inhibitors and arbs together despite potentially different mechanisms and effects on patient outcomes. 5 there some rationale for why there may be a specific ace inhibitor effect. there is preclinical evidence that suggests a possible protective role for ace inhibitors in covid-19. ace inhibitors, but not arbs, are associated with the upregulation of ace-2 receptors. 3, 25 these receptors modulate the local renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system interactions in the lung tissue. 26 the presence of ace2 receptors, therefore, exerts a protective effect against the development of acute lung injury in infections with sars coronaviruses, which lead to dysregulation of these mechanisms and endothelial . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. our study has important implications for 4 ongoing randomized trials as none of them align with the observations of our study. 6 of the 4 trials, 3 are testing the use of ace inhibitors or arbs in the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients, and 1 is using a 10-day course of arbs after a positive sars-cov-2 test to prevent hospitalization. 6 however, our study suggests that the most appropriate strategy to test in a trial would be the prophylactic use of ace inhibitor to prevent hospitalization, which is not being tested in any current study.the findings of our study should be interpreted in light of the following limitations.first, the study is observational, and despite robust methods, and explicit assessments of residual confounding, understanding the potential protective role of ace inhibitors in covid-19 requires a dedicated randomized controlled trial. second, we do not know the proportion of patients receiving these antihypertensive agents that continued to be treated with these drugs during the illness and the association of their continued use or cessation with patient outcomes. third, all included data elements are contingent upon individuals seeking care for that ailment or filling a medication using their insurance provider and would not be captured if they chose to self-pay. however, we do not expect that any sizeable proportion of insured individuals would defer insurance coverage for their care. fourth, we cannot account for differences in timing of . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint presentation of patients relative to their symptom onset. however, we limited the effect of differential presentation by patients across exposure groups by focusing on patients receiving treatment for the same medical comorbidity, i.e. hypertension, and only varying the class of drugs. moreover, we included patients across the us and accounted for clustering of patients, thereby limiting the effect of local practice patterns that may affect hospitalization thresholds. therefore, it is unlikely patient's care seeking . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint ant ihypert ensi e agent s use roups before propensit y score m at ching roups aft er propensit y score m at ching . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint the sars-cov-2 virus, a newly discovered member of the coronavirus family, was first described at the end of 2019 in wuhan, china, as the third severe respiratory syndrome caused by a coronavirus [1] . due to its easy spread via droplets and direct contact, it quickly spread globally, leading the world health organization to declare it a public health emergency [2] . most countries around the world are taking measures aimed at preventing the spread of the coronavirus as the main mechanism of fighting the disease [2] . some of those measures have had a significant impact on people's lives. many countries have imposed travel restrictions [3] [4] , leaving millions of people having to change travel plans. the psychological and economic impact of mandatory isolation following possible exposure to the virus is another matter of concern [5] [6] [7] .clinically, the disease presents after an incubation period of between 2 and 14 days [8] . the cdc reports that the most common symptoms are fever, cough, and shortness of breath, while dyspnea, chest pain, confusion, and cyanosis represent alarm symptoms that should prompt people to seek medical attention [8] . the largest meta-analysis available at the time of writing this article reports that fever and cough are the presenting symptoms in 89% and 72% of patients, respectively [9] . fatigue and gastrointestinal symptoms were also frequently reported [10] . hypertension and diabetes mellitus were the most commonly reported comorbidities [10] [11] [12] . older individuals and those with comorbidities were more likely to develop end-organ damage requiring icu admission [11] . acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), acute kidney injury (aki), and cardiac injury were all reported in severe cases, with ards being the most common [11] . leukopenia and, less commonly, eosinopenia were the most typical laboratory findings, while bilateral ground-glass or patchy opacities in the lungs were the most common radiologic abnormalities [10] [11] [12] . c-reactive protein, d-dimer, and procalcitonin levels were elevated, especially in cases of severe disease [12] . at the time of this writing, no clear guidelines on treating sars-cov-2 infections have been published, and most clinicians seem to be treating them in a manner similar to that of seasonal flu.the purpose of this article is to look at the impact the sars-cov-2 infection is having on hypertensive patients. considering the extremely high prevalence of hypertension in society and the fact that hypertension is among the most frequent comorbidities of patients with severe cases of sars-cov-2 infections, we believe it is important to look more deeply into the relationship between the two conditions.the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) enzyme is an essential component of human metabolism, and its dysregulation is associated with a number of different clinical conditions, including hypertension. many studies were done to assess the potential role of ace in ards development. multiple animal models have shown a protective effect of ace ii against ards development [13] [14] [15] . sars-cov-2, similarly to sars-cov, uses the ace ii receptor to invade the alveolar epithelium and can be considered a potential target for future anti-covid-19 therapies [13, 16] . cardiovascular pathology and ace inhibitors/angiotensin receptor (ar) blockers lead to increased ace ii levels, potentially increasing the risk of sars-cov-2 infections, as pointed out by hanff et al. [17] . there is also some evidence that sars-cov-2 can lead to the downregulation of ace ii and toxic accumulation of angiotensin ii [17] . it should also be noted that ace ii is expressed in other organs and tissues as well. the fact that ace is expressed in the gut, heart, and kidney and that sars-cov infections can be associated with gastrointestinal symptoms (and the virus can often be isolated from the stool), cardiac damage, and aki speaks in favor of there being a strong correlation between ace expression and covid infection [18] .overall, the exact role of ace enzyme and angiotensin in lung injury in general, as well as in the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 (covid 19) infections, is not clear. if the models are true and ace ii does have a protective role against ards and ards is the feared complication of covid 19, it would be reasonable to assume ace ii would have a protective effect against covid 19. as the ace ii receptor is used by the virus to infect the alveolar epithelium, it raises the issue of whether the availability of the receptor is associated with the severity of clinical findings. moreover, a large percentage of the population is treated with ace inhibitors and arbs. whether those treatments are associated with a change in outcomes of covid 19 infections is currently debated. while we recognize the difficulties of performing basic science research, especially on animal models, in light of the current epidemic, we agree with hanff et al. and would strongly encourage scientists to keep researching the possible connection between ace receptor, angiotensin, and ards.the ace inhibitors and ar blockers are currently among the most frequently prescribed medications in the western world. they are most commonly used in patients suffering from hypertension, congestive heart failure, and proteinuria (most commonly due to diabetes mellitus). they act by reducing the activity of the renin-angiotensin system (ras). if the ras plays a significant role in sars-cov-19 pathogenesis and ards development, it would be reasonable to assume that patients treated with ace inhibitors/ar blockers would be impacted. the animal models suggest that the administration of ace inhibitors and ar blockers leads to an elevated number of ace ii receptors in the pulmonary circulation [19] . marin reported that many patients from latin america and spain were intending to discontinue taking their ace inhibitors/ar blockers due to fear of the infection [20] . despite some animal models showing a potential association between ace inhibition and worsening lung injuries due to sars-cov, there has been no clinical evidence to support such an association [21] . the european society of cardiology recommends not discontinuing either of the drugs as the potential risks associated with uncontrolled hypertension seem to outweigh the risks of ace inhibition worsening the covid 19 infection [22] . danser et al. reached the same conclusion [23] . french health minister claimed that the use of anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen could worsen covid 19 symptoms [24] . although ace ii levels can be increased by the use of nsaids, the evidence for an association with the severity of covid 19 symptoms is weak [25] . fang et al. do, however, recommend monitoring patients who are taking any of the controversial drugs and, when possible, choosing alternative treatments [25] . despite that, most health authorities, including the nhs, suggest using paracetamol/acetaminophen instead as a precautionary measure [26] .the overall impact of ace inhibition on sars-cov-19 (covid 19) pathogenesis is at this point of time difficult to establish. the belief that an association between the two exists is mostly based on animal models, while the clinical evidence for such association is lacking. despite the lack of clinical evidence, it appears to be the case that a number of patients plan on discontinuing their long-term therapies believing that this would decrease their risk of contracting and/or dying from covid 19. the evidence for a relationship between nsaid use and more severe sars-cov-19 infections is also weak, although a possible pathophysiologic link can be hypothesized. in this case, however, many health authorities recommend against using nsaids until further evidence comes to light. we believe that a lot more basic science research into the pathophysiology of both coronavirus infections and ards development, in general, is needed before clearer patterns emerge. at this point, it may be reasonable to avoid starting new patients on nsaids and ace inhibitors/arbs if it can be avoided. when it comes to patients who require those treatments for other conditions, discontinuation of them is unlikely to benefit patients as the evidence for exacerbations of their comorbidities is stronger than the evidence for the covid 19 disease severity.there have been news reports and expert opinions on patients with hypertension presenting with more severe cases of covid 19. moreover, hypertension was among the most frequently reported comorbidities of those patients [10] [11] [12] . it should be taken into account, however, that hypertension is among the most prevalent chronic conditions in the western world, affecting millions of people. fang et al. point out that the association between diabetes and hypertension and covid 19 infections is likely due to their association with ace ii enzyme [25] . li et al. reported a significantly higher prevalence of hypertension and other cardiovascular comorbidities among covid 19 patients treated in the icu compared to those who did not require icu treatment [27] . they also reported that over 8% of those infected by sars-cov-2 developed cardiac injury [27] . chen et al. have also reported a similar association [28] . the elevated troponin levels seen in icu patients also pointed towards the development of myocardial injury [28] . the odds ratio of developing a severe case compared to a nonsevere case for hypertensive patients was 2.36, with a 95% confidence interval between 1.46 and 3.83 [29] . none of the studies analyzed age as a potential confounder considering that the prevalence of hypertension rises with age, and older patients are, in general, more likely to suffer serious complications of infectious diseases. that was addressed by the international society of hypertension, who point out that there is no evidence that patients with hypertension are overrepresented among those with severe sars-cov-2 infections when adjusted for age [30] .it is difficult to assess the impact hypertension has on the outcome of patients infected by sars-cov-2. multiple studies point to a significant association between hypertension and adverse outcomes; however, the number of potential confounders, the main of which is age is vast. the previously mentioned association between antihypertensives and severe covid 19 presentations also needs to be taken into account. the number of studies that have been published so far is insufficient to properly address all those questions. we hope that as more case reports and review articles become available in the literature, a clearer pattern will emerge. the outcomes of patients with uncontrolled hypertension should be compared to those of normotensive controls of similar baseline characteristics. the outcomes of hypertensive patients managed with ace inhibitors/ar blockers should be compared to those of hypertensive patients managed with calcium channel antagonists.besides hypertension, other cardiovascular comorbidities were also frequently reported in patients with severe cases of covid 19. considering the significant associations between hypertension and cardiac disease, a correlation would be expected. moreover, there is a significant association between heart failure and pulmonary disease, particularly pulmonary hypertension. the possible consequences of even mild cardiac damage would be expected to be more significant among patients with pre-existing cardiac disease. as li et al. reported, the cardio-cerebrovascular disease was among the most prevalent comorbidities among patients with severe cases of covid 19, second only to hypertension (17.1% and 16.4%, respectively) [27] . zhou et al. reported that coronary disease was the third most prevalent comorbidity, after hypertension and diabetes [31] . chen et al. also found that previous history of coronary disease was an independent risk factor for adverse outcomes [28] . the proposed mechanism of such findings is that pericytes with high ace ii expression might be the cells targeted by sars-cov-2 [32] . pericyte injury could then lead to endothelial dysfunction [32] . patients with pre-existing heart failure are more likely to have elevated ace ii expression due to the pathophysiology of chf, which could then increase the risk of infection [32] . he et al. found the mortality of critically ill patients infected by sars-cov-2 who develop cardiac injury to be as high as 60% [33] . they also found an elevation in n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide levels (usually a biomarker for congestive heart failure) associated with the myocardial injury caused by covid 19.considered together, these studies point to an association between pre-existing cardiovascular comorbidities and adverse outcomes following sars-cov-2 infections. the most likely contributing factor to such finding is the observed myocardial damage in a subset of covid 19 patients which patients with pre-existing heart disease are less likely to recover from. moreover, the increased expression of ace ii with congestive heart failure could explain the increased susceptibility to the virus. the ability to address myocardial damage in the icu may prove to be the most important prognostic factor for those patients. considering the lack of currently approved treatments aimed at the virus itself, it is especially important to ensure that people with such comorbidities are not exposed to it in the first place. more research is needed into the exact impact of sars-cov-2 on the cardiovascular system in order to develop both protective and, potentially, curative strategies. covid 19 , caused by sars-cov-19, has been the most talked-about disease of the first half of 2020. the elderly and those suffering from chronic conditions are most at risk for adverse outcomes. hypertension was the most frequently reported comorbidity among patients with severe infections, followed by diabetes and other cardiovascular diseases; possibly related to their expression of ace ii facilitating viral entry into cells. the relationship between ace inhibitor/ar blocker use and the incidence of severe covid-19 has been conflicting and at present, where most authorities do not recommend discontinuing long-term ace inhibitor/ar blocker treatments. a concern remains that some patients may be inclined to stop taking the prescribed medicines out of fear. another point of contention has been the use of nsaids and a number of public health authorities have released statements claiming no evidence of such association existed. nevertheless, most recommended choosing alternative drugs if possible, pending further investigation into nsaids. finally, the available evidence clearly points to a correlation between pre-existing cardiovascular comorbidities and adverse outcomes with sars-cov-2 infections as severe cases are associated with myocardial damage. considering the very high prevalence of hypertension and cardiovascular diseases, it is important to continue researching the association between these conditions and covid-19.disclosurest he severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2[sars-cov-2; previously known as novel coronavirus-2019 (ncov- 19) ] causes coronavirus disease-2019 . at the time of publication (april 30, 2020), the covid-19 pandemic has led to 3,090,445 cases and 217,769 deaths across 209 countries according to world health organization data. 1 older patients with covid-19, those with underlying pulmonary disease, and those with hypertension, diabetes, or established cardiovascular disease have a worse prognosis than their counterparts without these comorbidities. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] sars-cov-2 infects host cells by binding to human angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace2), [9] [10] [11] a membranebound enzyme expressed in the lungs, heart, and kidneys (among many other organs). 12, 13 within the heart, pericytes express the greatest levels of ace2, although cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells also express ace2. 14 ace2 catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin-i and angiotensin-ii to angiotensin-(1-9) and angiotensin-(1-7), respectively. 15 angiotensin-ii promotes increased sympathetic tone, sodium and water retention, fibrosis and inflammation through the angiotensin type 1 receptor, whereas angiotensin (1-7) counteracts these effects by binding to the mas receptor (fig. 1) . 15 it has been proposed that renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors predispose to sars-cov-19 infection and worsen outcomes after covid-19 by upregulating ace2 expression. 16 angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ace inhibitors), angiotensin receptor type 1 blockers (arbs) and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists increase heart, vascular, and kidney ace2 expression and activity in animals. [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] chronic treatment with an ace inhibitor for 6 months was associated with increased plasma angiotensin-(1-7) level and angiotensin-ii to angiotensin-(1-7) ratio, whereas no such association was observed in the immediate period after acute ace inhibitor treatment. 22, 23 spironolactone treatment increased ace2 activity and mrna in human monocyte-derived macrophages from patients with heart failure. 21 yet others support the hypothesis that raas inhibitors and ace2 counteract angiotensin-ii-mediated pulmonary injury in respiratory viral illness. 24, 25 these beneficial effects could be attributable to angiotensin-(1-7) binding to the mas receptor, which promotes anti-inflammatory signaling. 15 in one study of acid aspiration and sepsis lung injury, ace2 knockout mice and mice pretreated with recombinant human ace2 had attenuated lung damage. 26 in the same models, treatment of ace2 knockout mice with an angiotensin type 1 receptor blocker also protected against lung injury. 26 administration of recombinant human ace2 beginning one day before respiratory syncytial virus infection decreased pulmonary immune cell infiltration and attenuated histologic lung injury in mice. 27 recombinant human ace2 increased angiotensin-(1-7) and decreased angiotensin-ii concentrations in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome, but was stopped early for futility with no significant difference in the partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio. 28 these data suggest that ace2 modulation may protect against lung damage from acute respiratory distress syndrome, but do not address whether ace2 modulation may salvage lung function after the initial lung insult. moreover, it is unclear whether the hypothetical benefits of ace2mediated lung protection outweigh the theorized ace2mediated increase in sars-cov-2 entry.several questions about the relationship between sars-cov-2, ace2, and raas inhibitors must be answered before drawing conclusions about raas inhibitors and covid-19 and to inform the design of future studies. first, there are no data to support an increase in ace2 expression on alveolar epithelial cells during raas inhibition in animal models. plasma ace2 activity may not represent enzymatic activity at the tissue level, because angiotensin-ii infusion into mice decreases myocardial ace2 protein level and activity, but increases plasma ace2 activity. 29 furthermore, increased plasma ace2 levels are associated with an adverse cardiovascular prognosis. 30 there may be relevant differences between ace inhibitors and arbs, and differences within each class, with respect to their effects on circulating and tissue ace2. in a cross-sectional analysis of adults taking various antihypertensive agents, on-treatment urinary ace2 concentrations were increased in patients taking olmesartan, but not ace inhibitors or other arbs. 31 conversely, 2 studies demonstrated higher on-treatment circulating levels of angiotensin (1-7) in patients receiving an ace inhibitor than an arb. 32, 33 in spontaneously hypertensive rats, sacubitril-valsartan restored cardiac ace2 mrna expression, whereas valsartan did not. 34 circulating angiotensin-(1-7) may not reflect ace2 activity in patients receiving sacubitril-valsartan because neprilysin converts angiotensin-(1-9) and angiotensin-i to angiotensin-(1-7).ace2-independent factors also influence sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19 severity. for example, sars-cov-2 entry seems to require tmprss2, a serine protease expressed on ace2-expressing cells. 11 host genetics and comorbidities likely play a role in susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection and outcome, as suggested by the high prevalence of advanced age, and cardiac and pulmonary comorbidities among patients with covid-19.randomized clinical trials provide the only opportunity to answer to questions in a rigorous manner. two ongoing trials will compare losartan, an arb, against placebo or an active comparator in hospitalized patients and outpatients with covid-19 (clinicaltrials.gov nct04311177, nct04312009 and nct04328012). another clinical trial will compare continuing ace inhibitor or arb therapy and switching to an alternative agent in patients with hypertension, but without covid-19 (nct04329195). epidemiologic studies should be performed to estimate the association of raas inhibitor use to risk of covid-19 in patients with hypertension, heart failure or chronic kidney disease.withdrawal of raas inhibition increases the risk of decompensation in patients with heart failure and adverse physiological changes occur shortly after raas inhibitor withdrawal. plasma angiotensin ii, aldosterone, cortisol, and norepinephrine levels increase to pretreatment levels within 4-days of ace inhibitor cessation in patients with heart failure and new york heart association functional class iii or iv symptoms. 35 after a mean 15 days without ace inhibitor therapy, left ventricular end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes return to pretreatment values in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. 36 worsening symptoms and decreased exercise tolerance occurs within 4-6 weeks of ace inhibitor withdrawal. 37 even among patients with recovery of left ventricular function and reversal of left ventricular remodeling, withdrawal of neurohormonal blockade increases the risk of clinical relapse or subclinical adverse left ventricular remodeling. 38 discontinuing ace inhibitor or arb therapy in patients with progression of chronic kidney disease was associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease over a 5-year period. 39 figure 1. interactions between the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and coronavirus disease-2019. the complex raas regulates blood pressure, sodium and water retention and plays an important role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. angiotensin-converting enzyme converts angiotensin-i to angiotensin-ii, which mediates vasoconstriction, sodium and water retention and inflammation through the angiotensin type 1 receptor (red arrows). angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2) counterbalances the angiotensin-ii/angiotensin type 1 receptor pathway by converting angiotensin-ii to angiotensin-(1-7), which binds the mas receptor to mediate vasodilation and anti-inflammatory effects (yellow arrows). importantly, the angiotensin-ii/angiotensin type 1 receptor pathway leads to cleavage of membrane-bound ace2 via adams17 (green arrow). severe acute respiratory coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) binds ace2 and undergoes endocytosis to infect host cells. as a consequence, sars-cov-2 infection decreases membrane-bound ace2 and impairs the beneficial effects of the angiotensin-(1-7)/mas receptor axis.in march 2020, the american college of cardiology, american heart association, heart failure society of america and european society of cardiology issued recommendations against discontinuing raas inhibitors during the covid-19 pandemic. 40,41 clinicians should consider the risk of covid-19 exposure when caring for patients with hypertension, heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, and diabetic nephropathy. clinicians should reinforce preventative measures for those patients who must leave their homes to provide blood samples for electrolyte and renal function monitoring with raas inhibitors. 42 in summary, we have limited preclinical and clinical evidence of the effects of raas inhibitors on covid-19. clinicians should continue to use raas inhibitors during the covid-19 pandemic according to current standards of care. scientists must focus on addressing several knowledge gaps to inform clinical management of covid-19, particularly among those patients with underlying pulmonary and cardiovascular disease.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is known to play an important role in regulating blood pressure and electrolyte and water balance.the ras pathway consists of a cascade of proteases producing some bioactive molecules [1] . angiotensinogen is mainly released by the liver and then cleaved by renin, which is secreted by the juxtaglomerular cells in the kidney, thus generating the decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i) [2, 3] . ang i is converted to angiotensin ii (ang ii) by angiotensin-converting enzymes (ace), expressed by the endothelial cells of several organs, such as lung, heart, kidney, and brain [4, 5] . ang ii is the most relevant molecule of the ras pathway and performs its function by activating the following g-protein-coupled receptors: angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at1r) and angiotensin ii receptor type 2 (at2r) [6] (figure 1 ).the effects exerted by these two membrane receptors are opposite, in particular, at1r induces detrimental effects, such as inflammation, fibrosis, and altered redox balance in addition to vasoconstrictive properties, whereas at2r is involved in protective and regenerating actions (anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, neurodegenerative, metabolic) and in the release of vasodilatory molecules [7] [8] [9] . therefore, the equilibrium point of the ras is represented by ang ii, which can also be converted into heptapeptide ang-(1-7) thanks to the action of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ang- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) , which can also be generated by the cleavage of ang i by endopeptidases, and binds mas receptors counteracting most of the deleterious actions of the ace/ang ii/at1 axis, especially in pathological conditions [10, 11] . several sources of evidence suggest that the ras represents an important target for the treatment of lung pathologies [2, 21] . indeed, the ace/ang ii/at1r axis plays a relevant role in promoting acute lung injury, while the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas pathway can antagonize and reduce pathological processes, including pulmonary hypertension and fibrosis [6, [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] .some data have demonstrated a connection between ras and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [4, [27] [28] [29] [30] .in experimental settings of acute lung injury, ace2 deficient animals develop histological and functional ards [6] . in particular, ang ii is involved in a number of processes that take place in the lung, including the genesis of pulmonary edema due to regulation of pulmonary vasoconstriction and vascular permeability in response to hypoxia, stimulation of the lung production of inflammatory cytokines, induction of alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis, and fibroproliferation [27] . detrimental effects of hypertension and ang ii infusion [15] ; the ace2 pathway has been shown to exert different effects on cardiomyocytes in the heart [12, 16, 17] . ang-(1-7) infusion can ameliorate myocardial performance, cardiac remodeling, and survival in an animal model of heart failure, exerting beneficial effects [18] . other data have correlated ace2 overexpression with cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmia [19, 20] . several sources of evidence suggest that the ras represents an important target for the treatment of lung pathologies [2, 21] . indeed, the ace/ang ii/at1r axis plays a relevant role in promoting acute lung injury, while the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas pathway can antagonize and reduce pathological processes, including pulmonary hypertension and fibrosis [6, [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] .some data have demonstrated a connection between ras and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [4, [27] [28] [29] [30] .in experimental settings of acute lung injury, ace2 deficient animals develop histological and functional ards [6] . in particular, ang ii is involved in a number of processes that take place in the lung, including the genesis of pulmonary edema due to regulation of pulmonary vasoconstriction and vascular permeability in response to hypoxia, stimulation of the lung production of inflammatory cytokines, induction of alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis, and fibroproliferation [27] .inhibition; detrimental effects of hypertension and ang ii infusion [15] ; the ace2 pathway has been shown to exert different effects on cardiomyocytes in the heart [12, 16, 17] . ang-(1-7) infusion can ameliorate myocardial performance, cardiac remodeling, and survival in an animal model of heart failure, exerting beneficial effects [18] . other data have correlated ace2 overexpression with cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmia [19, 20] . several sources of evidence suggest that the ras represents an important target for the treatment of lung pathologies [2, 21] . indeed, the ace/ang ii/at1r axis plays a relevant role in promoting acute lung injury, while the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas pathway can antagonize and reduce pathological processes, including pulmonary hypertension and fibrosis [6, [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] .some data have demonstrated a connection between ras and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [4, [27] [28] [29] [30] .in experimental settings of acute lung injury, ace2 deficient animals develop histological and functional ards [6] . in particular, ang ii is involved in a number of processes that take place in the lung, including the genesis of pulmonary edema due to regulation of pulmonary vasoconstriction and vascular permeability in response to hypoxia, stimulation of the lung production of inflammatory cytokines, induction of alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis, and fibroproliferation [27] . due to the regulatory effects of ace and ace2 on the levels of ang ii, these peptidases are the main players in the regulation of blood pressure in the cardiovascular system [12, 13] .endothelial ace2 overexpression functions as a negative regulator of the ras, thus reducing blood pressure [14] . in an animal model, ace2 cardiomyocyte overexpression seems to decrease the detrimental effects of hypertension and ang ii infusion [15] ; the ace2 pathway has been shown to exert different effects on cardiomyocytes in the heart [12, 16, 17] . ang-(1-7) infusion can ameliorate myocardial performance, cardiac remodeling, and survival in an animal model of heart failure, exerting beneficial effects [18] . other data have correlated ace2 overexpression with cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmia [19, 20] .several sources of evidence suggest that the ras represents an important target for the treatment of lung pathologies [2, 21] . indeed, the ace/ang ii/at1r axis plays a relevant role in promoting acute lung injury, while the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas pathway can antagonize and reduce pathological processes, including pulmonary hypertension and fibrosis [6, [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] .some data have demonstrated a connection between ras and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [4, [27] [28] [29] [30] .in experimental settings of acute lung injury, ace2 deficient animals develop histological and functional ards [6] . in particular, ang ii is involved in a number of processes that take place in the lung, including the genesis of pulmonary edema due to regulation of pulmonary vasoconstriction and vascular permeability in response to hypoxia, stimulation of the lung production of inflammatory cytokines, induction of alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis, and fibroproliferation [27] .in 2003, during the sars-related coronavirus (sars-cov) infection outbreak, a possible relation emerged between ras and viral infections. this virus was characterized by a high mortality rate due to clinical respiratory failure linked to ards [31] . intriguingly, ace2 was shown to be a receptor for the sars-cov [32, 33] . the sars virus can enter the host cells through an endocytosis process mediated by the binding of its spike protein trimers with a hydrophobic pocket of the extracellular catalytic domain of ace2 [34] . after virus entry, ace2 levels decrease, thus enhancing ang ii release that may favor ards development [6, 33] . in animal models, sars-cov infection in ace2 knock-out mice reduces the development of lung injury [33] . only sars-cov and human coronavirus nl63 were shown to bind ace2 to invade host cells [35] . moreover, overexpressing ace2 in cell lines promoted efficient replication of sars-cov, while, when ace2 is neutralized by antibodies, viral replication is inhibited [33] .in clinical studies, serum ang ii levels have been shown to be significantly elevated in patients with acute lung injury [36] , and high serum ang ii levels have been associated with the severity and mortality of the infection [37] . while at2r has the opposite effect of at1r, at2r agonists can reduce lung damage [6, 38, 39] . ang-(1-7) and mas receptor agonists alleviate acute lung injury in mouse models [39] [40] [41] .some researchers also believe that blocking at1r may reduce the response of inflammatory mediators and reduce acute lung injury compared to blocking ace [40] . in particular, in animal models of lung injury, the ace inhibitor captopril significantly reduced lipopolysaccharide (lps) and induced detrimental changes in the lung by decreasing secretion of tumor necrosis factor α and interleukin 6, along with a reduction in ang ii/ang-1-7 ratio and by reversing the increased ratio of ace to ace2 [41] . those data are in agreement with recent evidence suggesting beneficial effects of anti-il-6 receptor human antibody tocilizumab for the treatment of sars-cov-2-induced ards [42] . moreover, a recent study has shown that coronavirus disease (covid-19) patients with hypertension treated with ace inhibitors and at1r blockers had different values of viral load and an attenuation of the inflammatory response, likely through the inhibition of il-6 levels [43] .sars-cov-2, responsible for coronavirus disease (covid-19), shares the same ace2 viral receptor as sars-cov [44] . ace2 is highly expressed in human lung tissue, but also in the nasal cavity and oral mucosa [10, 45] .currently, the majority of patients with covid-19 clinical infection exhibit mild symptoms, such as fever, myalgia or fatigue, nasal congestion, sore throat, and cough [46, 47] . a minority of patients rapidly develop complications, such as severe pneumonia, septic shock, and even clotting dysfunction.at present, there is no effective treatment for covid-19. the activation of the signaling pathway ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas or the inhibition of the pathway ace/ang ii/at1r may be interesting from a therapeutic standpoint.ace inhibitors inhibit the formation of angiotensin ii and, consequently, the effects triggered by its interaction with the receptors at1r (vasoconstriction, sodium and water retention, sympathetic activation, cell growth) and at2r receptors [47] .previous studies have shown that sars-cov significantly reduces ace2 in the lungs of infected mice [31, 33] .the binding of covid-19 and ace2 seems to result in the exhaustion of ace2, thus inhibiting the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor pathway and altering the balance of the ras, and this would lead to the exacerbation of acute severe pneumonia [48] . although these and other authors believe in a detrimental effect of ace inhibitors in covid-19 patients, this assumption is still controversial, with other authors concluding that ace inhibitors and at1r inhibitors may reduce the lung inflammatory response and mortality and may be used in patients with covid-19 pneumonia [48] .moreover, the scientific community has recently focused its attention on at1r inhibitors and their possible benefit for patients infected by covid-19 who experience pneumonia [49] , but even in this regard, there are still some doubts about the at1r antagonists' effects. indeed, at1r antagonists may intuitively increase the ace2 expression [50, 51] , yielding harmful consequences for covid-19 patients since ace2 has been identified as the functional receptor for sars-cov2.as mentioned above, after virus entry, ace2 levels decrease; the reduction in ace2 levels, on the one hand, would cause lower production of ang-(1-7) from ang ii. on the other hand, it would cause an increase in unconverted ang ii, which, finding at1r blocked by the drug, would act on at2r, triggering a series of protective events on the lung, such as a reduction in vascular permeability and edema, reduction in pulmonary fibrosis processes. furthermore, despite its reduction, a small amount of ace2 remains able to convert ang ii to ang- (1-7) , allowing the conservation of the pulmonary protective mechanisms mediated by mas receptors [6, 33] . for these reasons, at1r blockers may paradoxically represent a protective mechanism against pulmonary lesions from the virus.with regard to ace inhibitors, their action on ace inhibits the formation of ang ii, thus preventing both the negative effects mediated by at1r and the positive ones deriving from the ang ii binding with at2r and from its transformation into ang-(1-7). ang-(1-7), however, can be produced by the degradation of ang i by endopeptidase and ace2 (with the intermediate formation of ace-(1-9), figure 1 ). although ace inhibition blocks the degradation of ang-(1-9) to ang-(1-7), ang-(1-7) can still be produced directly from ang i. in addition, ace inhibitors prevent the degradation of ang-(1-7) to ang-(1-5) [1] , increasing its levels. therefore, as described for at1r inhibitors, in this case, it would also seem that the protective effects on the lung could be preserved.ace2 is regulated by a gene that is located on the x chromosome [52] , thus suggesting that some differences may exist in the expression of ace2 between men and women.moreover, there is evidence that ace2 tissue levels are regulated by estrogen. gupte, thatcher et al. [53] demonstrated that high-fat-fed female mice exhibited elevated adipose ace2 activity, and consequently increased plasma ang-(1-7) levels, without affecting systolic blood pressure. moreover, ovariectomy of hf-fed female mice, by reducing adipose ace2 activity, promoted obesity and hypertension. on the contrary, hf-fed males had elevated systolic and diastolic blood pressure that were abolished by losartan [53] . we also know that estrogen in atrial myocardium modifies the local ras homeostasis by increasing the ace2-mrna levels [54] .the deprivation of estrogen in post-menopause causes a loss of cardiovascular protection in women due to the possible shift from the ace2/ras axis to the ace/ras pathways [55] . shoemaker et al. showed that adipocyte-derived ace2 contributes to sex differences in obesity-hypertension through the regulation of the balance between ang-(1-7) and ang ii, a benefit that is lost with estrogen deprivation in post-menopause [56] .if we consider that the susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection should increase with increasing ace2 levels, women should be more prone to the infection than men. in contrast, the epidemiological data available to date show gender-based clinical differences in the manifestations of sars-cov-2, with women getting slightly less ill than men [57] and a greater number of male patients [53] , in particular elderly subjects, being affected by serious covid-19 infections if compared with female patients. this information is in contrast with studies that show that the level of ace2 decreases with age [57] , and, therefore, appears to be higher in young people who generally develop a less severe form of covid-2019. given this apparent inconsistency, we can speculate that there are probably other factors that contribute to the severity of the disease.information about the ethnicity of the patients affected by covid-19 will also be important to understand if african and afro-american patients, who usually have low plasma renin levels, will be really less affected than other populations; this concept seems to be reinforced by data on covid-19 available from world health organization at the moment and from our hundreds of cases of covid-19 patients in the abruzzo region, italy (unpublished observations), although such observation may be biased by several temporal and season disease development-related issues.other evidence suggests that sars-cov-2 can cause myocardial injury, with the elevation of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i levels [58] and also the mechanism underlying myocardial injury can be linked to the relationship between sars-cov-2 and ace2 [59] .it should also be considered that the mortality rate is higher in patients with a history of high blood pressure, diabetes mellitus, and coronary heart disease [60] . ace inhibitors and at1r inhibitors withdrawal would not only prevent the antihypertensive effect but also the cardioprotective properties of these drugs.although the relationship between the ras pathway and covid- 19 is not yet completely clear, ongoing mechanistic and observational studies are needed to clarify better the pathophysiology, as well as the efficacy and safety of therapeutic strategies targeting the ras pathway in the treatment and/or prevention of the covid-19 pandemia.until now, no evidence exists in support of the use of drugs that act on ras in patients affected by covid-19. as a matter of fact, the segment of the population affected by the most severe forms of covid-19 is usually affected by arterial hypertension and has a history of heart disease [61], but we still have no information about their previous therapies and other relevant clinical aspects.moreover, a recent study has highlighted how sars-cov-2 cell entry depends on ace2 and tmprss2, a serine protease. the interesting finding is that tmprss2 is blocked by a clinically approved protease inhibitor, and this opens up new scenarios from a therapeutic perspective [44] .there are many other research ideas that will allow us to conduct further studies in the next months with the aim of better clarifying any therapeutic strategies to defeat sars-cov-2 definitely, and the ras will probably play a role as protagonist in this important challenge for medical scientists.. structure of human phb1 and phb2. related to introduction. figure s2 . phb1 and cytoprotection. related to "phbs and cytoprotection". figure s3 . structural requirement of flavaglines for their anticancer activities. related to "flavaglines". figure s4 . structural requirement of aurilide for its cytotoxicity on hela s3 cells.related to "aurilide". figure s5 . structural requirement of melanogenin derivatives for the induction of pigmentation in melanocytes. related to "melanogenin".supplemental table  table s1 . list of additional putative proteins interacting with phb1 detected by a proteomic approach. related to table 1 figure s4 : structural requirement of aurilide for its cytotoxicity on hela s 3 cells (suenaga et al., 2008) . (snyder et al., 2005) . table s1 . list of additional putative proteins interacting with phb1 detected by a proteomic approach. the biological consequence of these interactions has not been explored yet.mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 10 (borro et al., 2010) nadh dehydrogenase [ubiquinone] iron-sulfur protein 2 "protein-tyrosine phosphatase mitochondrial 1 " paired amphipathic helix protein sin3a "breast cancer metastasis-suppressor 1 "probable global transcription activator snf2l4 "probable global transcription activator snf2l2 "retinoblastoma-like protein 1 " retinoblastoma-like protein 2 " adp/atp translocase (zhu et al., 2009) 60s ribosomal protein "protein kinase c inhibitor protein " importin-11 " 40s ribosomal protein s4 "collagen alpha-2(ix) chain precursor "ig gamma-1 chain c region " f-actin-capping protein subunit alpha "beta-actin "renal carcinoma antigen "plectin-1 " transcription factor iiic subunit alpha "heat shock protein hsp 90 "developmentally regulated brain protein "prohibitin-1 (phb1, formerly known as bap32) and its homolog phb2 (formerly bap37, rea, or prohibitone) are pleiotropic proteins with multiple functions. phb1 was initially identified in 1989 by mcclung and collaborators by screening for potential tumor suppressors with antiproliferative activities that were highly expressed in normal resting, but not regenerating, rat liver (mcclung et al., 1989; nuell et al., 1991) . phbs have since been shown to act as a hub for many signaling pathways triggered by growth factors, the immune response, and steroid hormones regulating metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis, cell migration, division, and survival.phbs are composed of an n-terminal transmembrane domain, an evolutionarily conserved phb domain that is common to other scaffold proteins (including stomatin, flotillin, and hflk/c), and a c-terminal coiled-coil domain that is involved in the interaction between phb1 and phb2 (figure s1 available online). although the structure of phbs has not been solved, winter et al. (2007) were able to generate structural models of human phbs based on the known structure of flotillin-2, which belongs to the same family of membrane proteins.located in the mitochondrial inner membrane, phb1 and phb2 interact with each other to form heterodimers that are organized in ring-like structures with a diameter of 20-25 nm (figure 1 ; back et al., 2002; coates et al., 2001) . these supercomplexes maintain the structure of mitochondria and regulate their functions (tatsuta et al., 2005) . phbs protect newly imported proteins from degradation by the m-aaa (mitochondrial atpases associated with diverse cellular activities) protease (steglich et al., 1999) , promote mitochondrial protein synthesis , maintain the organization and copy number of mitochondrial dna (mtdna; kasashima et al., 2008) , and act as a chaperones for newly synthesized proteins of the mitochondrial complex i (nijtmans et al., 2000 and the gtpase optic atrophy 1 (opa1) during mitochondrial fission and morphogenesis (merkwirth et al., 2008) . phb1 also interacts with the adaptor protein p66shc, a major mediator of stress-induced apoptosis (madireddi, 2006) . this adaptor protein is activated by uvc, h 2 o 2 , and reactive oxygen species (ros), and induces the generation of ros in mitochondria, leading to apoptosis (gertz et al., 2008) . it remains unclear whether phb1 modulates this proapoptotic response; nevertheless, it is tempting to speculate that p66shc is involved in the cytoprotective activities of phbs and their ligands, particularly against oxidative stress (bernard et al., 2011; fahrig et al., 2005; kathiria et al., 2012a; liu, et al., 2009b; ribeiro et al., 2012a) . phb2 is also regulated by a second messenger, sphingosine-1-phosphate (s1p), which controls diverse physiological processes through several targets. s1p binds with high affinity to phb2 and thereby maintains the integrity of the mitochondrial respiration machinery (strub et al., 2011) . this process is involved in the preconditioning protection of the heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury .phbs are not limited to mitochondria; they are also found in the nucleus, the endoplasmic reticulum, the plasma membrane, and macrophage phagosomes (garin et al., 2001) , where they modulate many aspects of cell physiology. their roles are extremely complex, partly because phbs are themselves regulated by several tyrosine and serine phosphorylations, o-glcnac modifications, palmitoylations, transamidations, and tyrosine nitrosylations . phb1 interacts physically with the second messenger pip3, and phb2 interacts with s1p (ande and mishra, 2009; strub et al., 2011) .each posttranslational modification of the phbs has substantial effects on their activity ( figure 2 ). one of the bestdocumented examples is akt phosphorylation of phb1 at thr258, which blocks its interaction with shp1/2 and facilitates akt signaling (ande and mishra, 2009 ). shp1/2 is a phosphatase that facilitates akt signaling and enhances insulin signaling. additionally, the phosphorylation of phb1 at thr258 is necessary for the activation of c-raf (raf-1) by ras (chiu et al., 2013) . rajalingam et al. (2005) established that the activation of c-raf by ras requires the heterodimerization of phospho-phb1(thr258) with c-raf. the phosphorylation of phb1 at thr258 in the plasma membrane of cancer cells activates pi3k/ akt and c-raf/erk pathways, which promote proliferation and metastasis (chiu et al., 2012) . by contrast, insulin-receptorinduced phosphorylation of phb1 at tyr114 promotes its heterodimerization with the phosphatase shp1 and blocks akt signaling (ande et al., 2009a) .it has been suggested that the regulation of phb1 by transforming growth factor b (tgf-b) is responsible for the dual effect of this cytokine in prostate cancer (zhu et al., 2010) . in the early stage of tumorigenesis, tgf-b acts as a tumor suppressor, but subsequently it promotes metastatic spread during cancer progression. the binding of tgf-b to its receptor triggers the c-raf/mek/erk pathway and also activates smad 2/3 or smad 1/5, thereby causing opposite effects ( figure 2 ). erk activates protein kinase c d (pkc-d), which leads to the phosphorylation of phb1 and consequently to cell survival and invasion. however, smad signaling also upregulates 14-3-3 protein, which inhibits pkc-d, leading to a hypophosphorylation of phb1 that promotes apoptosis.the activity of phb2 is regulated by serine and threonine phosphorylation, in particular at ser91 and tyr248 (ross et al., 2008; sun et al., 2011) . calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase iv (camkiv) phosphorylates phb2 at ser91, impeding its ability to repress the transcriptional activity of myocyte enhancer factor 2 (mef2; sun et al., 2011) . the consequence of this phosphorylation of phb2 on the activity of other transcription factors has not been reported. phb2 also inhibits circadian transcription by interacting with casein kinase 1 ε (ck1ε; kategaya et al., 2012) .phbs have been detected at the surface of platelets, microglial cells (wintachai et al., 2012) , endothelial cells in adipose tissue (kolonin et al., 2004) , paclitaxel-resistant cancer cells (patel et al., 2010) , intestinal epithelial cells (sharma and qadri, 2004) , and activated t cells (yurugi et al., 2012) . in platelets, phb1 and phb2 interact directly with protease-activated receptor 1 (par1) to promote platelet aggregation (zhang et al.,in the mitochondrial inner membrane, phb1 and phb2 are organized in ring-like structures that maintain the structure and regulate the functions of mitochondria through interaction with opa-1, m-aaa protease, slp-2 (stomatin-like protein 2), atad3 (atpase family aaa domain-containing protein 3), and mtdna. 2012 ). the physiological role of phb1 at the surface of microglial cells and endothelial cells of adipose tissue remains elusive, but it has been demonstrated that phb1 at the surface of cancer cells is involved in resistance to paclitaxel (patel et al., 2010) . a virulence antigen of salmonella typhi, the causative agent of typhoid, interacts with phb1 and phb2 at the surface of intestinal epithelial cells, resulting in downregulation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) cascade and inhibition of early inflammatory responses (patel et al., 2010) . similarly, considerable proportions of total phb1 and phb2 are located on the surface of activated t cells, where they contribute to the activation of erk induced by t cell activation (yurugi et al., 2012) .phb1 is also present in human serum, embedded in lipid droplets where it interacts with the complement protein c3 to promote innate immunity (mishra et al., 2007) . interestingly, serum phb1 and phb2 concentrations were found to be significantly elevated in patients with colorectal cancer, suggesting that they may serve as a biomarker for this type of cancer (mengwasser et al., 2004) .a brief presentation of the interactions between phbs and other proteins is provided in table 1 (for a list of other putative  partners of phb1, see table s1 ).both phb1 and phb2 are involved in growth, resistance to chemotherapy, and metastasis through several mechanisms, including activation of the ras-c-raf-mek-erk pathway, modulation of tgf-b signaling, and transcriptional regulation. indeed, phb1 interacts with the transcription factor p53 in the nucleus of cancer cells to increase its transcriptional activity (fusaro et al., 2003) . p53 is a tumor suppressor that controls the cell cycle, apoptosis, genomic stability, and angiogenesis (chander et al., 2010 (chander et al., , 2011 fusaro et al., 2003; joshi et al., 2007) . a component of ubiquitin ligase complexes, skp2b, which is overexpressed in many breast cancers, interacts with both phb1 and phb2 to promote their degradation (chander et al., 2010 (chander et al., , 2011 umanskaya et al., 2007) . because phb1 acts as an activator (fusaro et al., 2003) and chaperone (chander et al., 2011) for p53, this depletion in phb1 leads to an attenuated activity of p53 in cancer cells overexpressing skp2b and consequently promotes their survival.phb1 is also an important regulator of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (rb) and its family members p107 and p130 (wang et al., 1999b) . these proteins bind and inhibit e2f transcription factors, leading to cell-cycle arrest. phb1 represses the activity of e2f transcription factors by interacting with several proteins, including rb, histone deacetylases (hdacs), and the nucleosome-remodeling proteins brg-1 and brm (wang et al., 1999a (wang et al., , 1999b (wang et al., , 2002 .a growing body of evidence indicates that the cellular localization of phbs is a determinant of their function, especially in cancer cells. patel et al. (2010) found that phb1 is overexpressed on the surface of cancer cells that are resistant to taxoids, doxorubicin, and etoposide. they also demonstrated that the redirection of phb1 from the cytoplasm to the cell surface is critical for drug resistance, and their work suggests that cell-surface phb1 may serve as a biomarker of chemoresistance in cancer patients.in normal epithelial breast cells, phb1 is located primarily in the mitochondria, but in invasive and noninvasive breast cancer cells it is mainly confined to the nucleus, suggesting that phb1 local- phbs integrate many signaling pathways (e.g., akt, c-raf-mek-erk, camk, and pkc) to orchestrate various aspects of cell physiology, including metabolism, transcription, apoptosis/survival, cytoskeleton reorganization, and differentiation. ization is associated with tumorigenesis . confocal microscopy experiments demonstrated that phbs colocalize with the proto-oncogenes c-myc, c-fos, p53, and rb in neuroblastoma sk-n-sh cells .treatment with the anticancer drug camptothecin leads to phb1 and p53 being exported from the nucleus to the mitochondria of breast cancer cell lines (fusaro et al., 2003) . this camptothecininduced translocation of phb1, which is dependent on the protein transporter crm-1, occurs preferentially in transformed cell lines and not in untransformed or primary cells. a peptide corresponding to the nuclear export signal of phb1 prevented the export of phb1, resulting in the protection of cells from apoptosis, indicating that the translocation of phb1 from the nucleus to the mitochondria contributes to its tumorsuppressive effects (rastogi et al., 2006b) . one mechanism by which the intracellular location of phbs is controlled involves the signaling protein big3/wdr5, which traps phb2 in the cytoplasm and consequently stimulates the estrogen-signaling pathway in the hormone-related growth of breast cancer cells (kim et al., 2009) .beyond these activities of phbs as proteins, the 3 0 -utr of phb1 messenger rna (mrna) was found to suppress both the proliferation of human breast cancer cells in vitro and the growth of breast tumors in xenografted mice in vivo (manjeshwar et al., 2003) . this was the first demonstration that an rna molecule can function as a tumor suppressor in human breast cancer.the tumor-suppressor activity of phb1 and its mrna 3 0 -utr is further supported by the discovery that the oncogenic micro-rna-27a (mir-27a), which is upregulated in many cancers (chhabra et al., 2010) , targets the 3 0 -utr of phb1 and downregulates phb1 in human gastric adenocarcinoma (liu et al., 2009a) . fletcher et al. (2012) demonstrated that mir-27a is upregulated by androgen receptor in prostate cancer, resulting in reduced phb1 mrna and protein levels and increased cancer cell growth. interestingly, adding phb1 to cells overexpressing mir-27a blocked mir-27a-induced growth, demonstrating that the oncogenic activity of mir-27a strongly involves phb1 signaling in prostate cancer.an important question that needs to be examined is why phbs display both anti-and protumorigenic roles in cancers (summarized in table 2 ). this dichotomy may reflect the heterogeneity of cancer cell types, which are manifested by an alteration of different signaling pathways. consequently, the regulation of transcription, translation, and posttranslational modification of phbs probably depends on the cancerous cell type involved. these posttranslational events (e.g., phosphorylation, sumoylation, o-glcnac modification, palmitoylation, and transamidation) modulate both the subcellular localization of phbs and their downstream effects on proliferation and survival of cells. on the cell surface phb1 promotes chemoresistance, but on the inner face of the plasma membrane it can contribute to the oncogenic activation of c-raf. however, it is tempting to speculate that in the nucleus phb1 displays antitumorigenic activity due to its action on p53, rb, p107, p130, and components of the mammalian replication machinery. additional studies are required to decipher the roles played by signaling and intracellular localization of phbs in oncogenesis.many studies have indicated that phbs protect cells from oxidative stress, which is due to an excessive production or an impaired elimination of ros (jones, 2008) . it is closely associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and is an important component of the etiology of cancers, inflammatory, cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative diseases, and diabetes mellitus. in view of the central role of phbs in maintaining the normal structure and function of mitochondria, it is unsurprising that phbs can alleviate the deleterious effect of oxidative stress.many stresses, in particular oxidative stress, upregulate phb1 and phb2 to promote cell survival. indeed, phb1 expression is enhanced in neurons by various stresses, including electrical stimulation, hypoxia-ischemia, oxygen-glucose deprivation (zhou et al., 2012) , exercise-induced neuroplasticity (ding et al., 2006) , injection of the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (park et al., 2010) , and schizophrenia-induced oligodendrocyte dysfunction (bernstein et al., 2012) . phb1 is also upregulated in the liver of steatohepatitis patients (tsutsumi et al., 2009) , in fetal rabbit lung after exposure to hyperoxic conditions (henschke et al., 2006) , in pancreatic b-cells after ethanol intoxication, (lee et al., 2010b) , and in cardiac cells after ischemichypoxic preconditioning muraguchi et al., 2010) or chronic restraint stress . this cytoprotectant response involves the translocation of phb1 from the nucleus and the cytoplasm to mitochondria in pancreatic b-cells (lee et al., 2010b) , in the retina and retinal epithelium (lee et al., 2010a) , and in ovarian granulosa cells (chowdhury et al., 2007 ; figure s2 ). sripathi et al. (2011) suggested that the localization and trafficking of phbs are determined by the modulation of their binding to specific lipids. indeed, strong binding of phb1 to cardiolipin was shown to correlate with the localization of phb1 within mitochondria in transformed epithelial cells after an oxidative stress. by contrast, under normal conditions in these cells, phb1 binds strongly to pip3 but not to cardiolipin.overexpression of phb1 protects pancreatic b-cells, ovarian granulosa cells, and cardiomyocytes from apoptosis induced by ethanol, ceramide, staurosporine, serum withdrawal, and oxidative stress-induced injury, consistent with phb1 having a cytoprotective role (chowdhury et al., 2007 lee et al., 2010b; liu et al., 2009b) . merkwirth et al. (2012) recently described a critical role of phb2 in the survival of neurons. neuron-specific deletion of phb2 in the mouse forebrain impaired mitochondrial architecture, leading to tau hyperphosphorylation and filament formation. this phenotype was accompanied by severe behavioral and cognitive dysfunctions that were reminiscent of alzheimer's disease.the details of the mechanisms of this cytoprotection remain poorly documented. the only other actors that have been identified as being involved are s1p and stat3. s1p protects the heart from ischemia-reperfusion damage by directly activating phb2, thereby regulating respiration and cytochrome oxidase subunit iv assembly and decreasing the heart's susceptibility to opening of the permeability transition pore (ptp; gomez et al., 2011) .interleukin-6 (il-6) increases phb1 levels through phosphorylation of the transcription factor stat3 to promote the survival of intestinal cells and cardiomyocytes (gratia et al., 2012; theiss et al., 2007b) . in intestinal epithelial cells in vivo, phb1 interacts with stat3 to modulate stat3-mediated apoptosis (kathiria et al., 2012b) . in cardiomyocytes, il-6-induced upregulation of phb1 is central to the cardioprotective effects of il-6 against oxidative stress (gratia et al., 2012) . importantly, phosphorylated stat3 protects cardiomyocytes against oxidative stress by stimulating respiration and inhibiting the ptp within mitochondria, and not through a transcriptional effect (boengler et al., 2010) . it would be interesting to determine whether phb1 modulates this mitochondrial action of stat3.inflammatory bowel diseases (ibds) are characterized by strong oxidative stresses associated with downregulated antioxidant enzymes in the intestinal mucosa (lih-brody et al., 1996) . several studies in vitro and in vivo have indicated that phb1 alleviates intestinal inflammation and promotes the survival of cells exposed to oxidative stress. in intestinal epithelial cells, phb1 binds to a salmonella typhi antigen to inhibit the inflammatory response to s. typhi infection (sharma and qadri, 2004) . phb1 expression is abnormally low during ulcerative colitis and crohn's disease, the two most common forms of ibd (hsieh et al., 2006; theiss et al., 2007a; yeo et al., 2006) , due to an overstimulation of tumor necrosis factor a (tnf-a) signaling in the inflamed colon (theiss et al., 2009a) . this downregulation of phb1 increases ros signaling and tnf-a-induced autophagy, promoting inflammation in patients with ibd (kathiria et al., 2012a) . interestingly, transgenic mice overexpressing phb1 in intestinal epithelial cells exhibit reduced proinflammatory nuclear factor kb (nf-kb) signaling in the colonic mucosa after treatment with tnf-a, demonstrating that phb1 plays a critical role in inflammation. a detailed examination of this mechanism of action revealed that phb1 inhibits tnf-a-induced translocation of nf-kb by downregulating the expression of importin a3, a protein involved in nf-kb nuclear import (theiss et al., 2009a) . in an in vivo model of ibd, phb1 transgenic mice exhibited lower oxidative stress and colitis than wild-type mice (theiss et al., 2009b) . this cytoprotective effect is due to the upregulation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (nrf2), a transcriptional activator of review antioxidant responses. further evidence that phb1 is a putative therapeutic target for treating ibd comes from the observations that adenovirus-directed administration by enema and nanoparticle-based colonic delivery of phb1 effectively enhanced the levels of phb1 at the surface of colonic epithelial cells and alleviated colitis induced by dextran sodium sulfate (theiss et al., 2011) . picard et al. (2013) recently demonstrated that phb1 accumulates in the nucleus of osteoarthritic chondrocytes, where it represses the expression of the transcription factor pitx1, suggesting an involvement of phb1 in the etiology of osteoarthritis.in addition to phb1, phb2 is also involved in inflammation. indeed, heterozygous phb2 +/à were shown to be more sensitive to liver insults and inflammatory aggressions than wild-type animals, confirming a cytoprotective and anti-inflammatory role of phb2 in liver (sá nchez-quiles et al., 2012) . lucas et al. (2013) recently discovered how phb1 and phb2 induce an immune response in b cells. the interaction of cd86 with phbs was shown to induce the phosphorylation of ikba, phospholipase cg2, and protein kinase ca/b(ii), leading to the nuclear translocation of nf-kb (p65) into the nucleus and the subsequent transcription of oct-2 and igg1.ande and mishra (2009) and ande et al. (2009a) established that phb1 is a key regulator of insulin signaling and adipocyte differentiation. indeed, phb1 is directly phosphorylated by the insulin receptor to promote insulin signaling and block akt signaling, whereas phosphorylation of phb1 by akt has the opposite effect.interestingly, phb1 is not only phosphorylated but is also conjugated to o-linked b-n-acetylglucosamine in myoblast cells in response to insulin and high glucose. this glucose-induced o-glcnac modification and phosphorylation of phb1 may be associated with insulin resistance modification and tyrosine phosphorylation of phb (ande et al., 2009b; gu et al., 2011) .phb1 inhibits pyruvate carboxylase and decreases insulinstimulated oxidation of glucose and fatty acid in adipocytes, implying that it has a role in promoting lipid accumulation (vessal et al., 2006) . crosslinking experiments showed that phb1 associates with pyruvate carboxylase and eps 15 homology domain protein 2 (ehd2), suggesting that phb1 shuttles between the extracellular space and the mitochondria by a mechanism involving lipid rafts and ehd2.recently, ande et al. (2012) demonstrated that treatment of preadipocytes with insulin or a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor g (pparg) agonist upregulates phb1, thereby promoting preadipocyte differentiation into adipocytes. remarkably, overexpression of phb1 was sufficient to induce adipogenesis. phb1 on the cell surface is also a marker of adipose vasculature and may be a possible therapeutic target for obesity (see below).several recent studies demonstrated that the internalization of some viruses involves phbs. for instance, phb1 interacts with chikungunya virus (wintachai et al., 2012) , phb2 interacts with dengue virus (kuadkitkan et al., 2010) , and both phb1 and phb2 interact with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov; cornillez-ty et al., 2009). phb1 and phb2 also interact with the hiv-1 glycoprotein to promote replicative spread in nonpermissive cells (emerson et al., 2010) . interestingly, recombinant capsid protein vp1 (rvp1) of footand-mouth disease virus dephosphorylates akt and phospho-phb ttr258 in lipid rafts to downregulate c-raf/erk signaling and inhibit metastasis of cancer cells, both in vitro and in vivo (chiu et al., 2012) . moreover, using high-throughput mass spectrometry, jang et al. (2012) discovered that lipoteichoic acid, a major virulence factor of gram-positive bacteria, binds to phb2, implicating phb2 in host immune responses to infections.the activities of phbs are affected by some natural products (e.g., flavaglines and aurilide), fully synthetic small molecules (e.g., melanogenin), and adipotide, a chimeric peptide that is currently in phase i clinical trial. these compounds (except for adipotide) were examined for a variety of activities before it became clear that phbs were their molecular targets. the best-studied phb ligands are flavaglines.flavaglines have a unique cyclopenta[b]benzofuran skeleton (ebada et al., 2011; ribeiro et al., 2012b) . rocaglamide, the first of these compounds to be described, was isolated more than 30 years ago by king et al. (1982) from medicinal plants of the genus aglaia (meliaceae) in southeast asia. since then, $100 other flavaglines, including rocaglaol and silvestrol, have been identified ( figure 3a ; figure s3 ). see also table s1 .although flavaglines display a myriad of pharmacological effects due to their anticancer, anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, and cardioprotective properties, it is the anticancer properties that have attracted the most attention from scientists (ebada et al., 2011; ribeiro et al., 2012b) . at concentrations in the low-nanomolar range, flavaglines inhibit the proliferation of tumor cells, are not toxic to normal cells (hausott et al., 2004; ribeiro et al., 2012a; su et al., 2006; thuaud et al., 2009 thuaud et al., , 2011 zhu et al., 2007) , and show no sign of toxicity in mice (bernard et al., 2011; cencic et al., 2009; lee et al., 1998; thuaud et al., 2009; zhu et al., 2009) . king et al. (1982) were the first to demonstrate the antileukemic activity of rocaglamide in a mouse model. subsequently, ohse et al. (1996) established that flavaglines strongly inhibit protein synthesis, and lee et al. (1998) demonstrated that these compounds delay the growth of human breast cancer cells in athymic mice. however, because the tumors were not eradicated, these investigations were interrupted. since then, with the development of targeted therapies, approaches to the development of cytostatic compounds have changed radically (gutierrez et al., 2009) . as a consequence, there is now a renewed interest in flavaglines as potential anticancer agents.although flavaglines have shown significant anticancer effects in mouse models of cancer (alinari et al., 2012; cencic et al., 2009; hwang et al., 2004; king et al., 1982; lee et al., 1998; lucas et al., 2009; meurer-grimes et al., 2002; thuaud et al., 2011) , their most promising potential is associated with their ability to enhance the in vivo efficacy of other anticancer drugs, and in particular to relieve the resistance of tumors to chemotherapies. indeed, flavaglines were shown to enhance doxorubicin chemosensitivity in several mouse lymphoma models (bordeleau et al., 2008; cencic et al., 2009; zhu et al., 2009) . importantly, flavaglines did not display any overt sign of toxicity in mice in these studies, consistent with previous observations. very recently, using affinity chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry, polier et al. (2012) identified phb1 and phb2 as the direct targets of flavaglines. the binding of flavaglines to phbs inhibits ras-c-raf-mek-erk signaling, and such signaling is essential for the survival of cancer cells ( figure 3b ). c-raf needs to interact with phbs to be phosphorylated by ras and thus participate in signaling (rajalingam et al., 2005) . the binding of flavaglines to phbs prevents this interaction both in vitro and in vivo. knockdown of either phb1 or phb2 with small interfering rna (sirna) mimicked the effects of flavaglines through inhibition of cap-dependent translation and an arrest of cell-cycle progression via a depletion of cyclin d3, cdk4, cdk6, and cdc25a. moreover, rocaglamide strongly depleted phb1 and phosphorylated c-raf at the plasma membrane, suggesting that the relocation of phbs to the membrane is involved in the mode of action of flavaglines. these various observations support the idea that flavaglines exert their anticancer effects through their action on phbs.these findings are of particular interest because we now have evidence that ras-c-raf-erk constitutes an overactivated pathway in many human cancers, and that this pathway is a promising target for treatments in oncology (matallanas et al., 2011; maurer et al., 2011) . bleumink et al. (2011) showed that this inhibition of c-raf-erk signaling blocks cap-dependent protein synthesis. indeed, erk activates mnk1, which phosphorylates eif4e, allowing cap-dependent synthesis to occur. few proteins require phosphorylated eif4e for their synthesis, and most of them are involved in oncogenesis, angiogenesis, and chemoresistance. thus, the in vivo anticancer effects of flavaglines seems to be a consequence of the inhibition of the synthesis of cyclins d1 and d3, cdk4, cdk6, cdc25a c-myc, bcl-2, survivin, mcl-1, the pim1/2 kinases, vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf), and matrix metallopeptidase 9 (mmp9) (bordeleau et al., 2008; cencic et al., 2009; nasr et al., 2013; polier et al., 2012; schatz et al., 2011) .although inhibition of the ras-c-raf-erk signaling pathway may be involved in the flavagline-induced suppression of capdependent synthesis in cells (bleumink et al., 2011) , it is more difficult to explain the observed inhibition of protein synthesis in vitro, where c-raf, mek, and erk are absent. this observation suggests either that another molecular target is involved in the inhibition of translation by flavaglines or that phbs interact with the translational machinery to control its activity.flavaglines induce apoptosis in cancer cells through a myriad of mechanisms (ribeiro et al., 2012b) involving cytochrome c (mi et al., 2006b; zhu et al., 2007) , apoptosis-inducing factor (thuaud et al., 2009) , caspase 12 (thuaud et al., 2009) , and the mapks jnk and p38 (zhu et al., 2007 (zhu et al., , 2009 . whether these mechanisms involve phb1 and phb2 or another target remains to be determined. the effect of flavaglines on phbs-interacting proteins other than c-raf is also an issue that needs to be examined.silvestrol is the flavagline that has been the most studied in vivo for its anticancer properties (alinari et al., 2012; bordeleau et al., 2008; cencic et al., 2009; hwang et al., 2004; kim et al., 2007; mi et al., 2006a; robert et al., 2009; schatz et al., 2011) . however, the development of this compound is severely limited by its sensitivity to p-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance and its suboptimal absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (adme) characteristics (gupta et al., 2011; liu et al., 2012) . fortunately, structure-activity relationship (sar) chander et al., 2011; fusaro et al., 2003; joshi et al., 2007 phb1 interacts with the tumors suppressors rb, p107, and p130 to repress e2f-mediated transcription and inhibit cell proliferation wang et al., 1999a wang et al., , 1999b wang et al., , 2002 phb1 represses dna replication by interacting with components of the mammalian replication machinery rizwani et al., 2009 protumorigenic roles of phbs review studies have established that the deletion of the methyl ester or the amide in position 2 results in compounds that escape this multidrug resistance without any loss of cytotoxicity ( figure s3 ; ribeiro et al., 2012a; thuaud et al., 2009 thuaud et al., , 2011 . in addition to their anticancer effects, flavaglines also display potent anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective activities. indeed, flavaglines at nanomolar concentrations act as immunosuppressors by inhibiting the production of interferon-g, tnf-a, il-2, and il-4 by t lymphocytes (proksch et al., 2005) . this immunosuppression is mediated by activation of the mapks jnk and p38, which selectively inactivate nuclear factor of activated t cells (nfat; figure 3c ). it is still not known how flavaglines activate jnk and p38. at higher concentrations, flavaglines also inhibit nf-kb, another transcription factor that is involved in inflammation (baumann et al., 2002) . interestingly, the synthetic flavagline imd-019064 inhibits nf-kb signaling and displays potent in vitro anti-inflammatory effects that manifest as an inhibition figure s2 , which illustrates the translocalization of phb1 to mitochondria in noncancerous cells to promote survival. of proinflammatory mediator release from astrocytes, microglia, and endothelial cells (fahrig et al., 2005;  figure 3d ). more importantly, imd-019064 protects dopaminergic neurons both in vitro and in vivo in models of parkinson's disease (mpp + -induced neurotoxicity) and traumatic brain injury. recent sar studies led to the identification of fl40, which provides greater neuroprotection in vitro than imd-019064 (ribeiro et al., 2012a) . the neuroprotective activity of flavaglines is currently being actively explored by the pharmaceutical company intermed discovery, which has been developing imd-026259 ( figure 3a ) for the treatment of parkinson's disease.these studies have prompted evaluations of the cytoprotective potential of flavaglines in other tissues. the synthetic flavagline fl3 ( figure 3a ), which displays a potent cytotoxicity in cancer cells (thuaud et al., 2009) , was shown to protect cardiomyocytes in vitro and in vivo against various stresses, including anthracycline cardiotoxicity (bernard et al., 2011) . the heart is extremely sensitive to the toxicity of anthracyclines, such as doxorubicin. these medicines are among the most effective anticancer drugs available and have antitumor activity against both hematopoietic and solid tumors; unfortunately, their clinical utility is markedly hampered by their cardiotoxicity, which can lead to dilated cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure (minotti et al., 2004) .fl3 protects cardiomyocytes from the apoptosis induced by both doxorubicin and serum starvation (bernard et al., 2011) . interestingly, these stresses are of different natures: doxorubicin causes an oxidative stress, whereas serum starvation blocks the growth factor signaling that is necessary for cell survival, mimicking an important component of myocardial ischemia. treatment with fl3 significantly reduces mortality and attenuates both apoptosis and fibrosis in the hearts of doxorubicintreated mice. thus, flavaglines may both enhance the anticancer efficacy of anthracyclines and alleviate their main adverse effect, cardiotoxicity. anthracyclines are central to cancer chemotherapies, so the discovery of a new class of cardioprotective agents would be extremely valuable clinically, and further studies to examine this therapeutic application are therefore warranted.the cardioprotective effects of flavaglines are mediated through the phosphorylation of the small heat shock protein hsp27 ( figure 3e ). hsp27 is critical for protecting cells against many types of damage, including the cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin, and exerts its effects in several ways, including chaperone activity, control of redox homeostasis, and inhibition of apoptosis (kostenko and moens, 2009) . whether phbs or another target is involved in this cardioprotective effect of flavaglines has not been examined.although the cytoprotective and anti-inflammatory effects of flavaglines have not yet been demonstrated to be mediated through a binding to phbs, it is unlikely that another target is involved. indeed, both their pharmacological effects and cytotoxicity in cancer cells occur at the same range of concentrations. as far as we know, no other natural product that possesses such a complex three-dimensional structure has been shown to bind to different classes of proteins with a comparably high affinity.it would be useful to further evaluate this therapeutic application of flavaglines and elucidate the mechanisms involved. it may seem odd than an anticancer drug can also display various cardio-or neuroprotective effects; however, there are precedents. for example, rapamycin derivatives (erlich et al., 2007; khan et al., 2006; malagelada et al., 2010) and hdac inhibitors are both cardio-and neuroprotectants in addition to having anticancer effects (bush and mckinsey, 2009; mai et al., 2009) . a first clue to understanding this paradox may be that phb1 is localized mainly in the mitochondria of normal cells and in the nucleus in cancer cells . the translocation of phb1 from the nucleus and cytosol to mitochondria promotes survival in normal cells but apoptosis in cancer cells (fusaro et al., 2003) . it is therefore tempting to suggest that the opposite behaviors of flavaglines in cancer and normal cells are the consequences of different intracellular localizations of phbs.although many academic studies have demonstrated a therapeutic potential of flavaglines in preclinical models of cancers and inflammatory and cardiac diseases, these compounds have not yet been examined in a clinical trial. to our knowledge, only two pharmaceutical companies (intermed discovery and infinity pharmaceutical) are currently developing flavaglines for the treatment of parkinson's disease and cancers, respectively. aurilide isolated from the japanese sea hare (dolabella auricularia; suenaga et al., 2004; suenaga et al., 1996) , aurilide is a cyclic depsipeptide that displays a strong cytotoxicity at nanomolar and subnanomolar concentrations on a panel of cancer cell lines ( figure 4a ; figure s4 ). work involving affinity chromatography identified phb1 as the molecular target of aurilide (sato et al., 2011) . the binding of this toxin activates the proteolytic processing of the dynamin-like gtpase optic atrophy 1 (opa1), which in turn triggers remodeling of the mitochondrial cristae, leading to apoptosis. this devastating effect on mitochondria probably explains the extreme toxicity of this compound, which impedes its study in animal models and precludes its further development as a medicament.in a quest to identify compounds that modulate skin pigmentation, snyder et al. (2005) screened a tagged-triazine library on unpigmented melanocytes ( figure 4b ; figure s5 ). they identified melanogenin as an inducer of pigmentation with an ec 50 of 2.5 mm. this compound upregulates tyrosinase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of melanin. snyder et al. (2005) conjugated melanogenin to an agarose support, which enabled them to identify phb1 as the molecular target by affinity chromatography. further biological investigations confirmed that phb1 is responsible for the induction of pigmentation. immunofluorescence microscopy studies showed that phb1 was localized only in mitochondria, which led these authors to suggest that the binding of melanogenin to phb1 may disrupt the interaction between phb1 and a transcriptional factor, thereby causing its translocation to the nucleus and induction of the expression of tyrosinase, the rate-limiting enzyme in melanogenesis.this study was the first to demonstrate and unravel the involvement of phb1 in the regulation of mammalian pigmentation. although these discoveries may provide a basis for the development of novel cosmetics and drugs for the treatment of pigment disorders, no further investigation in this direction has been reported.recently, wu and wu (2012) demonstrated that phb1 is enriched in lipid rafts in hacat keratinocytes after uvb irradiation, and that this protects the cells against uvb-induced apoptosis. these findings are consistent with the notion that phb1 contributes to protection of the skin against uvb. adipotide kolonin et al. (2004) and staquicini et al. (2011) used phage display techniques to identify a peptide homologous to a region of annexin a2 that targets phb1 at the surface of the vascular endothelial cells of white adipose tissue ( figure 4c ). by fusion with a proapoptotic sequence, they obtained adipotide (ckggrakdc-gg-d (klaklak) 2 ), a chimeric peptide that damages the vasculature of the adipose tissue and consequently disrupts the blood supply to adipocytes. in obese mice, adipotide induced a substantial loss of weight and normalized metabolism, leading to a reversal of obesity without any adverse sign of toxicity. surprisingly, food intake was reduced, suggesting that there is an unexpected relationship between the adipose tissue vasculature and the regulation of feeding behavior (kim et al., 2010) .in obese rhesus monkeys, 4 weeks of adipotide treatment led to a 28% reduction in body fat and also reduced food intake and improved the animals' metabolic status (i.e., reduced insulin resistance); these findings have implications for the development of treatment for type 2 diabetes (barnhart et al., 2011) . adipotide is currently being developed by the biotech company arrowhead research corporation, and entered a phase i trial involving obese patients with prostate cancer in july 2012. because adipotide has a negative endocrine effect on tumor growth, it is expected to slow tumor growth in these patients.capsaicin is a component of hot chili peppers that inhibits the proliferation of many cancer cell lines. using affinity chromatography, fletcher et al. (2012) demonstrated that capsaicin (0.1-1 mm) binds to phb2, and that this binding induces a series of proapoptotic events in human myeloid leukemia cells, including (1) the translocation of phb2 from mitochondria to the nucleus; (2) the dissociation of phb2 from adenine nucleotide translocator 2 (ant2), leading to a noncompetitive inhibition of ant activity; and (3) the release of cytochrome c into the cytosol ( figure 4d ). the latter two effects could be caused by the depletion of phb2 in mitochondria, which would compromise mitochondrial integrity and promote apoptosis.capsaicin was used in these experiments at concentrations that are much too high to be therapeutically relevant, but this work may constitute the basis for an optimization program to develop a clinically useful drug. sulfonyl amidine derivatives sulfonyl amidine a inhibits the osteoclastogenesis involved in bone remodeling with an ic 50 of 1.8 mm (lee et al., 2010c; figure 4e ). chang et al. (2011) used affinity chromatography to identify the molecular target involved in this process and found aurilide is a cytotoxic depsipeptide that binds to phb1 and triggers remodeling of the mitochondrial cristae to lead to apoptosis. (b) melanogenin binds to phb1 to induce the expression of tyrosinase, the rate-limiting enzyme in melanogenesis. (c) adipotide is a chimeric peptide that targets phb1 at the surface of the vascular endothelial cells of white adipose tissue. its proapoptotic sequence is responsible for the damage to this tissue. (d) binding of capsaicin to phb2 induces its translocation from mitochondria to the nucleus, a noncompetitive inhibition of the ant2 and the release of cytochrome c into the cytosol, leading to the apoptosis of myeloid leukemia cells.(e) sulfonyl amidine (a) inhibits the osteoclastogenesis involved in bone remodeling. this compound binds to phb1 and three other proteins. which of these proteins is the relevant target involved in this antiresorptive activity remains unknown. (f) aftin-4, which binds to phb1, vdac1, and mitofilin, promotes in neurons the production of the neurotoxic peptide ab42, which is involved in the etiology of alzheimer's disease. (g) the dihydrooxazole choxa alkylates phb1, suggesting that it could be used as a chemical probe to analyze the structure of phb1. that this compound binds to phb1 and three other proteins. which of these proteins is the relevant target involved in this antiresorptive activity remains to be determined.while investigating how the toxic amyloid-b42 (ab42) peptide is produced in alzheimer's disease, bettayeb et al. (2012) observed that the adenine derivative aftin-4 promotes ab42 production in neurons ( figure 4f ). aftin-4 was found to interact with three proteins related to neural degeneration: phb1, voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (vdac1), and mitofilin. choxa the dihydrooxazole choxa, which displays some cytotoxicity with a gi 50 of 7.2 mm in b16f0 cells, was shown to alkylate the asp40 of phb1, suggesting that it could be used as a chemical probe to analyze the structure of phb1 (trzeciakiewicz et al., 2011 ; figure 4g ).the regulation by phbs of cell survival, apoptosis, metabolism, and inflammation makes these proteins promising therapeutic targets for novel treatments for cancer and neurodegenerative, metabolic, and inflammatory diseases. their intracellular localization and their translocation in response to proapoptotic signals differ substantially between normal and cancer cells. this divergence of behavior, which is not fully understood, may be exploited to develop therapeutic agents. the phase i trial of adipotide for the treatment of obese patients with prostate cancer may be the first step on the road to developing phb ligands of clinical value. the recent discovery that flavaglines target phbs warrants further studies of this class of anticancer and cytoprotective agent. in addition to the ongoing exploration of the roles of phbs in physiology and physiopathology, we anticipate that this field will stimulate research addressing other classes of phb ligands with original pharmacological properties.over the last few years, phbs have been found to interact with more than 60 other proteins to regulate a myriad of cellular events. there is no doubt that in the coming years, new partners and new cellular regulations will be uncovered. an important issue will be to determine when the alterations of phb expression, subcellular localization, and signaling are involved in the etiology of not only cancers but also cardiac, neurological, inflammatory, and metabolic diseases. translating this knowledge into clinical applications may lead to the development of new medicines and biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis.supplemental information includes five figures and one table and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.02.006.sars coronavirus main protease (sars-cov m pro ) is essential for the replication of the virus and regarded as a major antiviral drug target yang et al., 2003; tan et al., 2005; steuber and hilgenfeld, 2010) . peptide aldehyde inhibitors are widely used as research tools to characterize the substrate specificity of serine and cysteine proteases. in complex with the crystalline target enzyme, they provide a wealth of information on the specificity-defining subsites of the substrate-binding site. for this purpose, we have previously described peptide aldehydes as inhibitors of the sars-coronavirus main protease (sars-cov m pro ) (al-gharabli et al., 2006) . a major advantage of aldehydes over other peptide electrophiles is their reversible binding to the 0166-3542/$ -see front matter ó 2011 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.08.001abbreviations: sars-cov m pro , sars coronavirus main protease; cm-ff-h, cinnamoyl-phe-phe-h; boc, tert-butyl oxycarbonyl; ibx, 2-iodoxybenzoic acid; fret, fluorescence resonance energy transfer; peg, polyethylene glycol; mpd, 2methyl-2,4-pentanediol; mes, 2-(n-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid; dmso, dimethylsulfoxide. active-site sulfhydryl of cysteine proteases. we have previously used this property to screen a small library of non-peptide nucleophiles (mostly amines) for molecules that would efficiently enhance the inhibition of the aldehyde by formation of a stronger binding aldehyde-nucleophile ligation product. in a second step of this process that we named ''dynamic ligation screening'' (schmidt et al., 2008) , the most efficient compound in this process had its amino group replaced by an aldehyde moiety and was reacted with the target enzyme, and the resulting covalent adduct was subsequently used to screen the same library of nucleophiles for those that would react with the aldehyde. this way, starting from a substrate-like peptide aldehyde, we obtained a low-lm non-peptidic, reversible inhibitor from two fragments which by themselves had no or only very low inhibitory activity (schmidt et al., 2008) .interestingly, it turned out that some peptide aldehydes with an amino-acid sequence deviating from the consensus sequence embracing the cleavage sites of polyprotein substrates were surprisingly efficient as inhibitors. in particular, peptide aldehydes with p2 = asp or ser inhibited the main protease with a relatively low ic 50 (al-gharabli et al., 2006) , although it is generally agreed that the s2 specificity subsite of the enzyme has a strong preference for large hydrophobic side-chains such as leu, phe, or met (fan et al., 2004 (fan et al., , 2005 lai et al., 2006) . we therefore assumed that the hydrophilic p2 side-chain of these inhibitors would be oriented towards the solvent, rather than occupy the s2 pocket, and that the hydrophobic p3 residue would be binding to that pocket (al-gharabli et al., 2006; schmidt et al., 2008) . this model was based on a crystal structure of a peptidyl chloromethyl ketone bound to the sars-cov main protease, in which this arrangement had been observed (yang et al., 2003) . here we show by x-ray crystallography of a number of peptide aldehyde complexes with the protein that this is not the case. instead, the hydrophilic ser or asp residues in the p2 position bind to the hydrophobic s2 subsite. in order to understand these binding modes, the atomic interactions were analyzed in detail. also, we report the inhibition kinetics of these compounds and re-evaluate the cleavage specificity of the enzyme as far as the p2 position is concerned. in addition, we determined a crystal structure of sars-cov m pro in complex with the aldehyde cm-ff-h (cinnamoyl-phe-phe-h), which has a phenylalanine residue in the p1 position and exhibits high inhibitory activity against sars-cov m pro , with k i = 2.24 ± 0.58 lm. these results show that the stringent substrate specificity of the sars-cov m pro with respect to the p1 and p2 positions can be overruled by the highly electrophilic character of the aldehyde warhead.chemical synthesis of peptide aldehydes ac-estlq-h, ac-nsfsq-h, ac-dsfdq-h, and ac-nstsq-h was performed employing a solid-state method (al-gharabli et al., 2006) . briefly, protected glutamine aldehyde obtained by racemization-free oxidation of the corresponding amino alcohol with dess-martin periodinane was immobilized on a threonyl resin as oxazolidine. following n-tert-butyl oxycarbonyl (boc)-protection of the ring nitrogen to yield the n-protected oxazolidine linker, peptide synthesis was performed on the resin.synthesis of cm-ff-h was carried out by amidation of boc-l-phenylalanine with l-phenylalanine methyl ester followed by deprotection of the boc group and acylation of the corresponding product with cinnamoyl chloride to provide n-cinnamoyl-l-phenylalanyl-l-phenylalanine methyl ester. cm-ff-h was then obtained by reduction of the ester with nabh 4 /cacl 2 and alcohol oxidation with ibx.the recombinant production and purification of sars-cov m pro with authentic n and c termini were performed as described previously (xue et al., 2007; verschueren et al., 2008) . the substrate dabcyl-ktsavlq;sgfrkme-(edans)-amide (95% purity; biosyntan gmbh, berlin, germany), which contains a main-protease cleavage site (indicated by the arrow), was used as the substrate in the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (fret)-based cleavage assay. the substrate stock was prepared by dissolving 1 mm of the peptide in dmso. the dequenching of the dabcyl fluorescence due to the cleavage of the substrate as catalyzed by the sars-cov m pro was monitored at 490 nm with excitation at 340 nm, using a cary eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer. the experiments were performed in the buffer consisting of 20 mm tris-hcl (ph 7.3), 100 mm nacl, and 1 mm edta. . in order to estimate the population of catalytically active m pro dimers, the respective monomer and dimer concentrations were calculated according to graziano et al. (2006) . the dimerization of the sars-cov m pro follows the scheme m þ md the equilibrium dissociation constant, k d , is defined bywhere [m] and [d] are the molar concentrations of the monomer and dimer, respectively. the total protein concentration [m t ] expressed in terms of molar monomer equivalents issubstituting the above equation into the expression for the k d yieldssolving the above quadratic equation for [m] givesit then follows thataldehyde stock solutions were prepared by dissolving the compounds in dmso at 1 mm. all aldehydes form covalent bonds between the aldehyde (-cho) group of the inhibitor and the sulfhydryl (-sh) group of cys145 of sars-cov m pro . the binding of these inhibitors is reversible (schmidt et al., 2008) , although it is strong. therefore, they were treated as reversible tight-binding inhibitors. for the measurement of the inhibition constant k i , sars-cov m pro was incubated with the aldehyde inhibitor in reaction buffer at room temperature for 30 min. then the fret peptide substrate, dabcyl-ktsavlq;sgfrkme-edans, was added and the reaction velocity was calculated according to substrate cleavage. (ascenzi et al., 1987; copeland, 2000) . values of the intrinsic inhibition constant (k i ) for aldehyde binding to sars-cov m pro were calculated according to the equation k app (ascenzi et al., 1987; copeland, 2000) .twenty peptide substrates harboring alternative amino-acid residues in p2 (=x; swtsavxq;sgfrkwa) were purchased from gl biochemistry ltd. (shanghai, china). these peptides correspond to the n-terminal autocleavage site of the sars-cov mpro, with the exception of the p7 ile which had been replaced by trp, and the p6 0 met which had also been replaced by trp. all peptide substrate stocks were dissolved in dmso at 10 mm. to determine the k cat /k m for the substrate, 0.2 mm substrate peptide was incubated with 10 lm sars-cov mpro in 40 mm tris-hcl buffer, ph 7.3. aliquots of reactions were removed at different times, stopped by the addition of 1% trichloroacetic acid. separation of products and substrate was carried out using a reverse-phase (rp) hplc and a linear gradient (1-90%) of acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. the absorbance was determined at 280 nm, and peak areas were calculated by integration. the (k cat /k m ) app ratio was determined by plotting the substrate peak area using the equation lnpa = c à (k cat / k m ) app â c e â t, where pa is the peak area of the substrate peptide, c e is the total concentration of sars-cov m pro , and c is an experimental constant (fan et al., 2004 (fan et al., , 2005 .sars-cov m pro with authentic chain termini was concentrated to 10 mg/ml and crystallized by vapor diffusion using sitting drops (xue et al., 2007) . the crystals grew overnight at 20°c by equilibration against a reservoir containing 6-8% polyethylene glycol (peg) 6000, 0.1 m mes (ph 6.0), 3% 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (mpd), and 3% dmso. all aldehydes were dissolved in 8% peg 6000, 0.1 m mes (ph 6.0), 3% mpd, and 10% dmso to a concentration of 10 mm. crystals of the aldehyde complexes of sars-cov m pro were obtained either by adding a 4-ll aliquot of aldehyde solution to the drop and soaking of the crystals for 12 h, or by incubating the enzyme for 2 h at 20°c with a 7-fold excess of the aldehyde solution and subsequent cocrystallizing at 20°c against a reservoir containing 8% peg 6000, 0.1 m mes (ph 6.0), 3% mpd, and 3% dmso. in the latter case, nucleation was initiated by microseeding using crushed monoclinic (space group c2) crystals of the sars-cov m pro . prior to diffraction data collection, the aldehyde complex crystals obtained from soaking and cocrystallization were transferred for a few seconds to a cryoprotectant solution containing the crystallization ingredients and 20% mpd.all diffraction data were collected at 100 k at the joint embl/ university of hamburg/university of lübeck synchrotron beamline x13 at desy (hamburg, germany), using a 165-mm mar ccd detector (mar research, hamburg, germany), or at synchrotron beamline bl14.1 at bessy (berlin, germany), using an mx225 ccd detector (rayonics, evanston, il). statistics of data collection, processing, and refinement are summarized in table 1 . data were processed with mosflm (leslie, 1992) , and scaled using the scala program from the ccp4 suite (collaborative computational project, 1994; evans, 2006) .structure elucidation and refinement were carried out using the ccp4 suite of programs (collaborative computational project, 1994; potterton et al., 2003) . crystal structures were determined by molecular replacement, using the original x-ray structure of the sars-cov m pro with authentic chain termini (pdb id: 2h2z) (xue et al., 2007) as the initial model. refmac (murshudov et al., 1997) was employed for structure refinement. the computer graphics program coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) was used for interpretation of electron density maps and model building. gap volumes between inhibitor and protein in the subsites of the enzyme were calculated using ucsf-chimera (pettersen et al., 2004) . the molecular graphics package pymol (delano, 2002) was used to generate the figures.the kinetic parameters of sars-cov m pro with authentic chain termini were determined using the fret substrate dabcyl-ktsavlq;sgfrkme-edans amide. the k m value for this substrate was determined as 24.5 lm and the apparent k cat /k m value was 2359 m à1 á19 s à1 . however, the dissociation of the catalytically active sars-cov m pro dimer into inactive monomers (fan et al., 2004) has to be taken into account. a wide range of k d values has been reported for m pro dimer dissociation (see grum-tokars et al. (2008) for an overview). for the enzyme with authentic chain termini, the latter authors reported a k d of 0.25 to 1.0 lm. as the m pro dimer tends to be stabilized by the presence of substrate (cheng et al., 2010) , we used the lower limit of this range for estimation of the necessary corrections and obtained a k cat /k m value of 7863 m à1 s à1 . the k m value determined in our study is of the same magnitude as other values derived from data not corrected for dissociation, which are typically in the range from 10 to 50 lm (grum-tokars et al., 2008) . this suggests that much higher values reported previously (e.g., verschueren et al., 2008) should probably be reconsidered.initially, four pentapeptide substrate-analogous aldehydes containing the canonical p1 residue, glutamine, namely ac-estlq-h, ac-nstsq-h, ac-dsfdq-h, and ac-nsfsq-h, were tested for inhibition of sars-cov m pro . overall, the four analogues were found to be reversible tight-binding inhibitors. harboring the canonical p2 leu, aldehyde ac-estlq-h exhibited inhibition with a relatively low k i of 8.27 ± 1.52 lm. aldehydes ac-nstsq-h, ac-dsfdq-h, and ac-nsfsq-h, all with a non-canonical p2 residue, exhibited moderate inhibition with k i values of 40.98 ± 2.63, 41.24 ± 2.25, and 72.73 ± 3.60 lm. surprisingly, aldehyde cmff-h, carrying a cinnamoyl group in the p3 and a phe residue in the p1 position, had an even higher inhibitory activity against sars-cov m pro than the four pentapeptide aldehydes, with a k i of 2.24 ± 0.58 lm.the aldehydes ac-estlq-h, ac-nstsq-h, ac-dsfdq-h, ac-nsfsq-h, and cm-ff-h were separately soaked into crystals of sars-cov mpro. the crystals were all of space group c2, which is often observed for sars-cov m pro (lee et al., 2005; xue et al., 2007; verschueren et al., 2008) . these crystals contain one sars-cov m pro monomer per asymmetric unit and the dimer (which is the enzymatically active species) is formed through the symmetry of the crystal. the four pentapeptide aldehydes ac-estlq-h, ac-nstsq-h, ac-dsfdq-h, and ac-nsfsq-h are bound in extended conformations in the s6-s1 specificity subsites of sars-cov m pro . cm-ff-h occupies sites s3-s1. remarkably, the p1 phenylalanine side chain of this inhibitor is bound deeply in the s1 pocket, which is generally considered to be specific for glutamine. 2f o à f c electron density maps of these aldehyde inhibitors are shown in fig. 1 . in all complexes, continuous electron density between the aldehyde carbonyl c-atom of the inhibitor and cys145-sc of sars-cov m pro (fig. 1) indicates the formation of a thiohemiacetal, as a result of the nucleophilic attack of the catalytic cysteine onto the c-terminal aldehyde of the inhibitor. the main-chain conformations of sars-cov m pro in the five complexes are basically identical, with overall root mean-square deviations (rmsd) of 0.16 à 0.36 å for ca atoms. in addition to the crystal soaking experiments, we also tried to cocrystallize sars-cov m pro with the aldehydes. the crystals obtained were predominantly of space group p2 1 , with the exception of the complex with ac-nsfsq-h, which still displayed space group c2. however, in most of the p2 1 crystals, no electron density for the aldehyde could be observed; thus, while the presence of the inhibitors induced a change of space group in most cases, the compounds themselves were not detected in the crystals. an exception was ac-estlq-h. the crystals of its complex with the m pro diffracted to 1.89 å, but in both enzyme monomers in the asymmetric unit, electron density could only be seen for residues p1 (gln) and p2 (leu) of the inhibitor (fig. 1e and f) . crystallographic data and refinement statistics for all six crystal structures are summarized in table 1 .in the sars-cov m pro complex with aldehyde inhibitor ac-nsfsq-h, the thiohemiacetal adopts alternative configurations ( fig. 2a and b) . this is likely the result of nucleophilic attack by cys145 onto the planar carbonyl from either side. in the (r)-isomer, the thiohemiacetal oxygen forms a hydrogen bond with the imidazole of his41 (3.30 å) of the catalytic dyad (fig. 2c) , whereas in the (s)-isomer, the oxygen atom points away from his41 and into the oxyanion hole, forming h-bonds with the main-chain amides of gly143 (2.71 å) and cys 145 (3.15 å) (fig. 2d) . previous x-ray and nmr studies of aldehyde binding to various cysteine and serine proteases demonstrated that one or both configurations were present in the structures of the complexes (delbaere and brayer, 1985; webber et al., 1998; robin et al., 2009) .the s2 subsite is a large pocket lined by residues his41, met49, cys145, his164, met165, asp187, arg188mc (mc: contribution from main-chain atoms only), and gln 189 (fig. 1) . at the cleavage sites of the sars-cov m pro in the viral polyproteins, the p2 position is mostly found to be occupied by leu or phe. accordingly, almost all inhibitors designed for the enzyme carry a large hydrophobic group in the p2 position. we were therefore very surprised to find the ser or asp side chains in the p2 position of the aldehydes bound to this hydrophobic site (fig. 1) . in the sars-cov m pro complexes with ac-nstsq-h or ac-nsfsq-h, there is no hydrogen-bonding interaction between the side chain of p2-ser and residues of the s2 subsite. as the ser side chain is small, there is no steric barrier for ser binding in the large s2 pocket. the serine does not quite reach the ''bottom'' of the s2 pocket, but the distance between its oc atom and the carbonyl oxygen of residue gln192 is 4.0 å, leaving no space for a water molecule to locate in between. accordingly, we did not find any electron density suggesting the presence of a well-ordered water in the s2 pocket, although disordered water is probably present in the pocket on both sides of the serine side-chain, where free spaces with a total volume of >70 å 3 are present between the substrate and the protein. it should be noted that the side-chain of gln189, which contributes to one wall of the s2 pocket, is quite flexible and adopts different conformations in the various inhibitor complexes, allowing or preventing the access of water to the pocket.in case of the sars-cov m pro complex with ac-dsfdq-h, the p2 asp side-chain is situated between the side chains of met49 and met165, which form opposite walls of the s2 pocket. most interestingly, its carboxylate oxygens undergo close interactions with the sulfur atoms of the two methionines. the distances (r s. . .o ) between the sd atoms of met49 and met165 on the one hand and the od2 and od1 atoms, respectively, of p2-asp on the other are 3.36 and 3.45 å (fig. 3) . then the relative distances (d s. between the methionine sulfur atoms and main-chain carbonyl oxygens or carboxylate side-chains have been detected previously in the hydrophobic cores of proteins and were proposed to stabilize the protein fold (pal and chakrabarti, 2001) . it has also been suggested that s. . .o interactions should be taken into account in protein engineering studies (iwaoka et al., 2002; pal and chakrabarti, 2001 ), but to the best of our knowledge, we provide here the first description of a methionine-carboxylate interaction in a protein-ligand complex. the unexpected finding of ser and asp binding in the s2 subsite constitutes a deviation from the dogma that peptide inhibitors of proteases should contain amino-acid residues corresponding to the sequence specificity of the target enzyme.the unexpected observation of the p2-asp residue of aldehyde ac-dsfdq-h binding to the hydrophobic s2 pocket prompted us to re-determine the cleavage specificity of the sars-cov m pro with respect to the p2 position. within the context of the peptide substrate swtsavxq;sgfrkwa, all 20 proteinogenic amino acids were tested in position p2 (=x). in the hplc-based assay, the protease concentration was kept constant at 0.5 lm. the canonical substrate with leu in the p2 position was completely cleaved within two minutes and was therefore used as the standard to compare the proteolytic activities with other substrates. the results are listed in fig. 4 . our study confirmed that the most favored residues in the p2 position of the substrate (after leu) are the hydrophobic amino acids phe, met, val, and ile. substrates with polar amino acids in p2 are poorly cleaved. the cleavage efficiency for the substrate with p2 = ser was 160-times lower than for the best substrate (p2 = leu); furthermore, the peptide with p2 = asp was not cleaved at all after incubation with sars-cov m pro for 16 h.the s1 subsite is lined by residues phe140, asn142, gly143, ser144, cys145, his163, glu166, and his172. from the substrate specificity results (fan et al., 2004 (fan et al., , 2005 lai et al., 2006) , p1 has to be gln. moreover, in all sars-cov m pro complex structures described so far (lee et al., 2005; xue et al., 2007; yang et al., 2005 yang et al., , 2003 yin et al., 2007) , the s1 subsite is occupied by a polar group, i.e. the side chain of gln or a five-membered lactam (used as a glutamine surrogate). shie et al. synthesized a series of a,b-unsaturated esters containing both p1 and p2 phenylalanine residues which showed modest inhibitory activity against the sars-cov m pro (ic 50 = 11-39 lm) (shie et al., 2005) . the a,b-unsaturated ethyl ester of 4-(dimethylamino)cinnamoyl-phe-phe was reported to be a potent inhibitor, with an inhibition constant of 0.52 lm (shie et al., 2005) . the computer model for the complex of sars-cov m pro with the compound proposed that the p1 and p2 phenyl groups occupy the s2 and s3 pockets, respectively (shie et al., 2005) . however, in the crystal structure of the complex with the aldehyde cm-ff-h that we describe in this communication, the side chain of p1-phe is inserted into the s1 subsite (fig. 1g) . in order to understand this unexpected deviation from the commonly observed specificity, we compared the interaction with the s1 subsite observed in our structures of the complexes with cm-ff-h and ac-estlq-h, the latter of which corresponds exactly to the described cleavage specificity of the m pro . the predominant s1 specificity of the enzyme for gln is determined primarily by his163. in the complex formed with ac-estlq-h, ne2 of his163 donates a 2.83-å hydrogen bond to the side-chain carbonyl oxygen (oe1) of p1-gln (fig. 1) . in the complex with cm-ff-h, the side chain of asn142 undergoes an 83.8°rotation about its v1 torsion angle compared to the conformation in the complex with ac-estlq-h (fig. 5) , leading to an opening of the s1 subsite towards the solvent. a similar movement of asn142 has been observed in the crystal structure of sars-cov m pro in complex with an inhibitor called ''n1'' (pdb id: 1wof), where both the regular conformation of this residue and the one observed in our structure were found . the p1-benzyl group of cm-ff-h binds to the s1 subsite by making hydrophobic interactions with phe140, leu141, asn142, and the p3 cinnamoyl group of cm-ff-h. as the s1 subsite specificity does not seem to be as stringent as previously thought. it may well be possible that other chemical groups can be accommodated here, thereby expanding the opportunities for designing and synthesizing efficient inhibitors of the sars-cov m pro .in this study, we report six crystal structures of sars-cov m pro in complex with peptide aldehydes and the inhibition kinetics of these compounds. the crystal structures reveal the mechanism of aldehyde binding to the active site of sars-cov m pro and provide detailed information on the atomic interactions. since asp or ser were found to bind to the hydrophobic s2 subsite, and phe was located in the hydrophilic s1 subsite of sars-cov m pro , we conclude that the stringent substrate specificity of the sars-cov m pro with respect to the p1 and p2 positions can be overruled by the highly electrophilic character of the aldehyde warhead. this constitutes a deviation from the dogma that peptidic protease inhibitors should comprise an amino-acid sequence corresponding to the cleavage specificity of the target enzyme. the observed nonbonded interaction of the carboxylate oxygen atoms of an aspartate residue of an inhibitor with the thioether moieties of two methionines forming part of an hydrophobic pocket of the target protein is remarkable and suggests that such s. . .o interactions should be added to the repertoire of computer-aided drug design.atomic coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the rcsb protein data bank under id codes 3sn8, 3sna, 3snb, 3snc, 3snd, and 3sne (see table 1 ).t he spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has already taken on pandemic proportions, having infected >100 000 people in 100 countries. 1 although the major current focus of public health authorities is to develop a coordinated global response to prepare health systems to meet this unprecedented challenge, a corollary concern has been identified that is of particular interest to clinicians and investigators with a major interest in hypertension. hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes mellitus, particularly in elderly people, increase susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection. [1] [2] [3] given that ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) is the receptor that allows coronavirus entry into cells, the idea has come up that preexisting use of renin-angiotensin system (ras) blockers might increase the risk of developing a severe and fatal sars-cov-2 infection. 2 this commentary discusses this concern and concludes that based on current evidence, there is no reason to abandon ras blockers in patients receiving this important class of antihypertensive agents because of concerns of either increased risk of contracting sars-cov-2 or worsening its course.in 2003, li et al 4 demonstrated that ace2 is the receptor responsible for sars coronavirus entry. binding to the ace2 receptor requires the surface unit of a viral spike protein (s1; figure) . 5, 6 subsequent cell entry relies on priming by the serine protease tmprss2 (transmembrane protease, serine 2). 5 two recent reports confirmed that sars-cov-2 also enters the cell via this route. 7, 8 importantly, sars-cov-2 entry into the cell could be blocked both by s-protein neutralizing antibodies and tmprss2 inhibitors (camostat mesylate). 7 in the lung, ace2 expression occurs in type 2 pneumocytes and macrophages. generally, however, pulmonary ace2 expression is review low when compared with other organs like the intestine, testis, heart, and kidney. [9] [10] [11] ace2 and the ras ace2 displays considerable homology with ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme; 40% identity and 61% similarity) and on this basis received its name in 2000. 12 as a mono-carboxypeptidase, it hydrolyzes multiple peptides, including apelin, opioids, kinins, and angiotensins. much of the work on ace2 has centered on the biologic effects related to the formation of angiotensin-(1-7) from angiotensin ii. 13, 14 unlike ace, ace2 does not convert angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, nor do ace inhibitors block its activity. this is not surprising because the homology does not concern the active site. ace2 is the most potent of the 3 enzymes known to convert the vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7). 9,15 angiotensin-(1-7) is increasingly recognized to have organ-protective properties that oppose and counterbalance those of angiotensin ii. within the ras, the other known target peptide for ace2 cleavage is angiotensin i, with the subsequent formation of angiotensin-(1-9) (figure) .ace2 is a membrane-bound enzyme, and its (soluble) levels in blood are very low. 9, 15 cleavage of its membrane-anchor (shedding) by adam17 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17) ( figure) underlies its occurrence in body fluids. angiotensin ii, via its at 1 (angiotensin ii type 1) receptor, upregulates adam17, thus increasing soluble ace2 levels. 16 in urine, soluble ace2 levels can be significant and likely originate from shedding from the proximal tubular membrane. in pathological states, shedding of ace2 is often increased, resulting in elevated soluble ace2 levels in blood, urine, and other body fluids. 17, 18 indeed, a doubling of soluble ace2 has been reported in cerebrospinal fluid of hypertensive patients. 16 however, given that by far the majority of ace2 is membrane-bound, even a doubling is unlikely to significantly alter the amount of membrane-bound ace2. for instance, if 2% of ace2 occurs in a soluble form, doubling would increase this to 4%, while still 96% of ace2 is membrane-bound. theoretically, ras blockade might (partly) reverse this, thus returning the percent of membrane-bound ace2 to 97-98. this is unlikely to seriously affect sars-cov-2 entry, which depends on membrane-bound (full-length) ace2.this is really at the crux of the question and the prevailing confusion and panic that we are witnessing in the medical community after the word came out that ace2 is the receptor for sars-cov-2. part of the confusion in social media and the public in general stands because, at times, ace inhibitors are confused with ace2 inhibitors. those are 2 different enzymes with 2 different active sites and any effect of ace inhibitors on ace2 activity must therefore be an indirect one, via their respective substrates. this is unlikely to have any relationship with sars-cov-2 binding. there are, however, limited reports that ace inhibitors affect the expression of ace2 in the heart and the kidney. 19 at 1 receptor blockers (arbs) alter ace2 expression more consistently in several studies, both at the mrna and protein level. [19] [20] [21] upregulation has been best documented in cardiac tissue and in the renal vasculature. yet, even here, results are diverse, required high doses, and often differed per arb and per organ. given the relationship with adam17, a clear distinction should be made between membrane-bound and soluble ace2 because an overview of the connections between renin-angiotensin system blockers, ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) and the coronavirus. the carboxypeptidase ace2 converts ang ii (angiotensin ii) to ang-(1-7) and ang i to ang-(1-9) (a), yet is not blocked by ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors, which prevent the conversion of ang i to ang ii. ace2 also binds and internalizes sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2; b), after priming by the serine protease tmprss2 (transmembrane protease, serine 2). shedding of membrane-bound ace2 by a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (adam17) results in the occurrence of soluble (s) ace2, which can no longer mediate sars-cov-2 entry and which might even prevent such entry by keeping the virus in solution. at 1 r (ang ii, via its type 1 receptor) upregulates adam17, and at 1 r blockers (arbs) would prevent this.increase in soluble ace2, if anything, might imply a decrease in membrane-bound ace2. because measuring membranebound ace2 in vivo is technically challenging, most publications from humans have reported levels of ace2 activity in blood that reflect the soluble ace2 protein circulating at very low levels. 22 if arbs as a drug class would truly upregulate membrane-bound ace2, it is reasonable to first assume that this is because of at 1 receptor blockade. in agreement with this assumption, angiotensin ii acutely induced ace2 internalization via its at 1 receptor in ace2-transfected neuroblastoma cells. 23 ace inhibitors should then have the same directional effect as arbs, although for these drugs there is very limited data showing upregulation of ace2. esler and esler 24 suggested that the difference is due to the increased levels of angiotensin ii occurring after arb treatment (but not ace inhibition): high angiotensin ii levels would impose an increased substrate load on the enzyme, thus requiring its upregulation. here it should be stressed that the carboxypeptidase ace2 has multiple substrates and that an alteration in the level of one of these substrates (angiotensin ii, occurring at fmol/ml levels, ie, many orders of magnitude below the actual ace2 concentration!) cannot possibly make a meaningful difference in its substrate load. taken together, there is evidence from animal studies that arbs may upregulate membrane-bound ace2, whereas ace inhibitors may not. the current data, however, are often conflicting and vary between arbs and tissue (eg, heart versus kidney). even if the reported upregulation of tissue ace2 by arbs in animal studies and generally with high doses could be extrapolated to humans, this would not establish that it is sufficient to facilitate sars-cov-2 entry.we like to point out that a potentially beneficial pulmonary effect of arbs needs to be considered as well. during acute lung injury, alveolar ace2 appears to be downregulated. 25, 26 this would decrease angiotensin ii metabolism, thus resulting in higher local levels of this peptide, which increases alveolar permeability and fosters lung injury. in this context, one can speculate that having increased ace2 expression by preexisting arbs treatment may actually be protective in the course of sars-cov-2 infection.it is not clear how hypertension was coded in the recent sars-cov-2 report 1 -we can only speculate that it might be based on the use of hypertension medication rather than actual blood pressure measurement. to truly address whether patients with hypertension are more likely to get serious and fatal sars-cov-2 infections, a prospective cohort study with incidence rates of sars-cov-2 infection in a cohort of patients with hypertension and patients without hypertension is required, with similar exposure history. instead, what has been reported is history of hypertension versus not, in sars-cov-2 patients, without any adjustment (eg, for age). the use of ras blockers as a causal link is an assumption that lacks evidence, as discussed here. we therefore strongly recommend that patients who are taking ace inhibitors or arbs for high blood pressure, heart failure, or other medical indications should not withdraw their current treatment regimens unless they are specifically advised to do so by their physician or healthcare provider. there is an additional caveat. any resulting destabilizing of blood pressure control in hypertension, which might possibly occur with medication changes, would carry unacceptable risks of precipitating strokes and heart attacks, risks which clearly are not just hypothetical. simply discontinuing antihypertensive agents is strongly discouraged and should not be an option, considering the widespread use of ras blockers throughout the world. in particular, asian people seem to be more prone to cough, and therefore, arbs may be preferable. 27the available clinical database from the pandemic to date is insufficient to provide sufficient detail on the variables of interest: hypertension diagnosis and the antihypertensive drugs prescribed to test the hypotheses proposed and provide certitude. hence such information is desperately needed. although no therapy is currently established for sars-cov-2 patients, the field is moving rapidly with potential approaches being considered. those include broad spectrum antivirals such as favipiravir and remdesivir, 28 tmprss2 inhibition with camostat mesylate, 7 and adam17 upregulation. a more specific approach might be using soluble recombinant ace2 protein to intercept the virus from binding to the fulllength ace2 anchored in the cell plasma membrane. 6 these approaches make the most sense for the treatment of patients with high risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome. for preventive purposes, the goal, of course, is the development of a sars-cov-2 vaccine.in closing, we see no reason to abandon or discontinue temporarily the use of ras blockers preventatively in sars-cov-2 patients. 29 there are some concerns that these agents, particularly arbs, can affect the expression of ace2 based on animal models that, however, have not been challenged with coronavirus infection to evaluate the impact of ras blocker therapy. since this information is lacking, we see no rationale to panic and to alter the prescription of this critically important class of antihypertensives. their therapeutic benefit, in our opinion, outweighs any potential risk of them predisposing to corona infection. moreover, it is unknown whether alternative antihypertensives do not carry the same risk. another question is what to do in infected individuals with risk to progress to end-stage renal disease. here the decision should be based on clinical judgment and considering the pros and cons of ras blockade in the acutely ill, such as the presence or absence of hypotension and kidney function.• ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) is the receptor that allows coronavirus entry into cells. • ace2 in its full-length form is a membrane-bound enzyme, whereas its shorter (soluble) form circulates in blood at very low levels. • ace inhibitors do not inhibit ace2 because ace and ace2 are different enzymes. • although angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers have been suggested to upregulate ace2, the evidence is not fully consistent and differs per angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blocker and per organ.• there are no data supporting that ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers facilitate coronavirus entry by increasing ace2 expression. • animal data support a potential protective pulmonary and cardiovascular effects of elevated ace2 expression. • treatment with ras blockers should not be discontinued because of concerns with coronavirus infection based on the currently available evidence.in these unprecedented times, the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic has had a severe impact globally. most countries have implemented strict 'lockdown', and social distancing and isolation of the elderly and vulnerable are advised. at the time of writing this review, just over three million individuals have been affected globally with more than 200,000 deaths. 1 the global infection curve has not flattened, with new infections continuing to rise. although the pandemic originated in china, the epicentre shifted to europe, and presently the most affected country is the united states of america (usa).timeline the first cases of atypical pneumonia linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan, china were described in late december 2019. china announced an outbreak on 31 december 2019 and closed the market once it became apparent that this was the place of origin. in early january 2020, investigations by chinese authorities continued, contacts were traced and managed and the world health organization (who) was notified. on 7 january 2020, a novel coronavirus was announced as the cause of the outbreak, 2 and on 10 january 2020, china shared the viral gene sequence to allow the development of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) diagnostic kits. 3 the first case outside china was confirmed in thailand, and strict screening measures, travel restrictions and the lockdown of wuhan were implemented. 4 the first case in the usa was announced on 20 january 2020 5 and the first cases in europe were reported in france on 24 january 2020 in individuals with a travel history to the hubei province, china. subsequent human-tohuman transmission followed, and cases with no travel history were reported. 6 africa reported its first case on 14 february 2020 in egypt. since then, the number of cases has risen dramatically ( figure 1 ).this is the third coronavirus outbreak in as many decades. 7 the previous two were severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2003, and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2012 which had mortality rates of 10% and 37%, respectively. 8 the mortality rate of sars-cov-2, -although lower compared to sars and mers, seems to have a more devastating effect globally.the sars-cov-2 has a single-stranded rna genome enveloped in a lipid membrane embedded with glycoprotein spikes giving the impression of a crown -hence the name coronavirus (cov). rna viruses use an error-prone rna polymerase for replication and therefore have high mutation rates and can easily mutate during epidemics adapting to local environment to facilitate transmission. 9 however, these mutations are part of the virus life cycle and should not impact outbreaks. 10 zhu et al. extracted viral rna from respiratory samples of three patients admitted in wuhan, 2 and on 7 january 2020, the chinese centre for disease control and prevention identified a novel betacoronavirus from one of the samples. they described 85% sequence homology with bat sars-like cov which caused the sars outbreak in 2003. 2, 3 the virus was originally named 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and later changed to sars-cov-2. this is the seventh member of the coronavirus family. of the six previously described covs, four cause no more than minimal common cold symptoms in humans. the other two members are sars-cov and mers-cov.all covs have zoonotic origins, with bats considered the natural reservoir hosts. 3 in sars-cov-2, the sequence identity of pangolin origin covs and sars-cov-2 is 99%, and this raised the question whether the virus is of pangolin origin. 11 the natural hosts, namely bats, have a limited inflammatory response as seen by lower interleukin (il)-1b concentrations and adequate type i interferons, giving rise to a generalized antiinflammatory milieu and an ability to limit excessive inflammatory response. 12 interestingly, this may also explain bats' relatively long lifespan of 30-40 years. 12 type i interferon is known to assist with antiviral control. cov cannot infect humans unless the virus undergoes mutation and recombination in animal hosts.sars-cov-2 is a highly virulent virus. the original infection distribution in mainland china was found to be 71.45% in patients 30-65 years of age and only 0.35% in patients less than 10 years old. 13 it is easily transmissible, with initial studies finding that each infected person is capable of infecting another 2.2 individuals. 4 the virus is stable on plastic and stainlesssteel surfaces for up to 72 h, 14 further enhancing its ability to spread. the relatively long incubation period worsens the situation, as individuals may be asymptomatic carriers for up to two weeks, thereby releasing the virus in their surroundings in a process called 'viral shedding'.the most common symptoms of covid-19 are respiratory. transmission is via droplets (directly, and on surfaces) and direct contact. sars-cov-2 has also been detected in stool which may point to a possible faeco-oral route of transmission. 5, 13 risk and comorbidityalthough covid-19 may present mildly as a flu-like disease or even be asymptomatic, some patients develop significant cardiovascular and other adverse effects. according to present data, 81% of infected individuals have only mild flu-like symptoms and recover within two weeks, 14% have severe symptoms requiring hospitalization and 5% become critically ill. 15 these differences in presentation are thought to be due to viral load, age and the presence of comorbidities. 12 as many carriers may be asymptomatic and an underestimated source of transmission, 13 effective screening and contact tracing are important to identify high-risk individuals, advise self-isolation where transmission risk is high and trace possible cases to limit community spread. children may also be possible carriers of asymptomatic infection. lu et al. described that children under 10 years old may be asymptomatic in 15.8% of cases. 16 the elderly are considered high risk. this may be due to an aging immune system with concomitant lymphopaenia and decreased cd4-count and t-cell regulation. 12 elderly people have a propensity to excessive autoimmune and inflammatory responses which may be exacerbated by covid-19 infection. 12 male patients and those with associated comorbidities are also at increased risk.risk factors for complicated infection were identified in early studies. most of these corroborated the increased risk associated with age, male sex and certain comorbidities. the studies also described several laboratory and clinical markers that can be used to determine prognosis.the first study reported 41 cases admitted early in january 2020 in wuhan, china. the median age of 49 years (there were no adolescents or children), 73% were male and 66% had exposure to the huanan seafood wholesale market. of this cohort, 13 (32%) were admitted to an intensive care unit (icu). lymphopaenia, increased d-dimer levels, increased partial thromboplastin time (ptt), increased aspartate aminotransferase (ast), increased high-sensitivity troponin-i (hs-tni) and increased inflammatory cytokines indicated poor prognosis and outcome. 8 another early study described 99 hospitalized cases in wuhan. the average age was 55 years, most were male and 49% had a history of exposure to the huanan seafood market. age, obesity and comorbid illness were associated with increased mortality, and concern was expressed about individuals with compromised immune function such as human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), increased age, diabetics or those on immunosuppressive therapy. 17 a subsequent study of six family members in shenzhen china who had returned from a visit to wuhan described the first person-to-person transmission of the virus. 18 yang et al. described the clinical course and outcomes in 710 patients with covid-19 pneumonia including 52 who were critically ill. in the critically ill, the mean age was 59.7 years, 67% were male, 40% had comorbidities and 61.5% had died at 28 days (median time seven days). non-survival risk was associated with advance age and comorbidities. 19 li et al. collected demographic information, exposure history and illness timelines on 425 of the initial confirmed cases in wuhan. the median age was 59 years and 56% were male. as 55% of cases were linked to the original huanan seafood wholesale market, this was evident of human-to-human transmission. they described a doubling of cases every 7.4 days and suggested a 14-day observation or quarantine period for exposed persons. they described that each infected person spread the virus to an average of 2.2 people they come in contact with. as none of their cases were children, they postulated that children may be less likely to be infected or have milder symptoms. 4 ruan et al. examined factors associated with increased mortality in 150 patients from wuhan. they collected demographic, clinical and laboratory data and found that age, the presence of comorbidities or secondary infections, and increased cardiac tn, c-reactive protein (crp) and il-6 concentrations were predictors of fatal outcome. 20 the cytokine storm occurs in a subgroup of patients with severe covid-19. this is defined as a hyperinflammatory state characterized by a fulminant and fatal increase in inflammatory cytokines with subsequent multiorgan failure. ferritin concentrations are raised, cytopaenia occurs and approximately half of the patients develop significant pulmonary involvement such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). 21 these findings suggest that in the study by ruan et al., the mortality in the severely ill patients was probably caused by a cytokine storm.a study of 195 covid-19 patients from two hospitals in china, of which one was in wuhan, found that 54 (27.6%) died in hospital. increased risk of inhospital death was associated with older age, organ failure and raised d-dimer levels, and the authors postulated that these could possibly be used on admission to identify patients with a worse prognosis. 3 wang et al. examined the epidemiological, demographic, clinical, laboratory, radiological and treatment data on 138 patients hospitalized with covid-19. they found that 26% of patients needed icu admission and 4.3% died. the median patient age was 56 years and 54.3% were male. older age, comorbidities and abnormal laboratory tests including lymphopaenia, increased d-dimer, increased lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) and prolonged ptt were associated with a worse prognosis. 22 liu et al. performed a small study on only 12 patients in shenzhen china, of which eight were males and seven were older than 60 years. they found that laboratory parameters associated with worse prognosis were decreased albumin concentrations, lymphopaenia and elevated crp and ldh concentrations. they measured angiotensin ii concentrations by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) and found them to be increased. this increased angiotensin ii was associated with a high viral load and lung injury suggesting an imbalanced renin angiotensin system (ras). the authors therefore questioned the possible utility of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) as possible treatment modalities. 23 the first case diagnosed in usa on 20 january 2020 was a young male patient who had travelled to wuhan, china. he never visited the wuhan market or any healthcare facility, and also had no contact with ill people while in the city. the usa's patient zero initially presented with mild symptoms, but progressed to pneumonia on day nine. his laboratory results showed leucopaenia, mild thrombocytopaenia, elevated creatinine and liver enzymes (alkaline phosphatase [alp], alanine transferase [alt], aspartate transferase [ast]). 5 arentz studied 21 critically ill covid-19-infected patients in washington state with a mean age of 70 years, of which 52% were male. seventeen (81%) were admitted to icu, 33% developed cardiomyopathy and the mortality rate was 67%. again, most were elderly patients, and had comorbidities. 24 renin-angiotensin system and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 ras normal physiology and receptors. the ras is an important regulator of blood pressure homeostasis. renin is a protease secreted by the kidney, which cleaves angiotensinogen, a serpin family protein produced by the liver, to inactive angiotensin i. this is then cleaved to the active angiotensin ii by ace which is secreted by the kidneys and lungs and expressed ubiquitously in the vasculature. angiotensin ii binds angiotensin type 1 (at1) receptors and causes vasoconstriction and the secretion of aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone with subsequent renal sodium and water reabsorption and raised blood pressure. 25 when angiotensin ii binds at1 receptor, it leads to an increase in blood pressure as well as inflammation, fibrosis, oxidative stress and vasoconstriction. 26 this is important for the regulation of cardiovascular, haemodynamic, neurological and endothelial functions. 27 receptors of the ras 27,28 ( figure 2 ): a. angiotensin type 1 (at1) was originally thought to be the only receptor of angiotensin ii and its actions are facilitated via this receptor. 29 genetic polymorphisms are associated with hypertension and myocardial infarction. abnormal activation of at1 is associated with cardiovascular disease, inflammation and atherosclerosis, endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress, insulin resistance, cancer and malignant hypertension. at1 receptor blockers (arb) are selective antagonists used to treat hypertension and cardiovascular disorders. b. angiotensin type 2 (at2) has a 34% homology with at1 but low expression in adults. concentrations decrease soon after birth and it is found in low concentrations in the adult cardiovascular system, adrenal glands, kidney, brain, uterine myometrium and skin. upregulation may occur in physiological stressful conditions such as vascular injury, myocardial infarction and cardiac failure. 29 studies in knockout mice demonstrated the development of hypertension. mutation of the receptor is also associated with mental retardation, and it plays a role in antidiuretic and antinatriuretic functions. as it is also found in brain tissue, 28 it was investigated as a possible therapeutic target for neuropathic pain. however, the treatment had poor efficacy and many side effects. c. mas is the receptor for angiotensin (1-7) which is produced by ace2. activation of mas leads to the synthesis of arachidonic acid and activation of nitric oxide (no) synthase. high expression of mas is found in the brain, where it is important for cardiovascular regulation. it was also found to play an important role in testicular function where immunolocalization of angiotensin (1-7), and mas receptors showed impaired spermatogenesis in male infertility. 30 knockout mice present with altered heart rate and decreased blood pressure possibly due to no imbalance and the formation of reactive oxygen species. the protective role of masangiotensin (1-7) has made it a possible drug target. d. angiotensin type 4 (at4) receptor is beyond the scope of this review.a homologue of ace, namely ace2 was identified in 2000. 31 ace2 and ace catalytic domains are 42% identical alluding to two genes from a common ancestor. 31 ace2 is a type i transmembrane metallopeptidase with its enzymatic domain on the external surface of cells. 25, [31] [32] [33] it is involved in regulation of cardiac function and blood pressure control, possibly as a counterpart of ace. 34 ace2 regulates the ras by modulating endogenous concentrations of angiotensin i and angiotensin ii. 25 it cleaves a single residue of angiotensin i to generate angiotensin (1-9) and a single residue of angiotensin ii to generate angiotensin (1-7) ( figure 2 ). it possibly cleaves other substrates such as apelin which has cardioprotective properties, des-arginine bradykinin which promotes inflammation and neurotensin involved in the regulation of luteinizing hormone and prolactin. 26, 31 angiotensin (1-9) can also be converted to angiotensin (1-7) by ace. after binding the mas receptor, angiotensin (1-7) shifts the balance from vasoconstriction with angiotensin ii to vasodilation and gives rise to anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects, increased no synthesis and vasodilation. 26 inactivation of ace2 leads to increased angiotensin ii concentrations and impaired cardiac contractility. 25 although ace2 mrna is found in almost all organs, its protein expression is mainly in the lung (airways and type ii alveolar cells), heart, kidney and intestine. it is also found in oral and nasal mucosa, skin, lymph nodes, thymus, bone marrow, spleen, liver, testis and brain. 13 ace2 has an extracellular domain which is the receptor site for the spike (s) protein of sars-cov-2 to gain entry to the cell. it is specifically in lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes that it plays an important role in the entry of covs. 34 ace2 in enterocytes of the duodenum, jejenum and ileum may explain the virus being found in stool samples and support a possible faeco-oral transmission route. 5, 34 the ace2 receptor in the tongue and oral mucosa may implicate a possible route of transmission in dental practice. 35 in keeping with the observation that male individuals are at higher risk for sars-cov-2 infection, it is important to note that the ace2 gene has been mapped to the x-chromosome. 25 females have two copies of the ace2 gene, and males only have one copy which is a possible theory why males are at higher risk.there are two forms of ace2. the full-length ace2 is found in cell membranes and consists of a transmembrane anchor and an extracellular domain which is the receptor site for the spike (s) protein of sars-cov-2. the second form is a soluble form which is shed into the circulation. this form of ace lacks membrane anchors and circulates in low concentrations. 36 circulating levels do not reflect issue levels. it has been proposed that the soluble form of ace2 may inhibit the binding of sars-cov-2 to membrane-bound ace2 and therefore proposed a soluble recombinant of ace2 as a potential treatment for covid-19. 36when angiotensin ii binds to the at1 receptor, vasoconstriction, inflammation, fibrosis and proliferation follow leading to hypertension, cardiac fibrosis, thrombosis and ards. binding of angiotensin (1-7) to mas receptor leads to vasodilatation, anti-apoptotic, antifibrotic and anti-proliferation activity and a reduction in blood pressure, decreased cardiac fibrosis, decreased thrombosis and decreased ards. 37 when at2 is bound, no is released, which is an anti-inflammatory vasodilator, reduces platelet aggregation and may facilitate the insulin action. 29 therefore, angiotensin ii binding of at1 is an inflammatory mediator via reactive oxygen species (ros) and nuclear factor kappa b (nfkb) and provides a mitogenic stimulus for smooth muscles leading to oxidative stress. this is a common feature of atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and hyperlipidaemia. stimulation of at1 also leads to upregulation of adhesion molecules and interferes with insulin signalling leading to insulin resistance. ace inhibitors and arb therapy were found to decrease circulating crp, and this is thought to be due to decreased angiotensin ii stimulation of at1.disruption of ace2 in mice leads to severe cardiac contractility defects, increased angiotensin ii concentrations and the expression of hypoxia-induced cardiac genes. when ace was also decreased, this cardiac phenotype was rescued. however, loss of ace2 did not affect blood pressure or kidney development in these mice, and it was postulated that ace could potentially compensate for loss of ace2. yet, even when these mice were treated with ace inhibitor, there was a similar reduction in blood pressure as in wild type; therefore, ace2 has no apparent direct effect on blood pressure. 25 a strong association between ras and cardiovascular disease, neurodegenerative disorders and acute lung injury was demonstrated in mice with acid aspiration lung injury. in severe acute lung failure, a significant downregulation of ace2 was noted. the expression of ace was unchanged leading to a marked increase in angiotensin ii, as its formation is upregulated by ace. therefore, ace promotes disease through increased angiotensin ii, and ace-deficient mice were partly protected against acid-induced lung injury. recombinant ace2 and at2 receptor expression protected mice from severe lung disease in this scenario. 38 the inactivation of ace on an ace2 knockout background rescued the mice from severe lung failure. therefore, it was postulated that ace promotes acute lung injury, and ace2 alleviates it. 38 patel and verma found that high pulmonary ace2 concentrations protect against lung injury. 39 the loss of ace2 expression in acute lung injury led to leaky pulmonary blood vessels through at1 receptor stimulation. however, hydrostatic oedema could not be excluded as a causative factor, emphasizing the need for further studies on the local effects of angiotensin ii in lungs. 38 pathology of the ras is associated with pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary fibrosis. 40 angiotensin ii upregulates the expression of profibrotic cytokines leading to pulmonary fibrosis and severe inflammation with increased vascular permeability. treatment with ace inhibitors and arb may attenuate this. 40 animal models of ards found reduced ace2 concentrations, and treatment with exogenous ace2 alleviated the symptoms. 37 further studies found that the loss of ace2 rendered subjects susceptible to heart failure and postulated that increasing ace2 concentrations were cardioprotective. loss of ace2 also led to agedependant cardiomyopathy, pulmonary, cardiac and renal injuries. 33 diabetes mellitus, a major comorbid risk factor in covid-19, is associated with increased ace2 expression. this may explain why patients suffering from diabetes have greater susceptibility to sars infection. 33 ace2 is involved in the possible protective arm of the ras. the ace2/angiotensin (1-7)/mas axis counterbalances the ace/angiotensin ii/at1 axis which is associated with vasoconstriction, inflammation, cell proliferation, hypertrophy, fibrosis and tissue modelling. therefore, ace2 protects against ras-induced injuries by decreasing angiotensin ii and generating angiotensin (1-7), which increases substrate availability of the protective axis. 41 ace2 knockout mice and those on ace2 inhibitors had increased susceptibility to myocardial infarction, hypertension, angiotensin ii-induced myocardial hypertrophy, microvascular complication, inflammation, fibrosis, diastolic and systolic dysfunction and oxidative stress.ace inhibitors block ace and arb block the action of angiotensin ii on ati receptors. both lead to an increased ace2 activity. 42 the drugs may alleviate inflammation, decrease endothelial dysfunction and increase insulin sensitivity. 29 the arbs have more potential to block the ras than acei, as about 40% of angiotensin ii is formed via non-ace pathways in humans. 29 arbs are known to have less sideeffects than ace inhibitors. another area of interest is peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor-gamma (ppar-c). insulin resistance is strongly associated with hypertension. ace2 expression is increased with the use of ppar-c agonists. 26 ppar-c agonists, thiazolidinediones, attenuate the development of hypertension and improve endothelial dysfunction in angiotensin ii-infused rats. 43 these rats had decreased at1 expression; therefore, the effects were most likely mediated through at2 receptor activation. 44 however, ppar-c agonists were shown to increase the risk of congestive heart failure and possibly myocardial infarction.other medications that have an effect on ace2 concentrations include mineralocorticoid antagonists such as the aldosterone receptor antagonist spironolactone, which possibly increases ace2 concentrations in macrophages. this was not the case in the heart tissue of patients suffering from chronic heart failure. 45 statins possibly augment ace expression in heart and kidney tissue, and may also bring about epigenetic changes in ace2 gene, but more work is needed to determine the exact mechanism of these findings. 26 presently, there is still a paucity of evidence on how ace inhibitors or arb may impact the ace2/angiotensin (1-7) pathway in the lung, heart and brain, and ongoing research in this field is needed.human ace2 is a functional receptor essential for cellular entry of covs and is the same receptor used by sars-cov to gain access to cells. 32 kuba et al. provided the first genetic proof that ace2 was a crucial receptor for sars-cov in vivo. 46 when ace2 knockout and wildtype mice were infected with sars-cov, the knockout mice had very low levels of viral replication in their lungs. in the wildtype mice, sars-cov infection was associated with lung failure which was attenuated by treatment blocking the ras. they postulated that sars-cov infection downregulated ace2 concentrations, possibly explaining the decline in lung function observed with viral infection. 46 the spike (s) proteins of covs facilitate viral entry into the target cells by attaching to ace2 as an entry receptor. 32,47 sars-cov-2, like sars-cov, has a viral envelope studded with spikes consisting of glycoproteins made up by two subunits, namely s1 and s2. subunit s1 binds the cell surface bound ace2 and subunit s2 fuses with the cell membrane. 42 the cellular serine protease, tmprss2, is essential for s-protein priming and facilitates viral cell entry. 47 tmprss is expressed on sars-cov target cells. 48 after subunit s1 of the spike binds to membrane bound ace2, tmprss2 activates the spike and cleaves the ace2 receptor. tmprss2 also acts on the s2 subunit, causing an irreversible conformational change facilitating fusion of the viral membrane with the host cell membrane and endocytosis. 13, 47 therefore, both ace2 and tmprss2 are essential for cellular entry. sars-cov-2 binds human ace2 with 10-20-fold higher affinity than sars-cov. 13 this may be due to a more compact virus structure enabling better receptor affinity and enhanced ability to be internalized. figure 3 shows the cellular entry of the sars-cov2.the binding of sars-cov-2 may decrease ace2 concentrations and increase the angiotensin ii to angiotensin (1-7) ratio which may exacerbate pulmonary injury and tissue fibrosis. 26 angiotensin (1-7) may provide resilience from the development of pulmonary failure in covid-19 further supporting this finding. 49 oudit et al. 33 determined that sars-cov infection has a detrimental effect on cardiac function and led to cardiac dysfunction, arrhythmias and death. they measured ace2 concentrations in mice infected with human strain sars-cov and in hearts obtained from autopsy of patients who died from sars infection. they found that sars-cov infection led to a decrease in ace2 expression in the myocardium of mice with subsequent myocardial dysfunction. sars-cov mrna expression was found in 35% of the autopsy heart samples, which was associated with decreased ace2 protein expression. therefore, they postulated that sars-cov leads to cardiac dysfunction by downregulating myocardial ace2, possibly due to a cytokine-mediated downregulation of ace2 mrna. 33 the gastrointestinal system is also not spared from the effects of sars-cov-2 infection. xiao et al. found that ace2 was abundant in the glandular cells of gastric, duodenal and rectal epithelia. 50 hamming et al. described ace2 in the small intestine, further underlining the importance of sars-cov-2 involvement in the gastrointestinal system. 34 an interesting observation is the difference in infection rate and adverse outcomes in adults and children. although there have been reports of less covid-19 infection in children, there is a lack of evidence that ace2 changes with age. 37 a possible hypothesis is that children are less susceptible to covid-19 infection due to cross-protective antibodies from multiple upper respiratory tract infections and that their lower respiratory tracts have less ace2. 49 limited studies and data in children are available, and conclusive evidence to support postulations that children are less likely to be adversely affected by sars-cov-2 infection is lacking.it is clear from statistical data that older people, especially men are more affected by covid-19. increased ace2 have been described in older individuals and in males, 52 which could possibly be linked to the worse outcome in this population group.as yet, there is no evidence of causal relationship between ace2 activity and sars-cov-2 mortality. also, ace2 concentrations do not correlate with the degree of disease severity. 53 activation of the ras is associated with endothelial dysfunction and multiple organ injuries; therefore, theoretically, treatment focusing on manipulation and control of this system may be beneficial. 37 covid-19-infected patients have a worse prognosis when they suffer from comorbidities, especially cardiovascular. ras inhibitors have been shown to have a protective effect on the kidney and myocardium, and it may therefore be dangerous to withdraw treatment in these patients. a higher risk of relapse in patients with cardiovascular or renal disease has also been demonstrated. 54 angiotensin ii concentrations were found to be increased in covid-19 infection and positively correlated with viral load and lung injury. 23 increased ace2 concentrations may possibly lead to a greater susceptibility for covid-19 infection but may also be cardioprotective. this led to a crossroad in clinical decision-making: ras blocking treatment may increase ace2 and facilitate virus entry, but the beneficial effects it has in patients suffering from comorbid conditions cannot be ignored.a lot can be learned from studies involving other respiratory viruses where the use of ace2-lowering treatment was investigated. a study on patients with novel influenza a (h7n9), a virus of avian origin from eastern china in 2013, found that more than 70% developed ards and had a high mortality. patients with markedly elevated angiotensin ii concentrations had poorer disease outcome with a predictive value higher than crp. the authors speculated that recombinant ace2 and angiotensin ii-lowering treatment such as ace inhibitors and arb could be beneficial. 51 avian influenza a (h5n1) primarily infects poultry and birds, but since 2003 has also been infecting humans. increased angiotensin ii and downregulation of ace2 was linked to infection severity and mortality. when mice infected with h5n1 were given recombinant ace2, the virus-induced lung injury was ameliorated. 55 the use of intravenous ace inhibitors and arb in experimental animals increases ace2 expression in the cardiopulmonary circulation systems, causing a possible increased risk for sars-cov-2 infection. 56 severe covid-19 outcomes were described in patients with existing hypertension, coronary artery disease, diabetes and chronic kidney disease. 57 the question was asked whether their current treatment regimens were increasing their risk for infection.theoretically, if ace2 activity in cell membranes decreased, it should reduce the ability of sars-cov-2 to enter cells. but, this also decreases the protective effects of ace2 in various organ systems where ace2 is expressed. angiotensin ii may contribute to organ damage in covid-19, 58 and concentrations were found to correlate with viral load and lung injury. 23 downregulation of ace2 in the lung tissue may facilitate neutrophil infiltration, leading to angiotensin ii accumulation and ras activation. 54 when covid-19 binds ace2 and enters the cell, the expression of ace2 is downregulated. this downregulation essentially 'removes the brakes' from angiotensin ii and possibly induces local activation of immune cells. in lungs, decreased ace2 in alveolar type ii cells leads to surfactant deficit and the development of lung injury. 59 although an increase of ace2 may lead to higher cell infection rates and proliferation of the virus, it may be beneficial in patients with lung injury and withdrawal may be harmful especially in high-risk patients. 54 in a study on acid-induced lung injury in mice, ace2 downregulation by sars-cov worsened lung injury. the induced lung injury improved with the use of arbs, and the findings are suggestive that sars-cov exacerbates lung injury by decreasing ace2, and that it is also reversible by arbs. 46 an increase in ace2 in heart tissue may be cardioprotective. therefore, sars-cov-2 could possibly influence the fine balance between angiotensin ii and angiotensin (1-7), whereas treatment could block ras and protect the heart and other organs. 37 cardiac tissue function may be compromised by the increase in angiotensin ii to angiotensin (1-7) ratio. loss of ace2 in the central nervous system, specifically the brain stem cardiovascular centre, may cause an increased sympathetic drive, changes in baroreflex and worsening of hypertension. 26 loss of ace2 in the vasculature can contribute to endothelial dysfunction and inflammation and exacerbate existing atherosclerosis and diabetes.there have been concerns that increased ace2 expression in heart, brain and urine after treatment with arb may increase an individual's risk of infection, but very little evidence is available showing significant changes in serum of pulmonary ace2 concentrations. however, the significance of ace2 expression and its effect on covid-19 pathogenesis and mortality are uncertain. 39 therefore, do the benefits outweigh the risks? a joint statement issued on 17 march 2020 found that no experimental or clinical evidence demonstrating beneficial or adverse outcomes in covid-19 patients using ace inhibitors or arb was available and that urgent additional research is needed. it stated that treatment should not be discontinued if patients become infected with sars-cov-2. 60 potential covid-19 treatment involving ace2 system since the early stages of the covid-19 pandemic, emphasis has been on finding possible treatment modalities. a number of possible treatment targets were identified with most based on previous studies conducted on sars-cov, specifically involving the ace2/angiotensin (1-7) pathway.decreasing ace2. downregulation of ace2 was proposed as a possible treatment to reduce susceptibility to covid-19 infection. however, the ensuing relatively unopposed action of angiotensin ii could lead to worsening hypertension, inflammation, thrombosis and adverse lung and cardiac outcome. 41 a study by kuba et al. determined that infection with sars-cov downregulates the expression of ace2. these low ace2 concentrations were associated with lung oedema and acute lung injury, which contributed to the severe lung pathology in patients already on ace inhibitors at the time of sars-cov infection. they concluded that modulating ras may therefore be useful in treating infection. 46 some studies also questioned the use of anti-ace2 antibodies to inhibit viral replication of sars-cov. these could possibly inhibit virus-induced cytopathicity in a dose-dependent manner. 32 increasing ace2. trials are underway to evaluate the safety and efficacy of recombinant human ace2 and the arb losartan in covid-19-infected patients.infusion of recombinant human ace2 may act as a decoy to interfere with viral replication. soluble ace2 could potentially bind sars-cov and thereby prevent the binding of the viral spike protein to full length membrane-bound ace2 36 reducing viral infection of cells. 36 recombinant ace2 was shown to reverse lung injury in sars-cov-infected patients. 55 wang et al. found that ace inhibitors and arb offer partial cardiovascular protection by increasing ace2, and that iv recombinant ace2 may be beneficial in preventing pulmonary arterial hypertension and acute lung injury. 41 however, circulating ace2 concentrations are usually very low to undetectable and do not accurately represent the amount of membrane-bound ace2 and would not be sufficient to sequester sars-cov-2 in the circulation. 26 a proposed clinical trial with recombinant ace2 was withdrawn due to the unknown effects and the possibility of the drug inducing significant hypotension. 26 ace2 interaction with sars-cov is important in the development of sars-associated cardiomyopathy, as viral rna was found in the myocardium on postmortem examination. the associated cardiac injury due to reduced expression of ace2 possibly played a major role in the morbidity and mortality of patients infected with sars-cov. recombinant ace2 was found to normalize angiotensin ii concentrations, suggesting that it may be beneficial to prevent organ damage caused by sars-cov. the question thus arose if it is possible and beneficial to balance ras control to reduce infection and prevent organ damage in covid-19-infected patients. 33 targeting tmprss2. protease inhibitors against tmprss2 block viral entry in vitro by inhibiting the entry of sars-cov-2 into cells. 47 camostat mesylate, a serine protease inhibitor used in japan to treat chronic pancreatitis, inhibits tmprss2 and can block entry of sars-cov-2 into bronchial epithelial cells in vitro. 47, 48 angiotensin ii. many patients with severe covid-19 infection admitted to icu are in septic shock. as most angiotensin i to angiotensin ii conversion by ace occurs in the lungs, significant lung injury may decrease this. decreased ace function was found to be a predictor of mortality. angiotensin ii, a novel vasopressor agent, may be beneficial in this patient population.strategies to decrease ace2 may possibly attenuate sars-cov-2 infectivity. this may happen in a number of ways. firstly, endogenous angiotensin ii theoretically prevents infection by binding the ace2 during its degradation and therefore may compete with sars-cov-2 to bind to the receptor. secondly, binding of angiotensin ii to at1 causes internalization and downregulation of ace2. and lastly, angiotensin ii causes at1-dependent destruction of ace2 further decreasing the virus' ability to enter cells. angiotensin ii is not yet available for use commercially, but due to the number of critically ill patients, and the promising outcome of the drug, it has been made available for compassionate use in italy, germany and uk. 61 angiotensin (1-7) . another focus area is the use of angiotensin (1-7) as a novel treatment for covid-19. 26 experimental studies found that angiotensin (1-7) reduced the acute inflammatory response and subsequent fibrosis in acid-induced ards in mice. 62 angiotensin (1-7) protected the lung against inflammation and fibrosis, inhibited alveolar cell apoptosis, attenuated endothelial cell activation, loss of barrier function and oedema, and decreased synthesis of proinflammatory and pro-fibrotic cytokines. the authors therefore recommended that the concentrations of angiotensin (1-7) should be increased to protect covid-19-infected patients. 62 the effects of ace2 on covid-19 infections need to be further evaluated and randomized control trials are necessary to obtain the highest level of evidence. although ace2 has beneficial effects by regulating the protective arm of ras, some authors postulate that high levels make patients more susceptible to covid-19 infection. the ras has numerous attractive therapy targets for covid19 infection. trials are needed to evaluate the use of ace inhibitors and arb's in covid-19 patients.the coronaviridae family comprises viruses with genetic heterogeneity that allow differentiation in four genera: α-coronavirus, β-coronavirus, γ-coronavirus, and δ-coronavirus. sars-cov-2, a novel virus belonging to the coronavirus family is causing the ongoing global pandemic. the coronavirus rna genome (ranging from 26 to 32 kilobases in length) is the widest among all rna viruses with a degree of variability.although several coronaviruses are potentially pathogenic for humans, most produce minimally symptomatic disease [1] . however, in 2002 and 2012 the outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) respectively, resulted in relevant morbidity and mortality due to acute respiratory failure (arf) [2, 3] .an epidemic of respiratory disease caused by sars coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) began in china and has spread to other countries. the novel coronavirus was originally named 2019-ncov and subsequently sars-cov-2 by world health organization (who). the virus is a β-coronavirus belonging to the subgenus botulinum of coronaviridae, and it is responsible for a zoonotic disease (coronavirus disease 2019 or which target airways and may severely involve lung airspaces [4] . when lung parenchyma is affected, in addition to fever, symptoms include dry cough, dyspnoea and, in more serious cases, potentially fatal arf [5] . mechanisms by which older age and underlying medical conditions negatively impact acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and concurrent cytokine storm require to be understood.the sars-cov-2 is a single-strand positive-sense rna genome identified by high-throughput sequencing and released through virolo gical.org. the virus was originally discovered in humans. the animal reservoir remains unclear although growing data support that sars-cov-2 was a chimeric virus with high grade of affinity for genetic information of a bat coronavirus and elevated similarity in codon usage bias with snake [6] . also the intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2 remain undetermined.the interaction between viruses and host cells at entry site is crucial for disease onset and progression. in influenza a (h1n1), based on evidence in swine model, receptor binding domain on the host cells may also be used by intracellular bacteria both favouring the infection and enhancing the burden of symptoms [7] . for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 the virus tropism for the respiratory system is sustained by the attachment to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ace2 is a membrane-anchored carboxypeptidase highly expressed by airway epithelial and type i and ii alveolar epithelial cells, found to be the virus cell entry receptor previously during sars-cov outbreak [8] .focus of this review is to dissect the knowledge on ace2 receptor on airway and lung epithelium and attempt to understand whether underlying diseases or therapies are able to modulate expression affecting sars-cov-2 cell entry and infectivity.a large spike (s) protein that forms homotrimers protruding from the viral surface mediates coronaviruses attachment and adhesion to human target cells. in most avian and mammalian coronaviruses, s protein is cleaved into two smaller proteins although this has not been reported in sars-cov. however, two different functional regions have been described, s1 and s2 [9] .the s1 subunit consists of four core domains, s1a to s1d. the distal s1 domain mediates receptor association and stabilization, whereas the s2 domain promotes structural rearrangements and finally membrane fusion. coronaviruses use different regions of s1 domain to interact with specific binding receptors.acetylated sialoside attachment receptors expressed by glycoproteins and glycolipids on the host cell are the target of endemic human coronaviruses oc43 and hku1 while non-acetylated sialoside attachment receptors bind the a domain (sa) of mers-cov. for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, a small fragment of the s1 region, receptor binding domain (rbd), is necessary for binding to the peptidase domain of ace2. this represents the critical site for virus/host cell interaction [10] .sars-cov-2 has low homology to s-protein of sars-cov with patches of sequences in the rbd domain. walls et al. reported that sars-cov-2 s-protein has a boundary between the s1 and s2 subunits site presumably due to furin cleavage in the golgi compartment [11] .in particular, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 present more conserved s2 fusion machinery than the s1 subunit with the highest divergence found within sa and sb [12] . these changes in sars-cov-2 result in a functional advantage as the ectodomain s attaches to ace2 with ~15 nm affinity, which is approximately 10-to 20-fold higher than that of sars-cov [13] these findings have been proposed as the rationale for elucidating the efficient transmission of sars-cov-2 in humans.ace2 expression is widely represented in type ii lung alveolar cells, oesophageal epithelial cells, enterocytes, cholangiocytes, myocardial cells, kidney proximal tubule cells, and bladder urothelial cells [14] .single-nucleotide ace2 polymorphisms are not associated with sars susceptibility or outcomes [15] . furthermore, in experimental models, the binding of the s protein to ace2 is not altered by the addition of a specific ace2 inhibitor, confirming the inability of this inhibitor to block sars infection [16] . conversely, sars-cov2 s-mediated entry into target was enabled in mice immunized with a stabilized sars-cov s-protein.these data support a role for sars-cov neutralizing antibodies in preventing receptor engagement [12] . while ace2 has been extensively discussed as receptor for entry into the host alveolar cell, in a murine ards model ace2 protected lungs from severe acute injury [17, 18] . impaired tissue repair mechanisms, increased vascular permeability, fluid accumulation in extra-alveolar spaces and oxidant/antioxidant imbalance have been described in relation to ace2 deficiency [19] [20] [21] . after attachment and virion membrane fusion, ace2 expression is downregulated resulting in excessive production of angiotensin (ang) enhancing oxidative stress mechanisms [22] in contrast to what happens during other viral infections.sars-cov-2 internalization is promoted through hemagglutinin cleavage operated by the transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2), a cell-surface protein expressed by epithelial cells within the airway and alveolar spaces [8, 23] . viral priming mechanisms, tmprss2 dependent, were demonstrated during previous coronaviruses and influenza a h1n1 outbreaks [8, 24, 25] (fig. 1) . tmprss2 involvement in sars-cov-2 is currently under investigation based on in vitro data of camostat mesylate, an inhibitor of the protease activity of tmprss2, demonstrating sars-cov-2 entry cell inhibition [8] . a phase i/ii study with camostat mesylate (nct04321096) and a phase ii/iii study with nafamostat, an extremely potent tmprss2 inhibitor, (nct04352400) are ongoing [26, 27] . preliminary results are expected by 2021.ace is a type 1 transmembrane monomeric glycoprotein expressed in lungs, intestine, kidneys, brain, aorta, and adrenal medulla; it cleaves two amino acids from ang i to produce ang ii. ace2 conversely cleaves single amino acid from ang ii to generate ang-(1-7) [28] .in human lungs, elevated ang ii/ang-(1-7) ratio favours vascular permeability and extra-alveolar fluid accumulation. conversely, elevated levels of ang-(1-7) though mas receptor (mas1) activation, which is widely present on endothelial cells, exert vasodilatory, antiinflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects [29] . most importantly, ace2 differs from ace for not being inhibited by ace inhibitors (ace-i) [30] .in a rat model, ace2 mrna expression is significantly reduced in copd rat lung compared to wild type animals [31] . likewise, ace2 overexpression through intratracheal injection of ad-ace2 significantly attenuated the lung function deteriorations and pathological manifestations of copd, supporting a pathogenetic ace/ace2 imbalance in copd [32] . similarly, an increment in ace/ace2 ratio has been reported in the murine model of asthma. however, administration of ace2 activator counteracts the cytokine storm (il-1β, il-4, nf-κb, bcl2, p-akt, p-p38) in asthmatic rat model [33] .to an uncertain extent, smoking may play a role in ace2 modulation. lungs from rats chronically exposed to cigarette smoke exhibited significant reduction in ace2 expression as well as an increase of ace. based on data independently reported by guan et al. [34] and zhang et al. [35] , incidence of sars-cov-2 appears to be lower in patient with smoking history. by contrast, smoking seems to be associated with adverse outcome. these mechanisms need to be fully explored.previous data highlighted that viral infections might amplify local inflammation in chronic respiratory conditions. in atopic subjects, hrv and allergen exposure singularly increased icam-1 expression resulting in migration of immune effector cells into the airways [36] . conversely, in sars-cov2 infection, the presence of comorbid chronic respiratory disorders is not associated with enhanced risk for developing infection compared to other common clinical conditions. however, covid could evolve in more severe clinical outcomes in copd subjects [34] .however, it is recognised that a down regulation of ace2 following infection does promote lung injury [19] . in lung, reduced ace2 levels prompt reduce ang-(1-7) levels, which promotes protective tissues regeneration and reduces reactive oxygen species (ros) [28, 32] . covid covid-19 exhibits more severe clinical course in patients with hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetes [35, 37] . renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors are the cornerstone of therapy of many cardiovascular and renal diseases. these drugs are widely used for reducing blood pressure in hypertensive patients. experimental and clinical models show different responses from administration of agents interfering with this regulatory axis: angiotensin-receptor blockers (arb) and mineralocorticoid-receptor blockers seem to increase the levels of ace2 gene expression and cardiac ace2 activity [38, 39] , whereas ace-i are associated with elevated cardiac ace2 activity but not cardiac ace2 mrna [40] . an early study documented increased cardiac ace2 expression after myocardial infarction in rats treated with agents blocking the ang ii receptors when compared to placebo [41] . similarly, higher urinary ace2 levels were observed in hypertensive patients treated with olmesartan, an ang ii type 1 (at1) receptor antagonist [42] . furthermore, administration of losartan, another at1 receptor antagonist, counterbalanced smoke-induced decrease of ace2 and restored to some extent the ace/ace2 ratio in the lung [43] .in a small cohort study, levels of ang ii were found markedly increased in covid-19 plasma samples [44] . these results are in accordance with previous studies which reported high ang ii levels in mice infected with sars [17] and with experiments in h7n9 viruses showing that ang ii levels were related to worse clinical outcomes [45] .ras may represent a double-edged sword. its positive impact in upregulating ace2 has been demonstrated [41] , suggesting a potential role against lung damage in sars-cov-2 infected patients [22] . however, risk of increase susceptibility to infection linked to ace2 upregulation due to ras inhibitors remains uncertain and needs to be clarified. fang et al. based on higher prevalence of hypertension, diabetes mellitus and chronic cardiovascular diseases among patients who died from covid-19 postulated that ace-i or arbs might favour severe disease progression [46] . however, more recently, in a multicentre retrospective study including 1,128 covid-19 inpatients with hypertension, the use of ace-i/arbs was associated with lower all-cause mortality (adjusted hr, 0.42; 95% ci, 0.19-0.92; p ¼ 0.03) and septic shock (adjusted hr, 0.36; 95% ci, 0.16-0.84; p ¼ 0.01) compared with ace-i/arb non-use. unfortunately, the study was not designed to detect differences between ace-i and arbs and overall the patient number in ace-i/arb group was limited (188/1128; 16.6%) [47] . these data support the statements of european society of cardiology [48] , american heart association, the heart failure society of america and the american college of cardiology [49] , international society of hypertension [50] , italian society of pharmacology [51] and european society of hypertension [52] that recommend against ace-i or sartans discontinuation in light of the current evidences.however, a recent comment by phadke et al. [53] , based on unpublished observational data, supports the use of losartan or telmisartan, which block at1 receptor more avidly than valsartan, to potentially prevent the virus spread.finally, data about non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) are still far from being clarified. earlier evidences in rat models suggest that ibuprofen and thiazolidinediones may upregulate ace2 expression [54] [55] [56] . it has yet to be established whether these observations may objectively influence the clinical scenario in patients with sars-cov-2 infection.there is sufficient evidence to support the concept that one of the main battles in the war on covid will be played at the level of ace2, the receptor for viral cell entry. in healthy individuals, ace2 promotes lung homeostasis through the production of ang-(1-7). in chronic respiratory conditions, ace2 down-regulation may prevent sars-cov-2 host cell interaction. however, patients with pre-existing copd who are infected with sars-cov-2 may experience poor clinical outcomes most likely due to reduced respiratory reserve.data on ace2 modulation from ras inhibitors is inconclusive. whilst subjects chronically exposed to these agents appear to have hypothetically higher availability of cell receptors within lung, it remains uncertain whether this may influence the susceptibility to developing sars-cov-2 infection. however, ace2 upregulation may also result in enhanced host defence mechanisms that counteract ace2 virus-induced downregulation.dissecting the pathways of the major cell receptor for sars-cov-2 will let us understand both the mechanisms of viral induced direct lung injury and the effects of perturbation of ace2 on their function. manipulation of ace2 receptor expression and its implication on viral cell entry has the potential to be a major target for therapy.patients with diabetes who get coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) are at risk of a severe disease course and mortality. several factors especially the impaired immune response, heightened inflammatory response and hypercoagulable state contribute to the increased disease severity. however, there are many contentious issues about which the evidence is rather limited. there are some theoretical concerns about the effects of different anti-hyperglycaemic drugs. similarly, despite the recognition of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as the receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars cov-2), and the role of ace2 in lung injury; there are conflicting results with the use of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arb) in these patients. management of patients with diabetes in times of restrictions on mobility poses some challenges and novel approaches like telemedicine can be useful. there is a need to further study the natural course of covid-19 in patients with diabetes and to understand the individual, regional and ethnic variations in disease prevalence and course.diabetes and covid-19: evidence, current status and unanswered research questions.the high prevalence of diabetes globally makes it a frequent comorbidity in patients with coronavirus-associated disease 2019 . though diabetes increases the risk of infection in general, most studies have reported prevalence of diabetes almost similar to that in general population in patients with covid-19. a meta-analysis of eight trials in china showed that diabetes was present in 8% of 46,248 patients with covid-19 [1] . understandably, prevalence of diabetes in patients with covid-19 varies by region, age and ethnicity. it is not known whether patients with diabetes with well-controlled blood glucose levels have an increased risk of infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars cov-2).patients with diabetes who develop covid-19 have been seen to have a worse prognosis and increased mortality in most studies. in 201 chinese patients with diabetes a hazard ratio of 2.34 (95% ci, 1.35-4.05; p = 0.002) for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [2] has been reported. further, meta-analysis of nine studies from china (n = 1936) showed a significant correlation between severity of covid-19 and diabetes (or, 2.67, 95% ci; 1.91-3.74; p < 0.01) [3] . similarly, case fatality rate was 7.3% in patients with diabetes as opposed to 2.3% in those without diabetes in a report of 44,672 patients of covid-19 by chinese centre for disease control [4] . a recent study in 1122 patients with covid-19 in 88 centres across the usa found diabetes to be associated with more than fourfold increase in mortality [5] .how diabetes increases severity of covid-19 is unclear, though several factors may be responsible (table 1) . poor glycaemic control impairs several aspects of the innate and adaptive immune response to viral infections and to the potential secondary bacterial infection in the lungs [6, 7] . defects in immunity namely inappropriate t-cell action, impaired natural killer cell activity and defects in complement action could reduce viral clearance [8] . interestingly, ards in patients with covid-19 is driven by severe hypoxaemia despite relatively well-preserved lung mechanics. pre-existing proinflammatory state could accentuate the cytokine storm, which is believed to be responsible for ards as well as multi-organ dysfunction in covid-19 [9] . in this context, it is important to note that there is strong association between type 2 diabetes, obesity and abnormal secretion of adipokines and cytokines like tnf-alfa and interferon, which may further impair immunity and predispose to severe infection [10] . further, diabetes is associated with increased plasminogen levels which has been postulated to increase the virulence of sars cov-2 [11] . presence of these inflammation and prothrombotic factors has been shown in a study in 174 patients hospitalised with covid-19 in wuhan, china; significantly higher serum levels of interleukein 6, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, creactive protein, ferritin, fibrinogen and d-dimer were reported in patients with diabetes compared with those without diabetes [12] . increased viral replication in diabetes may also due to an increase in furin, which is a type-1 membranebound protease involved in the entry of coronaviruses into the cell [13] . in addition, pre-existing comorbidities associated with diabetes like hypertension, coronary artery disease and chronic kidney disease further worsen the prognosis. lastly, hypoglycaemia which could occur during treatment of diabetes may additionally worsen the clinical outcomes.in this respect role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor in pathogenesis of covid-19 in patients with diabetes is intriguing. sars cov-2 enters the cell by binding to ace2, a process which involves many steps and several enzymes and proteins [14] . there is experimental evidence for downregulation of ace2 in diabetes [15] , which may predispose to more severe lung injury. on the other hand, ace2 is a receptor for sars cov-2 and this downregulation might reduce the entry of virus into cells. these issues are further discussed below in context of use of anti-hyperglycemic and anti-hypertensive drugs.the precise effect of treatment with various oral antihyperglycaemic agents on the severity of covid-19 is not known, though there are some theoretical considerations. metformin has shown modest benefits in lower respiratory tract infections and pulmonary tuberculosis [16] , though gastrointestinal tolerability in sick patients is of concern. thiazolidinediones have been shown to increase ace2 levels [17] . however, propensity of thiazolidinediones to cause fluid retention and the risk of congestive heart failure in covid-19 would make these agents unfavourable for treatment. glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists have has been shown to increase ace2 and increase surfactant in experimental animals [18] . practical significance of changes in ace2 levels with use of thiazolidinediones and glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists is not known. sulfonylureas are effective, but the risk of hypoglycaemia especially in the setting of irregular meals might preclude their use. nevertheless, sulfonylureas can be considered whenever blood glucose monitoring is possible.there is some data regarding use of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) inhibitors from previous viral epidemics. dpp4 is the prime receptor for middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus responsible for its entry into cell [19] . hence the possibility of dpp4 facilitating the entry of sars cov-2 into the cell cannot be ruled out. in that context, it is an interesting postulation that widespread use of dpp4 inhibitors in india and many other countries might be protecting individuals with diabetes from this infection. on the other hand, dpp4 inhibitors can potentially interfere with immune response which may be harmful, but clinical data from dpp4 inhibitors has shown that this is generally not the case [20] .there is increasing use of sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (sglt-2) inhibitors worldwide and in india. interestingly, sglt-2 inhibitors could also activate ace2 indirectly especially if used along with ace inhibitors [21] . there is a hypothetical possibility of sglt-2 inhibitors reducing lactate production because of reduction in oxygen demand of tissues, which could reduce viral entry by raising cytosolic ph [22] . further, caution about dehydration and the possibility of euglycaemic ketoacidosis need to be observed when using sglt-2 inhibitors in sick patients with covid-19. insulin has also been shown to increase ace2 expression by attenuating the effect of a disintegrin and metalloprotease (adam-17) [23] . practical relevance of these findings is not known at present. in any case, insulin thus, it appears safe to continue the usual antihyperglycemic medications in most patients who have mild infection, good general condition and normal oral intake. however, sglt-2 inhibitors might need discontinuation due to the risk of dehydration and euglycaemic ketoacidosis. metformin may also need to be stopped if there is vomiting or poor oral intake. doses of other antihyperglyacemic drugs like sulfonylureas and insulin may have to be altered depending upon the blood glucose levels. hospitalised patients especially those requiring intensive care would need insulin for glycaemic control.angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors/ angiotensin receptor blockers (arb)these are commonly used drugs in patients with diabetes, especially in those with hypertension and kidney dysfunction. there have been a lot of literature and debate whether these drugs could benefit or harm patients having covid-19 infection. this issue is discussed below.scientific experimental data that support potential harm duet to ace inhibitors/arb in covid-19there has been a lot of interest in ace inhibitors and arbs following the identification of ace2 as the receptor for sars cov-2. ace inhibitors and arbs increase the levels of ace2 by inhibiting the conversion of angiotensin 1 to angiotensin 2. increased ace2 expression could theoretically increase viral binding and entry into cell, though there is no clinical evidence to support this otherwise attractive hypothesis. reduced angiotensin 2 as a result of ace inhibition and increased angiotensin 1-7 as a result of increased activity of ace2 could reduce the cytosolic ph, which could result in more favourable environment for viral endocytosis [24] . also, angiotensin 1-7 has been shown to increase sympathetic activity by acting on mas receptors in the brainstem, which could contribute to cardiovascular morbidity observed in these patients [25] . however, most of these concerns are hypothetical with minimal evidence.scientific experimental data that support benefit due to ace inhibitors/arb in covid-19increased ace2 might not result in increased viral entry because of the limited availability of the serine protease tmprss2, which is required for viral binding [20] . increased ace2 and consequently angiotensin 1-7 have vasodilatory and antifibrotic effects and have been shown to be protective against lung injury in animals [26] . treatment with arbs was reported to reduce mortality in ebola virus infection [27] . previously, a small study in ten patients with ards showed that recombinant ace2 was well tolerated and led to an increase in angiotensin (1-7) levels [28] .(1) there are no controlled studies on the use of ace inhibitors and arbs in patients with covid-19. (2) the clinical evidence is inconclusive. while one study in china did not find any association of ace inhibitor use with severity of disease, there was an increased mortality in patients with covid-19 receiving ace inhibitors and arbs in another study [29, 30] . one study in the usa did not find any significant difference in mortality in patients who received ace inhibitors and arbs and those who did not [31] . in this subject situation is far from clear and there are too many unknown factors, which might be operative in the interaction between ace2, diabetes, ace inhibitors/arbs and lung injury. the lack of evidence for either benefit or harm has prompted european society of cardiology council on hypertension, european society of hypertension and american heart association to advise continuing with ace inhibitors and arbs in case a patient develops covid-19 [35] . a clinical trial is underway to study the arb losartan and recombinant human ace2 in patients with covid-19.there have been several commentaries on the relationship between diabetes and covid-19 [36] . however, several unanswered questions remain, about which the knowledge and information is limited. clearly, further research could lead to important insights ( table 2) . some of these are discussed below.(1) what is the natural history of covid-19 in patients with diabetes? the natural course of the disease after infection of patients with diabetes with sars cov-2 has not been documented well. for example, we don't know if the incubation period is different in people with diabetes. it is also possible those patients of diabetes who are young, have short duration of diabetes, and well controlled may have less severe covid-19 infection. there is a possibility of reduced viral clearance in diabetes as has been reported in patients who are on corticosteroids [37] . this could have public health implications as the patients with diabetes could remain infectious for a longer period than those without diabetes. a. chloroquine has also been licensed for use in india for patients with type 2 diabetes. although the efficacy of chloroquine is not proven; it has been used in patients with covid-19 [38] . chloroquine has a weak anti-hyperglycaemic effect and there is a theoretical risk of hypoglycaemia when used in combination with other antihyperglycaemic drugs. b. corticosteroids, though neither effective nor recommended, are frequently used in ards and sepsis and would worsen glycemic levels.(3) covid-19 and pancreatic beta cells: there is significant expression of ace2 receptors in pancreatic islets and hyperglycaemia lasting up to 3 years has been reported in patients with sars [39] . direct injury to beta cells is a possibility and patients recovering from covid-19 might need major changes in anti-hyperglycaemic regimen. recently, new-onset diabetes has been reported in patients with covid-19 [11] . (4) suboptimal lifestyle measures and other issues during lockdown:a. there are restrictions on movement of people and 'lockdowns' in several parts of the world in order to contain the pandemic. this poses some challenges in the evaluation and treatment of patients with diabetes. there are limited opportunities for exercise as regular walks and visits to gyms or swimming pools are not possible. dietary irregularity could occur because of staying at home. b. there is considerable mental stress because of the unpredictability of the disease as well as social immobility as brought out in an excellent study in healthy people in china at the time when there was a huge burden of covid-19 there [40] . c. patients may find it difficult to procure healthy foods, medicines, insulin, needles and glucose strips etc. because of partial or complete lockdowns. the problem becomes more pronounced with elderly, poor and disadvantaged sections of society. d. there could be underreporting of symptoms because of the perceived need to avoid visiting hospitals.all these factors could cause glucose dysregulation and could predispose patients to complications like infections, hyperosmolar coma, ketoacidosis and even acute cardiac events. a prediction model of the effect of lockdown in india on blood glucose showed a 3.6% increase in hba1c at the end of 45 days of lockdown and future increase in diabetes-related complications [41] . (1) are people with well-controlled diabetes at higher risk of getting covid-19 infection than non-diabetic individuals?(2) is there any effect of obesity on the severity of covid-19 in people with diabetes?(3) is there any specific diet or supplement which could help patients of diabetes and covid-19?(4) what is the role of renin angiotensin aldosterone system (raas) and inhibitors of raas in determining the predisposition to covid-19 and its severity? (5) use of remote education and advice: telemedicine (also emails, texts) can be very helpful in these times to impart education and has been shown to improve glycaemia. telemedicine guidelines for physicians in india have been published [42] . patients need to be educated about the need to visit the hospital urgently in emergency situations like vomiting, drowsiness, shortness of breath, chest pain, weakness of limbs, altered sensorium, etc [43] . (6) covid-19 testing for all patients with diabetes?given the increased severity of covid-19 in patients with diabetes, a case could be made for testing of all people with diabetes for the presence of disease. that would be a humongous task considering the high prevalence of diabetes. high-risk groups like those with high hba1c, those with comorbidities, long duration of diabetes or elderly could be chosen for testing, however, utility of this approach remains to be proven, there are frequent false negative tests and repeated testing may be required in asymptomatic individuals. since there is no treatment currently recommended for asymptomatic people, therefore apart from isolating them, detecting these patients might not prove meaningful clinically. (7) ethnic variations in severity of covi19 in patients with diabetes? in the united states, the disease has caused disproportionately more fatalities in blacks and asians compared with whites [44] . south asia, africa and korea have seen much lower mortality than rest of the world. whether it is because of the different approaches topublic health measures, innate immunity or due to some ethnicity-specific variability in response to viral infection, or availability of good medical resources, remains to be studied. interactions between ethnicity, diabetes and severity of covid-19 will be of interest, considering the racial disparities in the prevalence of diabetes. according to a recent report, prevalence of covid-19 and mortality due to the disease correlated significantly with frequency of d allele in ace gene [45] . such polymorphisms in ace gene as well as several other genes involved in the pathophysiology of covid-19 might be responsible for individual and ethnic variations in disease course. (8) benefits of lockdown? there could be some positive effects of the social restrictions.a. patients have more time for self-care and could pay more attention to diet and exercise if motivated. b. some people have stopped or reduced alcohol and smoking because of non-availability. c. there has been significant fall in air pollution as a result of reduced industrial and vehicular emissions [46] . increase in blood glucose has been reported with short-term rise in pm 10 (particulate matter <10 microns in diameter) and glycaemic improvement could occur with the fall in pollution [47] .in view of the issues highlighted above, it is important to recognise the importance of diabetes as a vital comorbidity in patients with covid-19. there are several contentious issues and the ongoing research will hopefully shed more light on the behaviour of covid-19 in patients with diabetes.author contributions rg and am planned the outline of manuscript. rg reviewed the literature and wrote the manuscript. rg, am and ah edited the manuscript.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) causes coronavirus disease , a potentially fatal disease that is of immense global public health concern. the initial cases were reported in december 2019 in wuhan, china [1] . since then, there have been 3,041,764 confirmed covid-19 patients in the world as of april 27th ,2020 with a total of 211,167 deaths. the united states has the maximum number (988,189) of confirmed cases with a total of 56,259 deaths. most cases were diagnosed in new york (291,996) with a total of 22,668 deaths [2] .several studies, including a recent meta-analysis have reported that coexisting conditions, including hypertension, cardiac diseases, cerebrovascular diseases and diabetes were common among patients with covid-19 who had severe illness, got admitted to the intensive care unit (icu), received mechanical ventilation, or died than among patients who had mild illness [3, 4] .notably, the most frequent comorbidities reported in these studies of patients with covid-19, especially hypertension is often treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arb) [5] . this could theoretically result in an upregulation of ace2 in the epithelial cells of the lung, intestine, kidney, and blood vessels, which is an active binding target for sars-cov-2 virus [6] .although this raised concerns regarding the use of these drugs in covid-19 patients, several animal studies presented conflicting findings regarding increased ace2 expression due to acei and arb in animal studies and the previous human studies suggested that administration of acei/arbs does not increase ace2 expression [7] . in light of these findings and a paucity of clinical outcome studies, many professional cardiovascular and hypertension societies including the italian society of pharmacology, international society of hypertension (ish), european society of hypertension, joint american heart association/american college of cardiology/american heart failure association and others recommended the continued use of acei/arbs in covid-19 patients [8] [9] [10] [11] .however, since the conception of these recommendations, several clinical studies have been conducted which evaluated the association of acei and arb with clinical severity and mortality outcomes in covid-19 patients. therefore, the medical literature was systematically reviewed for the current clinical evidence evaluating the safety and efficacy of ace inhibitors and arb in covid-19 patients.literature search was conducted on the pubmed/medline database using key words, viz., "ace inhibitors and coronavirus." and "arb and coronavirus." we applied search filters to include humans and english language published till april 26 th , 2020. additional papers of possible interest were identified by examining references of pertinent review articles and searching google scholar and preprint servers like medrxiv and biorxiv. we included studies which evaluated clinical severity and mortality outcomes for patients with covid-19 on aceinhibitors or arb or both.we excluded those studies which dealt with in-vitro or animal studies as well as those which only evaluated only ace expression levels. (figure 1 the information on the demographics, comorbidities, pharmacotherapy with ace-i, arbs and other drugs, clinical severity outcomes and mortality was extracted.articles from preliminary search of pubmed, google scholar and preprint servers (n=79) articles included for further review after screening the titles and abstracts (n=56) articles whose full text was reviewed (n=35) articles included after review and addition of pertinent crossreferences (n=8)a total of 79 articles were found in the search. based on titles of the articles, 23 were excluded as they did not meet the inclusion criteria. further, abstracts of 56 articles were read and subsequently, the full text of 35 articles were reviewed. of these, six articles were shortlisted which compared the clinical and/or mortality outcomes of covid-19 patients on acei or arb with non-users [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . additionally, a couple of studies from the united kingdom and china published on a preprint server was also included [18, 19] . finally, eight studies were included for review. (table 1) all the included studies compared clinical severity related outcomes in covid-19 patients on acei or arb with non-users. however, there was non-uniformity in the definition of the severe outcomes amongst the studies. table 2) richardson s. et al and zhang p. et al compared the rates of invasive ventilation and found that they were slightly higher or equivalent in patients on acei/arb as compared to non-users, respectively. in addition, richardson s. et al also reported slightly higher rates of icu admissions in patients on acei (21.4%) and arb (20.8%) as compared to non-users (14.8%). zhang p. et al reported that the patients on acei/arb had lower rates of septic shock (hr = 0.32, p value = 0.01) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (hr = 0.65, p value = 0.07) as compared to non-users [15, 16] . on the other hand, guo j. et al found that patients on acei/arb had higher rates of cardiovascular disease and elevated troponin t (tnt) levels as compared to non-users (21.1% vs 5.9%) [17] . (table 2 despite the worldwide implementation of public health measures like social distancing, contact tracing and mass testing to aid in the control of covid-19, the global cases have risen to more than 3 million and over 200.000 patients lost their lives by april 27 th , 2020 [2, 21] , which further requires attention. several studies have reported increased rates of covid-19 associated mortality in patients with significant comorbidities viz hypertension, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, heart failure etc. [3, 4] although acei and arb are commonly prescribed to treat some of these comorbidities, the fact that ace2 receptor is the main binding site for entry of sars-cov-2, caused concerns regarding the use of acei and arb in such patients [5, 22] .several evidence-based consensus and position statements were formulated by various cardiovascular and hypertension societies which recommended continued use of ace inhibitors and arb in covid-19 patients citing the lack of any contrary clinical evidence [8] [9] [10] [11] . since then, however, several clinical studies have evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arb in covid-19 patients and comorbidities.it is imperative to accurately predict clinical outcomes of covid-19 patients especially those with comorbidities and taking acei or arb to decide whether to continue or switch to another medication. however, there were conflicting findings reported in several studies as meng j. et al, liu y. et al and feng y. reported that patients on ace inhibitors/arb had lower rates of severe outcomes whereas richardson s. et al reported higher rates of invasive ventilation and icu admissions in patients on ace inhibitors/arb as compared to non-users and guo j. et al found that patients on ace inhibitors/arb had higher rates of cardiovascular disease and elevated troponin t (tnt) levels. it is pertinent to note that all above studies did not perform adjustment for covariates or matching for analysis, undermining the statistical strength of their results to a certain extent [12, 14, 15, 17, 18] . however, zhang p. et al did perform matching and an adjusted analysis of 348 patients in which he found slightly higher rates of icu admissions in patients on ace inhibitors (21.4%) and arb (20.8%) as compared to non-users (14.8%) [16] . zhang p. et al again performed matching and adjustment in assessing the mortality outcomes strengthening their conclusions regarding safety of acei/arb, however a large sample size study conducted in new york in over 1000 covid-19 patients by richardson s. et al raised concerns of worse mortality outcomes with acei/ arb and cannot be overlooked [15, 16] .several hypotheses have been put forward explaining the positive and negative aspects of acei/arb administration in covid-19 patients. positive effects include ace2 receptor blockade, disabling viral entry into the heart and lungs, and an overall decrease in inflammation secondary to acei/arb, suggesting the use of acei might be protective against respiratory complications. negative effects include a possible retrograde feedback mechanism, by which . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 5, 2020. . ace2 receptors are upregulated, which may lead to severe pneumonia increasing risk of severe outcomes and mortality [23] . individuals with ace2 polymorphisms have an increased genetic predisposition for an increased risk of sars-cov-2 infection and may have harmful effects of acei/arb [24] . this aspect is worth considering and needs to be evaluated in future studies .to best of our knowledge, this systematic review is a comprehensive exploration and analysis of existing literature in this topic till date. our review has limitations in its rigor due to the scarce existing data and diverse study types available. the rapidly emerging knowledge base of covid-19 poses the possibility that few studies (particularly unpublished/under peer review) remain un-captured. however, we have tried our best to mitigate this by allowing broadest search terms and by including many databases and repositories. we have also tried to comprehensively review and analyze the existing data.considering the inconsistent clinical studies and conflicting hypothesis, it is essential to evaluate the clinical outcomes in covid-19 patients on acei/arb in future large studies, particularly randomized controlled trials and additionally evaluate the association of clinical outcomes with ace2 polymorphisms. based on this, there are ongoing trials studying the effect of losartan (an arb) in patients with covid-19 in outpatient and inpatient settings (nct04311177, nct04312009) [25, 26] .it is concluded that acei and arb should be continued in covid-19 patients, albeit while exercising caution until larger clinical studies and rct confirm their safety. additionally, the individual patient factors like ace2 polymorphisms which might confer higher risk of adverse outcomes need to be evaluated further.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 5, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.29.20085787 doi: medrxiv preprint is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.29.20085787 doi: medrxiv preprint * the severity of covid-19 was identified during the hospitalization according to the guidelines established by the national health commission of the people's republic of china ***the severity of covid-19 pneumonia was classified according to the diagnosis and treatment scheme for covid-19 of chinese(5thedition). 1 severe illness was defined as blood oxygen saturation levels of 93% or less, respiratory frequency of 30/min or greater, a partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio of less than 300, lung infiltrates more than 50% within 24 to 48 hours, septic shock, respiratory failure, and/or multiple organ dysfunction or failure. non severe illness was defined as the absence of the previously described characteristics. ** mortality rates for patients with hypertension # among the 78 patients, 40 were classified as having mild disease (covid-19-m), and 38 were classified as severe condition (covid-19-s) according to new coronavirus pneumonia prevention and control program published by the national health commission of china + other regimens $ primary endpoint primary endpoint being death or transfer to a critical care unit for organ support within 7-days of symptom onset. @ before matching; ! after matching . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.29.20085787 doi: medrxiv preprintcoronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), results in a devastating, multisystem disease which has affected millions of people worldwide. 1 this pandemic has sparked efforts to identify modifiable risk factors and investigate putative treatments. with the first wave of observational data, hypertension quickly emerged as a key comorbidity potentially associated with increased covid-19 mortality. 1, 2 identification of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as the primary sars-cov-2 binding site led to further concern that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) may increase sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19 mortality risk. 3, 4 select experimental studies have shown that ace inhibitors and arbs increase ace2 expression in certain tissues. [5] [6] [7] however, data continue to emerge which either temper or refute these early concerns. 8, 9 in addition, these concerns contrast with prior experimental data, which suggest a protective role for these renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors against acute lung injury and inflammation in select viral pneumonias including sars-cov, the virus responsible for the sars outbreak of 2003. informed decisions to continue or discontinue ace inhibitor or arb therapy during covid-19 hinge on ongoing research to understand the roles of ace2 and the ras in pulmonary biology and well-designed clinical trials targeting this patient population.we review ras biology and how this classic mediator of hypertension may also both hold the key to sars-cov-2 entry into pneumocytes and potentially modulate subsequent lung injury.we also briefly review the competing data regarding the effect of ras inhibition in covid-19;identify key unmet needs and the studies designed to address them; and summarize consensus recommendations regarding the use of ras inhibition in covid-19.the ras is a crucial regulator of numerous physiologic functions, including fluid and electrolyte balance, perfusion, and inflammatory response. the two predominant ras axes, the ace/angiotensin (ang) ii/type 1 ang ii receptor (at 1 r) pathway and the counter-regulatory ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor (masr) pathway, are co-expressed in most tissues. 10 ace exists in membrane-bound and soluble forms and converts ang i into ang ii that acts via the at 1 r and at 2 r, while ace2 is predominately membrane-bound and converts ang ii into ang- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) which acts via the masr. 11 homeostasis between these pathways is critical for normal physiology, but in pathologic conditions, ace/ang ii upregulation and/or ace2/ang-(1-7) downregulation propagates disease. 11, 12 the ras has several effects on the cardiovascular system as well as target organs including the kidney and brain. experimental models of acquired or genetic ace2 deficiency associate with several deleterious structural and functional abnormalities attributed to unopposed ang ii as well as reduced ang-(1-7), including decreased cardiac contractility, cardiac hypoperfusion, myocardial dysfunction, impaired kidney function, and albuminuria. [13] [14] [15] in the vasculature, ang ii acts on the at 1 r, resulting in diminished nitric oxide and vasoconstriction. 16 in the kidneys, ang ii promotes sodium and fluid retention, which in combination with vasoconstriction raises blood pressure. on the other hand, ang-(1-7) activation of the masr results in part in the release of prostaglandin e 2 , bradykinin, and nitric oxide to decrease blood pressure via natriuresis, diuresis, and vasodilation. 11, 16 in the brain, the ace2/ang-(1-7) pathway reduces sympathetic activity and increases nitric oxide synthase and nitric oxide levels, further promoting vasodilation and blood pressure decline. 17, 18 in addition to its effects on the vasculature, ang-(1-7) counteracts the pro-inflammatory and profibrotic effects of ang ii in the heart and kidneys. 19, 20 in animal models, unopposed ang ii in the setting of diminished ace2 upregulated inflammatory cytokines interferon-γ, interleukin-6, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and increased phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (erk)1/2 and c-jun n-terminal kinase (jnk)1/2 signaling pathways. 21 furthermore, at 1 r activation by ang ii has pro-thrombotic effects, including enhanced platelet activation and impaired fibrinolysis, resulting in hypercoagulability. 22, 23 ang ii also stimulates plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, further promoting thrombus production. 24 the pro-thrombotic effects of ang ii are downregulated by ace2-mediated conversion into ang-(1-7) and subsequent ang-(1-7) signaling via masr. dysregulation of this pathway may contribute to the hypercoagulability and endothelial dysfunction observed in covid-19. 25, 26 there has been increasing interest in the ras, and ace2/ang-(1-7) in particular, during the covid-19 pandemic given that the sars-cov-2 spike protein binds to ace2 to infect epithelial cells in the lung, most notably type ii alveolar epithelial cells, which was the same mechanism observed with sars-cov. 27, 28 in the lungs, the ras regulates pulmonary vascular tone, alveolo-capillary integrity, and inflammatory response. alveolar epithelial cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, and resident immune cells (i.e. alveolar macrophages) express both ras pathways, though ace/ang ii expression is generally much greater than ace2/ang-(1-7). 10,29-32 lung injury upregulates and stimulates de novo ace/ang ii expression and, notably, ace2/ang-(1-7)suppression, which in turn propagates injury. 29, 30, [33] [34] [35] as with sars-cov, evidence suggests that sars-cov-2 downregulates ace2 via endocytosis and shedding and thus could potentially shift the ras towards ace/ang ii. [36] [37] [38] [39] acid aspiration-induced acute lung injury resulted in ace-dependent increased ang ii concentrations in lung and plasma associated with reduced ace2 expression. 34 in a rat acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) model, a combination of lipopolysaccharide and mechanical ventilation decreased the ace2/ace activity and ang-(1-7)/ang ii concentration ratios in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. 29 patients with ards had elevated plasma ang ii levels; 40 in addition, prior ace inhibitor and arb use, as well as ace genotype, were associated with improved mortality in patients with ards. 41, 42 ang ii binds to at 1 r to increase pulmonary vascular permeability, induce alveolar epithelial cell apoptosis and fibroblast differentiation, and promote immune cell migration, activation, differentiation, and cytokine release. 30, 34, [43] [44] [45] indeed, cytokine release by activated type ii alveolar epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages is mediated in part through erk1/2 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling cascades, which are regulated by at 1 r and masr. [45] [46] [47] the ace2/ang-(1-7) pathway mitigates acute lung injury/ards. the binding of the sars-cov spike protein to ace2 downregulated ace2 expression, increased ang ii lung concentration, and enhanced at 1 r-mediated acute lung injury, including increased lung elastance and pulmonary edema. 36 further, ace2 deficiency worsened lung elastance, pulmonary vascular permeability and pulmonary edema, inflammatory cell infiltration, and hyaline membrane formation and decreased oxygenation in several acute lung injury models; catalytically active recombinant human ace2 improved these lung measures and reduced lung ang ii concentration. 34 in a phase-ii clinical trial, recombinant human ace2 caused a sustained decrease in plasma ang ii and a sustained increase in ang-(1-7). 40 the beneficial effects of the ace2/ang-(1-7) pathway in acute lung injury extend beyond ang ii metabolism; ang-(1-7) binding to masr, and to a lesser extent ang ii binding to at 2 r, also exerts a protective effect. 48 in several rodent models of acute lung injury, ang-(1-7) infusion (peptide and cyclized) reduced pulmonary vascular resistance and edema, increased pao 2 , blocked increased tumor necrosis factor α, increased bronchoalveolar lavage fluid ace2/ace activity and ang-(1-7)/ang ii concentration ratios, and protected against alveolo-capillary barrier failure and neutrophil invasion. 29, 49 intriguingly, ang-(1-7) restored systemic blood pressure and reduced right ventricle pressure load and, in part, mediated beneficial arb effects. 49 the ras plays a significant role in acute and chronic lung injury, including sars, and given ace2's role as the sars-cov-2 binding site, the ras likely plays a role in covid-19 pathophysiology, though confirmatory clinical and experimental data are needed.sars-cov-2 cellular entry via ace2 is dependent upon priming of the sars-cov-2 spike protein by type ii transmembrane serine proteases. 3, 39 in addition, sars-cov-2 binds to ace2 with a higher affinity than sars-cov. 50 therefore, any process which increases ace2 expression theoretically could increase the likelihood of viral binding, cellular infection, and thus increase the risk of worse outcomes in patients with covid-19.ras inhibitors may increase cell surface ace2 levels and expression. 5-7 ace2 interacts with the at 1 r on the cellular surface; however, ang ii binding to at 1 r interrupts this at 1 r-ace2 interaction and promotes increased ace2 internalization. 51 among other complications of this multi-organ disease, covid-19 may increase the risk for acute kidney injury (aki); in studies of critically ill persons with covid-19, the rate of aki ranges from 19-39%. [54] [55] [56] however, aki estimates for all hospitalized patients vary substantially and the incidence of aki in outpatients with covid-19 remains unknown. 1,2,56-58 through impairment of the autoregulatory response to changes in kidney perfusion, 59,60 ace inhibitors or arbs could theoretically increase the risk of aki in highly susceptible individuals. however, aside from the demonstrated risks of dual therapy, 61 neither ace inhibitors nor arbs clearly increase aki risk in randomized studies of other at-risk populations. 62 moreover, no study has directly demonstrated an association between ras inhibition and the risk of aki in patients with covid-19. 58despite the theoretical increase in ace2 binding sites, ras blockade could improve clinical outcomes in persons infected with sars-cov-2. this rationale is supported by preclinical studies in which losartan, an arb, attenuated lung injury in a non-viral mouse model of sars-cov spike protein-enhanced acid-induced lung injury. 36 in this study, either infection with sars-cov or the use of spike protein combined with an acid-inhalation model substantially reduced ace2 levels and increased ang ii levels in the lung. thus, the overarching hypothesis is that viral infection diminishes ace2 protein and activity, leading to ang ii accumulation and reduced ang-(1-7).the aforementioned upregulation of ace/ang ii and concomitant suppression of ace2/ang-(1-7) likely propagates lung injury during sars-cov-2 infection. 29, 30, [33] [34] [35] this increased ang ii/ang-(1-7) ratio leads to vasoconstriction of the pulmonary vasculature, further reducing pulmonary blood flow to the already-damaged lung parenchyma in the face of hypoxemia from the viral pneumonia. the predominance of ang ii intensives the immune response which may further contribute to lung injury. 63 however, whether at 1 r universally stimulates inflammation and fibrosis remains unclear: specific deletion of at 1 rs on both macrophages and t cells in mice suggests that activation of at 1 rs on these immune cell lineages limits rather than propagates inflammation and organ injury in kidney models. 64, 65 how at 1 r signaling of macrophages and t cells contributes to lung injury during sars-cov-2 infection remains unknown.while the benefits of ras inhibition in covid-19 remain unclear, we may be able to extrapolate from the use of ras inhibition in other types of viral infections. for example, in a mouse model of h7n9 influenza, viral infection also decreased ace2 levels (with resultant increased ang ii). 66 ace2 knockout mice had worse outcomes after viral infection; in contrast, losartan mitigated lung injury in wild-type mice with influenza infection similar to the effect seen in the sars-cov model. 66 moreover, respiratory syncytial virus models demonstrate similar improvements with ras inhibition. 67 these data in other analogous viral infections provide a favorable precedent for the use of ras inhibition in covid-19.several observational studies have evaluated the association of ace inhibitor and arb therapy with the development and severity of covid-19. 8, 9, 68, 69 these studies have several limitations, including confounding by indication, collider bias (conditioning on specific factors like hospitalization or for-symptom covid-19 testing, which may distort or induce spurious associations between ace inhibitor or arb use and covid-19), time-dependent bias, or lack of accounting for multiple hypothesis testing. accordingly, the studies show conflicting results regarding the association of ace inhibitor and arb therapy with covid-19. for example, zhang et al. found that ace inhibitor or arb therapy was associated with lower risk of mortality among individuals hospitalized with covid-19 in hubei province, china; 68 in contrast, rentsch et al. found that ace inhibitors and arbs were associated with a higher risk of requiring intensive care among us veterans hospitalized with covid-19. 69 further research is needed to better understand the magnitude and direction of these associations.the dizzying pace of research in the wake of the covid-19 pandemic has yielded incomplete and conflicting data regarding the safety of ras inhibitors for patients with covid-19. for patients with certain comorbidities such as heart failure and chronic kidney disease, decades of research clearly demonstrate improved survival and disease trajectory with ras inhibitors. 70, 71 given the stakes of the decision to continue or hold these medications, patients and providers need clear guidelines to help navigate this difficult situation. while our understanding of covid-19 continues to evolve, table 1 summarizes the current consensus guidelines from select organizations regarding the use of ras inhibitor therapy in persons affected by covid-19. [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] the measured and consistent responses from these organizations to continue ras inhibitor therapy through sars-cov-2 infection unless otherwise directed by a healthcare provider reflect the lack of high-quality data to overturn the existing indications for these medications.several confounding factors -both measurable and unmeasurable -underlie the clinical decision to continue, discontinue, or start ras inhibitor therapy in the setting of covid-19; these confounding factors limit the ability of observational studies to definitively answer this question. infection nor do they affect the outcomes of those infected.• strongly recommend that the routine use of ace inhibitors or arbs the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is a powerful biological system that plays an important role in regulation of systemic blood pressure through the maintenance of fluid and salt homeostasis. it is a multifactorial system since it includes different components (fig. 1) : the first, renin, was discovered in 1898 [1] , whereas the discovery of the last component, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace 2), is relatively recent, from 2000 [2, 3] . three kinds of ras are known: a) circulating, b) local, and c) intracellular. a) the circulating ras acts at a systemic level: its substrate is angiotensinogen, which is released from the liver and cleaved, to form angiotensin i (angi), by renin, an enzyme secreted from the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney. the main effector peptide of the system is angiotensin ii (angii), generated from angi by ace and acting as a powerful vasoconstrictor. b) local tissue rass, described in several organs and tissues, can synthesize angii locally, since they possess the whole ras enzymatic machinery. c) more recent studies have revealed an intracellular complete ras, which can produce angii.the ras can, therefore, be considered an endocrine, paracrine and intracrine system [4] .the endothelium is a continuous layer of simple squamous epithelial cells (endothelial cells), which contributes to systemic homeostasis through different functions: barrier, maintenance of coagulation and thrombolytic processes, participation in immune reactions, and synthesis of different vasoactive compounds [5] . direct injury (mechanical, chemical or infective) of the endothelium exposes the basement membrane components to the blood, leading to a series of events (the so called inflammatory cascade), including alteration of vascular integrity and production and release of cytokines, adhesion molecules, procoagulant agents and reactive oxygen species (ros). in addition to its well-known regulatory role in hemodynamic homeostasis, ras, and in particular angii (fig. 2) , is also involved in the modulation of the inflammatory process [6] . indeed angii can regulate vascular permeability, the first step of the inflammatory response, by inducing the synthesis of prostaglandins and vascular endothelial cell growth factor (vegf) [7, 8] . moreover, ras participates in leukocyte extravasation, a critical step in the inflammatory response, at different levels. angii activates leukocytes and increases their adhesion to endothelial cells [9] via the induction of pro-inflammatory mediators like selectins, adhesion molecules, chemokines, cytokines and other factors (e.g., transforming growth factor [tgf]-β). angii effects are mediated by its receptor angiotensin receptor 1 (at1r), which leads to the activation of transcription factors, including activating protein-1 (ap-1) and nuclear factor-κb (nf-κb), and the ensuing expression of genes involved in inflammation and tissue injury [10] . in patients with cardiovascular disease, the increased selectin expression and plasma chemokine levels are attenuated by treatment with losartan (at1r antagonist) [11] . experimental studies have demonstrated that angii infusion (at dosages unable to induce vasoconstriction) increases leukocyte transmigration, and that treatment with angiotensin receptor antagonists suppresses this leukocytes response [12] . finally ras participates in the last phase of inflammation: cell growth and tissue repair. preclinical studies on the kidney [13] have revealed that angii induces cellular growth and release of several growth factors, resulting in organ hypertrophy, massive matrix synthesis and formation of scarring. further studies demonstrated that angii also induces fibrosis in other tissues, such as heart [14] and lung [15] .it is now well known that ras is involved in the pathophysiology of several diseases, occurring in different organs (e.g., heart and kidney). overactivation of ras is linked with the development of atherosclerosis, hypertension and cardio- vascular and renal events, such as myocardial infarction, stroke, congestive heart failure, diabetes, nephrosclerosis [16] and tumorigenesis [17] . several studies have focused on lung diseases, such as pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary fibrosis, in order to better understand the role of ras in this field. capillaries in the lungs are one of the main sites of ace expression [18] , and thereby lungs are considered an important source of angii. pulmonary hypertension is characterized by increased vascular resistances and endothelial remodeling, eventually leading to right heart failure and death. in this context, angii seems to mediate pro-inflammatory signaling (rather than vasoconstriction), resulting in pulmonary vascular remodeling [19] . indeed angii can induce smooth muscle cells proliferation [20] , with consequent increase in pulmonary artery wall thickness. evidence has demonstrated the involvement of ras in the pathophysiology of pulmonary fibrosis. angii upregulates the expression of tgf-β, thus the differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts and increase in extracellular matrix deposition [21] , as well as alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis [22] .among the various scenarios in which ras can have a role, this chapter focuses on current knowledge of the role of ras in acute lung injury (ali) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). fig. 1) . ace is the key enzyme of the ras and is highly expressed on lung endothelial cells, where it represents an ectoenzyme uniformly distributed along the luminal surface, with its catalytic site exposed to the blood-borne substrates [5] .some clinical data seem to indicate that ace activity is related to ali pathogenesis and outcome. in 1987, idell et al. [23] found that ace levels were augmented in bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid of ards patients, compared to normal subjects and to patients affected by sarcoidosis and fibrosis. in particular ace levels were highest in bal fluid from patients with ards of infectious origin. the authors speculated that ace in bal fluid could be a marker of endothelial damage. two years earlier, in 1985, fourrier et al. [24] had performed sequential measurements of ace levels in the serum of patients with ards or with sepsis (without ards). they found that, in ards survivors, ace levels had a biphasic evolution, decreasing in the early phases of the illness, and increasing at the time of weaning. conversely, ace levels in ards non-survivors decreased in the early phases without the later increase. finally, in patients with sepsis without ards the levels of ace remained elevated. the authors postulated that a low level of circulating ace was an index of pulmonary endothelial injury correlating with the presence and severity of ards.ards appears to have a relatively low incidence compared to the number of subjects who are potentially at risk of developing this syndrome. thus, some genetic background predisposing to the illness has been postulated. the ace gene is located on chromosome 17q23 and contains a restriction fragment length polymorphism consisting of the insertion or deletion of an alu repeated sequence in intron 16. deletion of the alu sequence is associated with greater ace activity in plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells [25] . marshall et al. [26] performed a retrospective study in 2002 comparing patients with ards to patients with non-ards respiratory failure. they found that the deletion of the alu sequence in the ace gene was associated with a higher incidence of ards and increased mortality in the ards group, suggesting that an increase in ace activity correlates with the risk and outcome of ards. different results were obtained by orfanos et al. in 2000 [27] . in order to assess whether pulmonary capillary endothelium bound (pceb)-ace activity could be a marker of endothelial injury, thus predicting the development and severity of ali, patients were grouped according to lung injury score (lis) and pceb-ace activity was measured. the authors observed that pceb-ace activity was decreased in patients with ali/ards compared with non-ards patients, with an inverse correlation with lis and apache ii score. these data suggest that pceb-ace dysfunction is an early marker of the presence and severity of endothelial cell damage.the fact that deletion of the alu sequence, which leads to a higher activity of ace, is related to the pathogenesis of ards, appears in contrast with the fact that pceb-ace activity is reduced as a consequence of pulmonary endothelial dysfunction. maniatis et al. [28] interpreted this paradox by inferring that increased ace and angii activity could generate superoxide anions. the interactions between ros and nitric oxide (no) lead to the synthesis of reactive nitrogen species, that damage the pulmonary endothelium. the consequent reduction in ace activity counterbalances its pro-inflammatory activity. another hypothesis is that the crude losses of endothelium result in reduced pceb-ace activity, whereas it is normally, or even more than normally, active in healthy zones of the lungs.the main biological activity of ace is the cleavage of angi to give angii, which thus appears the main effector through which ace is responsible for ards pathogenesis. angii is an octapeptide with several biological activities, many of which have been already described in this review. its action is mediated by two different receptors, at1r and at2r, that show opposite biological effects (fig. 2) . the role of angii in the pathogenesis of ali/ards seems to be strongly linked to its proinflammatory properties.kuba et al. [29] showed that in a murine model of ali caused by acid aspiration or by the injection of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus spike proteins, the levels of angii in the lungs were increased, and the degree of increase was proportional to the degree of lung injury assessed by histopathology (angii levels were significantly higher in the lungs of mice subjected to a double injury, acid aspiration and viral infection). however, pulmonary edema, the hallmark of ali/ards, can be due to increased hydrostatic pressure (the typical effect of angii is augmentation of systemic pressure, which may promote pulmonary edema) or to enhanced permeability: some studies [6, 30] demonstrated that local angii was able to act directly on vascular permeability by stimulating vegf and prostaglandins, thus exerting a primarily pro-inflammatory effect, not mediated by hemodynamic alterations, yielding important evidence in the assessment of the role of angii in the pathogenesis of ali/ards. the same group [29] demonstrated that the receptor implicated in angii action during development of ali is at1r: inhibition of at1r attenuated ali, as shown by increased compliance and attenuated pulmonary edema.ang ii may also play a role in the regulation of apoptosis of type ii pneumocytes, an important phenomenon in the late phases of ards. in fact, while proliferation of type ii pneumocytes is characteristic of the early phases of ali as a reparative phenomenon, their apoptosis indicates evolution towards a fibrotic role of the renin-angiotensin system in ards 175 v phase of the disease [31] . angii seems to promote apoptosis by modulating the fas/fas ligand system [32] , which bears major implications in the pathogenesis and evolution of ali by apoptosis of alveolar epithelial cells. wang et al. [22] confirmed the role of angii in modulation of apoptosis: alveolar epithelial cells were cultured in a medium supplemented with different doses of angii or angiotensinogen. both these proteins were able to induce apoptosis in alveolar epithelial cells in a concentration-dependent manner. moreover, the authors observed that the non-selective angiotensin receptor antagonist, saralasin, could inhibit apoptosis induced by both proteins, while lisinopril, an ace-inhibitor, blocked apoptosis induced by angiotensinogen but not by angii. these data showed the relationship between angii and alveolar epithelial cell apoptosis. although alveolar epithelial cells express mrnas for both angii receptors (at1r and at2r), only selective inhibition of at1 blocked apoptosis caused by angii [33] . other findings by marshall et al. showed that angii could influence the progression of ali towards a fibrotic disease: angii is mitogenic for human adult fibroblasts via the at1 receptor and stimulates the autocrine release of tgf-β (a pro-fibrotic cytokine) and pro-collagen production from fetal lung fibroblasts [34] . finally, in a rat model of pulmonary fibrosis, bleomycin augmented lung angii concentration, whereas treatment with an ace inhibitor or an at1 inhibitor was able to attenuate lung collagen accumulation and tgf-β expression [34] .several animal models [33, 35, 36] helped to disclose the relationship between lipopolysaccharide (lps)-induced ali and angii mainly by using selective inhibitors of at1 receptors. first, sepsis-induced ali was characterized by increased levels of angii in lung tissue. treatment with an inhibitor of at1 led to improvements in permeability index in vivo, such as wet/dry weight ratio, quantification of evans blue dye extravasation, histological evidence of edema. in vitro studies [35] supported these data, since monolayers of rat pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells had increased permeability following exposure to angii; this increase in permeability was partially corrected by adding an inhibitor of at1 to the culture medium. the role of angii in the inflammatory cascade and endothelial dysfunction was further demonstrated by cytokine levels: sepsis induced the secretion of several pro-inflammatory cytokines in the lungs and plasma, including tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, interleukin (il)-1β, il-6; this secretion was partially inhibited by the infusion of an at1 inhibitor. two groups [33, 36] performed additional studies to understand the mechanisms underlying angii's proinflammatory actions: both groups found that inhibition of at1 led to a lesser activation of the nf-κb pathway, mediated by increased levels of iκb (inhibitor of nf-κb). signal transduction through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) cascade, c-jun n-terminal kinase (jnk) and ap-1 seems also to be involved in the pro-inflammatory effects of angii.in 2000, ace2, the first human homolog of ace, was discovered by two independent groups [2, 3] . human ace2 is expressed in the endothelium, but predominantly in the heart, kidney and testis [2] , although its expression is also distributed to lung, liver, small intestine and brain [37] . human ace2 consists of 805 amino acids and is a type i integral membrane glycoprotein with an extracellular domain, containing a potential metalloprotease zinc binding site, a single trans-membrane domain, and a cytoplasmic tail. it has only one catalytic domain, which shows 42 % identity with the amino domain of ace. ace2 is a carboxypeptidase, since it cleaves only one c-terminal residue from its substrate, rather than a dipeptide, as ace does (fig. 3) . this particular difference between the two enzymes makes ace2 resistant to the action of ace inhibitors, since they mimic the dipeptidyl c-terminal binding sites of ace substrates. ace2 converts angi to ang 1-9 and angii to ang 1-7 [2, 3] . ang 1-9 can be converted by ace to ang 1-7 [2] . rice and colleagues [38] demonstrated that ace2 hydrolyzed angii more efficiently than angi; therefore, the production of ang 1-7, a powerful vasodilator, is believed to be the primary goal of ace2 activity (ang 1-7 will be discussed in depth later in the chapter). moreover, other vasoactive peptides are substrates of ace2 catalytic activity, such as neurotensin, kinetensin, des-arg bradykinin and apelin-13 [2, 3] .ace2 is present in the lungs of healthy and diseased humans; it is expressed by type i and type ii alveolar epithelial cells and in bronchiolar epithelial cells [30, 39] . ace2 may play an important role in ali as shown by experimental studies. imai et al. [30] examined extensively ace2-induced protection from severe acute lung failure in two murine models of ali (acid aspiration and sepsis). loss of ace2 (ace2 knockout mice) resulted in decreased compliance, pulmonary edema and leukocyte infiltration in both animal models. the pulmonary edema seemed to be predominantly due to the altered vascular permeability (as demonstrated by evans blue accumulation), rather than to hemodynamic causes. indeed no differences in heart contractility or pulmonary vascular tone were found, although the authors did not exclude a potential effect of angii on blood vessels. to further underline the protective action of ace2, which counterbalances ace functions, imai et al. demonstrated that ace, angii and at1r promoted ali in different types of knockout mice, whereas ace2 and at2r protected against it. ace2 negatively regulates angii levels, which, if ace2 is lacking, increase both in lungs and plasma.ace2 appears to play a role also in the pathogenesis of sars [29] . ace2 is now considered the sars virus receptor: the interaction of ace2 and the virus leads to endocytosis of viral particles and to viral fusion with cells. the absence of ace2, in ace2 knockout mice, results in a dramatic reduction in sars-coronavirus infection, with subsequent reduced histologic alterations and leukocyte infiltration. kuba et al. [29] demonstrated in vivo the mechanism underlying the elevated severity and mortality of the viral infection: sars-coronavirus infection downregulated ace2 expression. during sars infection, the protective arm of the ras is impaired by the loss of ace2 and of its ability to negatively regulate angii, the levels of which are significantly increased in lung tissue. these authors demonstrated that the inhibition of at1r, thus inhibition of angii activity, attenuated the severity of lung injury, in terms of lung mechanical properties and pulmonary edema, in sars-coronavirus challenged mice.ang-(1-7) is a biologically active heptapeptide (fig. 3) released from angi or angii by different peptidases, of which ace2 is one of the most important. ang-(1-7) exerts its action via the receptor, mas, an 'orphan' g protein-coupled receptor [40] although it can also bind at2r, but the affinity with at2r is modest as compared to that of angii. the ace2-ang-(1-7)-mas arm is now consid-v ered the principal counterregulatory mechanism for the other ras arm, ace-angii-at1r. indeed the two arms of the system act in opposite ways, the first leading to formation of ang-(1-7) and simultaneously decreasing angii, and the second forming the powerful vasoconstrictor angii and catabolizing ang-(1-7) and bradykinin [41] . ang-(1-7) is both substrate and inhibitor of ace, since it is cleaved by the n-domain of ace to form ang-(1-5) but it can also inhibit the function of ace c-domain [42] . ang-(1-7) acts as a vasodilator through the inhibition of ace and, in addition, through the release of no achieved by the indirect potentiation of bradykinin [43] .in addition to its vasodilatory properties, ang-(1-7) interaction with the receptor mas exerts an antiproliferative effect on vascular smooth muscle cells, fibromuscular tissue, and lung cancer cells. moreover, it can reduce organ remodeling by limiting hypertrophy and collagen deposition, and thus fibrosis, with subsequent improvement in organ functions [41] . a recent study on experimental models of arthritis [44] showed the anti-inflammatory effects of the ang-(1-7) mas receptor. the activation of mas, through the use of a mas agonist, decreased the release of cytokines (tnf-α and il-1β), and the rolling and adhesion of leukocytes to the endothelium at the injured site. it also decreased histological abnormalities and classical signs of inflammation, such as pain and edema. the authors suggested that mas receptor agonists may be a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of arthritis in humans.limited information is available concerning the role of ang-(1-7) and its receptor in healthy or diseased lungs. uhal et al. [45] recently demonstrated the protective effects of ang-(1-7) on alveolar epithelial cell survival via the masmediated inhibition of apoptosis. in fact, ang-(1-7) inhibits jnk phosphorylation, caspase activation and nuclear fragmentation, acting through mas receptors, blockade of which, conversely, favors apoptosis.the previously reviewed data show that ras has a role in ali/ards pathogenesis. for this reason, several experimental studies have been performed to evaluate the therapeutic role of ras modulation in this setting. for example, hagiwara et al. [46] developed a model of lps-induced ali in rats and showed that therapy with ace inhibitors could diminish interstitial edema, alveolar cellular infiltration and cytokine release, probably via a reduction of ang ii levels and inhibition of the nf-κb pathway. in a different model of ali [47] , induced by the association of chronic ethanol ingestion and endotoxemia, alveolar epithelial permeability was improved by therapy with lisinopril or losartan. the same drugs were able to reduce tgf-β levels in lung tissue and avoid glutathione depletion, thus limiting epithelial dysfunction and oxidative stress. finally, an experimental model of oleic acid-induced ali [48] confirmed that captopril could attenuate pulmonary injury by protecting the vascular endothelium: the number of circulating endothelial cells in the captopril-treated group was reduced as compared to the control group, in addition to a decreased expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (icam)-1 and activation of the nf-κb pathway. captopril treated rats also had a better pao 2 /fio 2 ratio and less edema.no clinical trial has been performed to investigate the effects of ras modulation in ards patients. however, a retrospective cohort study [49] has been con-178 v. zambelli, a. grassi, and g. bellani v ducted to assess the effects on survival of prior use of ace inhibitors in patients hospitalized with community acquired pneumonia. prior use of ace inhibitors was associated with a lower 30-day mortality.as far as the ace2-ang(1-7)-mas arm is concerned, the anti-inflammatory properties of ace2 have been proposed as therapy for ali/ards. the injection of recombinant human ace2 (rhace2) in ace2 knockout mice (rescue of phenotype) decreased the severity of ali, and improved ali/ards symptoms in wild type mice, suggesting that rhace2 administration may be a novel potential therapeutic strategy for ards [30] . a study evaluating the therapeutic potential of rhace2 in an animal model of lps-induced lung injury [50] showed that treatment with rhace2 reduced plasma tnf-α and angii levels, improving the inflammatory response and pulmonary edema. control animals receiving lps infusion developed pulmonary hypertension, whereas in the treatment group, mean pulmonary arterial pressure was reduced (without changes in pulmonary artery occlusion pressure), indicating a pulmonary vasodilatory function of ace2. in addition, rhace2 treatment improved lps-induced arterial hypoxemia, probably because of a more homogeneous perfusion in ace2 treated animals.in this chapter, we have reviewed the main evidence concerning the role of ras components in ali/ards. in addition to its well known cardiovascular and renal regulatory properties, the ras participates in the different phases of inflammation, from the release of cytokines and the extravasation of leukocytes to matrix deposition and tissue repair. ali/ards is characterized by a powerful inflammatory response that persists over time and, while attempting to repair the injury, results in the formation of scar tissue. although ras modulation appears a promising therapeutic strategy, more data need to be collected to elucidate whether it would be a feasible and clinically effective means of attenuating lung injury. enhancement of the effects of the recently discovered ace-angii-at1r arm may be a potential strategy to decrease the deleterious effects of angii.s upplemental oxygen, which is frequently used in the treatment of pulmonary insufficiency in premature infants, has been implicated in the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (bpd). bpd remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality during the first year of life, and some of these infants have significant respiratory problems throughout childhood, including increased airway reactivity and the development of restrictive airway disease (1) . hyperoxia induces lung injury and may contribute to bpd. a comprehensive review of the literature reveals a strong association between exposure to hyperoxia and subsequent expression of comorbidities. hyperoxia can directly cause lung injury by generation of reactive oxygen radicals. prolonged exposure of neonatal mice to hyperoxia results in impaired alveolarization and capillary development and in increased lung fibrosis that is similar to human bpd (2) .among the mechanisms believed to contribute to the pathogenesis of lung fibrosis, ace-2 is of great importance, since the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is expressed by and is functional in human lung myofibroblasts, the cells believed to be most important in synthesizing the collagens that accumulate in fibrotic lungs (3) . in studies of tissue fibrogenesis, the tissue ras is believed to play a key role in initiation and progression of fibrous tissue accumulation in a variety of organs. both ace inhibitors and angiotensin receptor antagonists have been shown to prevent fibrogenesis of the heart (4), liver (5) , kidney (6) , and lungs (7, 8) . ang ii, produced by ace, is the main effector molecule in the ras. ang ii is a potential pulmonary profibrotic mediator which activates ang ii type i receptor and stimulates collagen synthesis. studies done in vivo showed that the angiotensin system was upregulated in oxygen-exposed fetal lung fibroblasts (9) . the main function of ace-2 is to convert the octapeptide angiotensin ii to a heptapeptide ang 1-7. this limits the accumulation of ang ii and protects against experimental lung fibrosis.imai et al (10) . demonstrated in three different models of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) which all used ace 2 knock-out mice, that these mice showed very severe disease compared with wild-type mice. previous work from this laboratory demonstrated that ace-2 protects against fibrosis, but is downregulated in both human and experimental lung fibrosis models (11) , and that inhibition of ace-2 is associated with increased lung tissue injury/fibrosis. earlier, uhal et al (3) . demonstrated the existence of an angiotensin/ tgf-β1 "autocrine loop" in human lung myofibroblasts. more important in the context of the neonatal lung, jiang et al (12) . showed the activation of the angiotensin system in hyperoxiainduced lung fibrosis in neonatal rats. chou et al (13) . showed that blocking ang ii activity through the at1r (angiotensin type i receptor) blocker losartan prevented lung fibrosis in response to hyperoxia. the role of ace-2 in these models, however, has not yet been evaluated.the function of ace-2 as the cellular receptor for sars-coronavirus was demonstrated by li et al (14) .. haga et al (15) .articles demonstrated the role of tnf-α-converting enzyme (tace), which can cleave the ectodomain of ace-2, in viral entry into the lungs. these authors also showed that tace-dependent "shedding" of ace-2 ectodomain is completely dependent on the binding of sars-s protein to ace-2 and that tace was required for viral entry (16) . further, the shedding was blocked by tace antagonists, tapi-0, and tapi-2 (15) . tace (also known as adam17), originally identified as a metalloprotease required for processing the membrane form of tnfα and its release as a soluble factor (17) , is now known to be involved in the cleavage and release of the ace-2 ectodomain in several tissues (18) .given the known involvement of other ras components in lung fibroblast function (3) and the profibrotic action of hyperoxic gas, we hypothesized that ace-2 might be expressed by fetal lung fibroblasts and further, might be downregulated by hyperoxia. we further theorized that the downregulation of ace-2 by hyperoxia might be prevented by inhibiting its shedding by an inhibitor of tace, the enzyme that causes shedding. we report here the findings that ace-2 protein and enzyme activity are severely decreased by hyperoxia in human fetal lung fibroblast cultures. we also report that tapi-2 prevents this decrease. table 1 shows the number of cells with disrupted plasma membrane integrity, as measured by trypan blue and expressed as a percentage of total cells. cell cultures exposed to hyperoxia showed a modest (less than 1%) but statistically significant increase in dead cells compared to cells exposed to room air, if the exposure was followed by a 24-h period of recovery (p < 0.01). figure 1 shows western blotting for caspase 9 as a marker of apoptosis which, when normalized to β-actin, showed no significant changes by densitometry. together, these data suggest a very slight decrease in the viability of hyperoxia-treated cells following a recovery period, but only in a very minor fraction (<1%) of the cells. figure 2 shows the effect of hyperoxia on ace-2 immunoreactive protein on western blotting. both ace-2 immunoreactivity and enzyme activity were significantly decreased in cells treated with hyperoxia when compared with cells treated with normoxia. this reduction (74.6%, p < 0.01 by densitometry) only occurred when cells were allowed to recover by incubating in normoxic serum free media for 24 h.in figure 3 , the enzymatic activity measured by the ace-2 synthetic substrate was completely inhibited by the synthetic peptide dx 600 (p < 0.01), a competitive inhibitor of ace-2 (11) . figure 3b showed no significant reduction of ace-2 in fetal lung fibroblasts exposed to hyperoxic or normoxic gas. imr 90 cells in confluent culture were exposed for 72 h to 95% oxygen with 5% co 2 . control cells were incubated in 21% o 2 with 5% co 2 for 72 h. at the end of 72 h, cells were either harvested or incubated for an additional "recovery" phase in serum free media for 24 h. western blotting for caspase 9 was then performed as described in materials and methods. despite the slight decrease in band intensity in hyperoxia-treated cells, quantitation by densitometry demonstrated no statistically significant difference in the caspase 9/β-actin ratio (not shown). hyperoxia with normoxic recovery downregulates angiotensinconverting enzyme-2 (ace-2) in human fetal lung fibroblasts. imr90 cells were exposed to hyperoxic or normoxic gas as described in figure 1 . (a) western blotting for ace-2 protein was then performed and normalized to β-actin. (b) there was no change in ace-2 without recovery but with recovery hyperoxia caused a significant decrease in ace-2 immunoreactive protein (74.6%, *p < 0.01 vs. 21% o 2 by student's t-test). figure 4 shows that the addition of tapi-2 during exposure to hyperoxia prevented the reduction of immunoreactive ace-2 that otherwise would occur in hyperoxia-treated cells (p < 0.05)next, ace-2 immunoreactivity was analyzed in the culture media collected from hyperoxia-exposed cells. figure 5 shows that treatment of fetal lung fibroblasts with hyperoxia increased the release of soluble ace-2 into the culture supernatant (p < 0.01) and that tapi-2 prevented the increase (p < 0.01). figure 6 shows that the treatment of hyperoxia followed by normoxic recovery significantly increased adam17/tace immunoreactive protein by threefold in the imr90 cells (p < 0.05). the hyperoxic gas alone (without recovery) did not increase adam17/tace (data not shown). as expected, the inclusion of the tace inhibitor tapi-2 (an active site blocker) had no ability to reduce the increase in tace protein induced by hyperoxia with normoxic recovery (data not shown). figure 6 , panel c shows that hyperoxia with normoxic recovery also caused a significant increase in adam17/tace mrna (2.2-fold, *p < 0.05). methods of preventing and/or reducing the effect of oxygen injury remain elusive. identification of molecular mechanisms of oxygen injury and endogenous protective factors . hyperoxia with normoxic recovery reduces angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) enzymatic activity but not ace-2 mrna. imr90 cells were exposed to hyperoxic or normoxic gas as described in figure 1 (with recovery only), but cells were harvested for assay of ace-2 enzyme activity (11) with and without inclusion of the ace-2 competitive inhibitor dx600 at 1 µmol/l in the enzyme assay vessel. (a) ace-2 enzymatic activity showed a statistically significant reduction by hyperoxia (with recovery) and complete blockage by dx 600 (*p < 0.01 vs. 21% o 2 by anova and dunnett's test). the (b) ace-2 mrna quantification by qrtpcr showed no significant change. see methods for details. . hyperoxia with normoxic recovery reduces cellular angiotensinconverting enzyme-2 (ace-2) by a tapi-2-sensitive mechanism. imr90 cells were exposed to hyperoxic or normoxic gas as described in figure 1 (with recovery), but in the presence or absence of the adam17/tace inhibitor tapi-2. cell monolayers were then harvested for ace-2 western blotting (upper panel). densitometry (lower panel) demonstrated a significant reduction in cell monolayer-associated ace-2 in hyperoxia treated cells compared to the control (*p < 0.05 vs. ctl by anova and tukey's multiple comparison test). addition of tapi-2 prevented the decrease. figure 5 . hyperoxia with normoxic recovery increases soluble angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) by a tapi-2-sensitive mechanism. imr90 cells were exposed to hyperoxic or normoxic gas as described in figure 1 (with recovery), but in the presence or absence of the adam17/ tace inhibitor tapi-2. cell-free culture supernatants were then harvested separately from the cell monolayer and were concentrated and subjected to western blotting for ace-2 (upper panel articles might provide much needed targets for future design of interventions. lang et al (9) . recently showed that angiotensin ii (angii) mediates the profibrotic effect of hyperoxia on cultured human lung fibroblasts, but these authors did not study the potential contributions of ace-2, which degrades angii, to the angiotensin-induced increase in collagen production stimulated by hyperoxia. moreover, previous work showed that ace-2, which protects against lung fibrosis in animal models by degrading angii, is downregulated in the lungs of patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis through mechanisms yet to be fully identified (11) . together, these issues led to our hypotheses that: (i) hyperoxia might downregulate ace-2 and (ii) modulation of ace-2 might be useful in the management and prevention of hyperoxia-induced lung injury. for example, maintaining high levels of tissue ace-2 by prevention of its shedding, and/or replacement of the protein through administration of biologically active enzyme, may hold potential as therapeutic strategies for treating hyperoxic lung injury. in support of this theory, a pharmaceutical preparation of recombinant human ace-2 (rhace-2) is currently in clinical trials for acute lung injury (glaxosmithkline, pipeline drug gsk2586881). ace-2, a carboxypeptidase which degrades angiotensin ii, was shown to be protective but downregulated in human interstitial pulmonary fibrosis and in experimentally-induced lung fibrosis by li et al (11) .. a clear role for ace-2 in modulating acute lung injury was shown by the demonstrations of imai et al (10) . who showed that the absence of ace-2 in ace-2 knockout mice exacerbates experimental acute lung injury. to date, the potential role of ace-2 in hyperoxic lung injury has not been explored.in recent years, clinicians are seeing less of the classical "old bpd", which is characterized by pulmonary fibrosis alternating with cystic emphysema on chest x-ray with evidence of collagen deposition and fibrosis (19) . more recently, the milder form termed "new bpd" has been described, characterized by abnormalities in alveolar septation, pulmonary edema, and less overt fibrosis (19, 20) . in adult animal models of acute lung injury (10,21), ace-2 was shown to inhibit lung edema formation and inflammation as well as fibrogenesis. thus, although little is known about the role of ace-2 in alveolar septation, figure 7 . proposed role of angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) in hyperoxia-induced lung fibrosis. angiotensinogen (agt) produced by either alveolar epithelial cells or myofibroblasts (3) can be cleaved by a variety of pulmonary aspartyl proteases (3) to yield angiotensin (ang) i, which in turn is cleaved by various lung enzymes to yield the profibrotic angii. angii is degraded by ace-2 to yield the antifibrotic peptide ang1-7, which acts through its receptor mas. hyperoxia causes, by mechanisms yet unknown, the release of ace-2 from the cell through ectodomain cleavage mediated by increased adam-17/tace. through this mechanism, hyperoxia is theorized to promote fibrosis through both (a) promoting accumulation of angii (8, 9) and (b) reducing production of the antifibrotic peptide ang1-7 (21 figure 6 . hyperoxia with normoxic recovery increases adam17/tace in fetal human lung fibroblasts. imr90 cells were exposed to hyperoxic or normoxic gas as described in figure 1 (with recovery), then were recovered for western blotting of adam17/tace as described in materials and methods. (a) western blotting for adam17/tace protein was then performed and normalized to β-actin. (b) by densitometry, hyperoxia with normoxic recovery caused a significant increase in adam17/tace (3.1-fold, *p < 0.05 by student's t-test). (c) replicate wells were harvested for recovery of total rna followed by qrtpcr as described in methods; hyperoxia with normoxic recovery also caused a significant increase in adam17/tace mrna (2.2-fold, *p < 0.05 by student's t-test). articles oarhe et al.ace-2 might be expected to protect against the "new bpd" as well as the more fibrotic "old" form. regardless, a small percentage of children with bpd today present with classic findings of the "old bpd", and it may be that a continuum exists between the milder forms and the more severe presentations. therefore, the study of ace-2 and other components of the ras in hyperoxic lung injury and the possibility of ameliorating the most severe, and possibly the milder, forms of bpd associated with hyperoxic injury remains critical. ace-2 has also been shown to be involved in virus-induced lung disease. ace-2 is the cellular receptor the sars-coronavirus, is required for coronaviral entry, and inhibition of its shedding by the tace inhibitor is related to the severity of the sars-cov infection (14) (15) (16) . liu et al (22) . showed that ace2 protein levels were significantly downregulated after infection with h1n1 viruses, but was dispensable for viral replication. they also found that ace-2 cleavage could be regulated by influenza neuraminidase. zou et al (23) . showed that in experimental mouse models, infection with highly pathogenic avian influenza a h5n1 virus results in downregulation of ace-2 expression in the lung and increased serum ang ii levels. genetic inactivation of ace-2 causes severe lung injury in h5n1-challenged mice, confirming a protective role of ace-2 in h5n1-induced lung pathologies. the same authors also demonstrated that the administration of recombinant human ace-2 ameliorates avian influenza h5n1 virusinduced lung injury in mice. thus, the potential influence of ace-2 downregulation by hyperoxic gas on viral infection will be an interesting topic for future investigation.growing evidence in the study of the role(s) of ace-2 in normal pulmonary physiology or pulmonary pathophysiology has demonstrated that alveolar epithelial cells are the primary site of ace-2 expression in mice (24) , but relatively less attention has been directed toward understanding the role of fibroblasts in the ace-2 mediated pulmonary physiology or pulmonary pathophysiology. to our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate that ace-2 is expressed by human lung fibroblasts and is downregulated by hyperoxia. it is also the first to document that this downregulation could be prevented by tace antagonist in hyperoxia-treated cells. given the known function of ace-2 in preventing lung collagen deposition in experimental lung fibrosis (11) , its expression by the fibroblastic cells most responsible for collagen synthesis is not surprising. indeed, other authors have shown that lung collagen accumulation in neonatal rats exposed to hyperoxic gas could be prevented by blockers of angiotensin receptor at1 (25) .the well-studied pulmonary toxicity of hyperoxic gas is known to involve apoptotic cell death of alveolar epithelial cells (26) , but exposure of the cell line imr90 to a high oxygen concentration that is often administered to premature neonates (95% o2) did not increase a marker of apoptotic cell death in these fetal human lung fibroblasts (caspase 9, figure 1 ). although the 95% oxygen did cause a very minor increase in necrotic cells (<1% see table 1 ), it seems unlikely that this small but statistically significant effect would have physiologic significance. the hyperoxic gas did, however, cause a significant decrease in ace-2 ( figure 2) ; whether or not subphysiologic oxygen concentrations reduce ace-2 will be an interesting topic for further research. in the light of all published evidence, the downregulation of ace-2 would be expected to lead to accumulation of ang ii and its downstream profibrotic pathways (see figure 7) . indeed, hyperoxic gas was previously shown to increase angiimediated collagen synthesis by human lung fibroblasts (9), and either inhibition or gene knockdown of ace-2 increased autocrine angii generation by human lung cells in culture (11) . furthermore, the heptapeptide ang1-7, the product of ace-2, was shown to be antifibrotic in lung tissue (21, 27) and inhibition of ace-2 reduces its production (see figure 7) . accordingly, the reduction of cellular ace-2 induced by hyperoxia would be expected to promote fibrogenesis through both increasing angii and simultaneously decreasing ang1-7.the mechanism by which hyperoxia decreases ace-2 appears to be at the protein level, as no significant change in the mrna occurred and the decrease was prevented by tapi-2, an inhibitor of the adam17/tace enzyme that cleaves the ace-2 ectodomain in response to sars coronavirus (16) . as was demonstrated by haga et al (15) ., the present study also showed that the effect of hyperoxia on ace-2 appears to involve the upregulation of adam17/tace mrna and protein (see figure 6) , which in turn mediates enzymatic shedding of the ace-2 ectodomain and its release into the extracellular space. determination of the signaling mechanism(s) by which hyperoxia upregulates adam17/tace will be an interesting and compelling topic for future investigations.it is notable that the decrease in ace-2 occurred only if the period of hyperoxic exposure was followed by normoxic recovery for 24 h (figures 2-6) . this sequence of redox poise variation is reminiscent of ischemia-reperfusion injury, in which many key signaling pathways are induced not during the ischemic period, but during the return to normoxia (28) . although unknown at present, the mechanisms induced by hyperoxic/ normoxic cycling may be speculated to involve mitochondrial or other redox sensing mechanisms known to be influenced by reactive oxygen or nitrogen species (29) . the elucidation of these pathways will also be a very interesting topic for future inquiry.in summary, this study showed that ace-2 is expressed not only by lung epithelial cells (24) , but also by fetal human lung fibroblasts. ace-2 protein and enzyme activity, but not mrna, were decreased by hyperoxia in cultured fetal lung fibroblasts, but ace-2 protein was increased in the cell culture supernatants. inhibition of these effects by tapi-2 suggests a mechanism mediated by adam-17/tace-induced shedding of ace-2 from the cell surface. since it is known that lung injury and fibrosis can be abrogated by ace-2, the demonstration of a direct effect of hyperoxia on ace-2 in human lung cells has significant implications for the pathogenesis of hyperoxic lung injury, fibrogenesis and viral infection of the lungs.the peptide dx 600 , a competitive inhibitor of ace-2, was purchased from phoenix pharmaceuticals, burlingame, ca. antibodies against ace-2 were obtained from santa cruz biotechnology. tapi-2 wascell lines cultured to confluence were treated as described above, with control cells at 21% oxygen and hyperoxia-exposed cells at 95% oxygen (both at 5% co 2 ). after 72 h exposure in 5% fetal bovine serum, cells were allowed to recover in serum-free media in normoxic gas (21% o 2 + 5% co 2 ) for 24 h. then, cells were treated with trypan blue and viewed under the microscope, and blue stained cells as a marker for dead cells were counted. the cells were then treated with propidium iodide for dna count as a marker for total cells. a total of at least 400 cells per microscopic field were counted over at least three microscope fields per culture well. the counts from each field in a given culture well were then averaged to obtain the data used to calculate the numbers reported as n = 3 (three culture wells of 1,200 cells each per condition). the total number of necrotic cells as a percentage of total cells was then calculated. to assess for possible apoptosis, caspase 9 was detected by western blotting of cell lysates collected at the end of the 72-h exposure to hyperoxia or at the end of the 24-h recovery in normoxic gas. blotting methods are described below.cells were harvested with protease inhibitor (protease inhibitor cocktail p840, sigma, st louis, mo). soluble protein lysate (45 µg) were loaded and run on 10% tris.hcl polyacrylamide gels, separated by sds-page, in 10× tris/glycine/sds buffer (biorad, berkeley, ca). gels were transferred to immun-blot polyvinylidene fluoride blotting membrane. blotting membrane was blocked by 5% nonfat dry milk in 0.1% tween 20 in tris-buffered saline. western blot analysis of ace-2 was performed with anti-ace-2 polyclonal antibody (1:4,000: abcam biotechnology, cambridge, ma). antibodies for caspase 9 and adam17/tace were obtained from cell signaling, danvers, ma. to ensure equal loading of proteins, membranes were probed with an antibody against β-actin (cell signaling technology). bands were visualized by hrp-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:10,000 dilution, santa cruz biotechnology, santa cruz, ca) using enhanced chemiluminescence detection by standard techniques.imr-90s raised and treated in six-well collagen i-coated plates (bd biosciences, bedford, ma) were harvested in ice-cold complete tris-hcl buffer (tris-hcl (ph 6.5), 1× complete protease inhibitor cocktail edta-free (roche, indianapolis, in), and lisinopril (50 μg/l; sigma-aldrich). lisinopril was added to the buffer as a means to block the activity of ace. in a half-area black 96-well microtiter plate, the fluorogenic peptide substrate for ace-2, mca-yvadapk(dnp)-oh (r&d systems, minneapolis, mn) was added at a final concentration of 10 μmol/l to 30 μl cell lysate (in a total volume of 50 μl using complete tris-hcl buffer) on ice. dx 600 (at a final concentration of 10 µmol/l; phoenix pharmaceuticals, burlingame, ca), a competitive inhibitor of ace-2, was also added to half of the wells to compare enzymatic ace-2 activity inhibition. the plate was warmed to room temperature and the fluorescence was read on a plate reader (310/20 nm excitation and 420/50 nm emission) in a biotek fl600 microplate fluorescence reader (biotek, burlington vt) for 30 min. kinetic readings were normalized to their respective dna concentrations.in a clear 96-well microtiter plate, 4 µl of cell lysate and 46 µl of complete np-40 lysis buffer (np-40, 1× complete protease inhibitor cocktail ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid-free (roche)) were added. total volume was brought up to 100 µl with the addition of 50 µl hoescht dye (final concentration of 5 µmol/l). the microtiter plate was then covered and rocked for 30 s on medium speed. the plate was then placed in a 37 °c incubator for 15 min. fluorescence was read on a plate reader (360/40 nm excitation and 460/40 emission) (fl600 microplate fluorescence reader).imr 90 cells after treatment were extracted for total rna by trizol reagent (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca) following the manufacturer's protocol. first-strand cdna was synthesized from total rna using superscript ii reverse transcriptase and oligo(dt) [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] (invitrogen). real-time pcr was carried out with cdna synthesized from 50 ng of total rna, sybr green pcr core reagents (applied biosystems, foster city, ca) according to the manufacturer's instructions, and 0.2 μmol/l specific primers for human ace-2 (sense 5′-cattggagcaagtgttggatctt-3′, and antisense 5′-gagcta-atgcatgcca-ttctca-3′), adam17/ tace (sense 5′-ttggtggtagcagatcatcg-3′ and antisense 5′-ctgggagagccaacataagc-3′) and β-actin (sense 5′-aggccaaccgcg-agaagatgacc-3′ and antisense 5′-gaagtccagggcgacgtagc-3′). the thermal profile for ace-2 and β-actin started with 10 min activation at 95 °c followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °c for 60 s, annealing at 55 °c for 60 s, extension at 72 °c for 60 s, and ending with dissociation curve analysis of the pcr products. the thermal profile for adam17/ tace started with 10 min activation at 95 °c followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °c for 15 s, annealing at 55 °c for 15 s, extension at 72 °c for 30 s. reactions were performed in a steponeplus realtime pcr system instrument (applied biosystems). threshold cycle (c t ) data were collected using stepone software version 2.1 (applied biosystems). the relative ace-2 expression was normalized to β-actin and calculated with the comparative ct method of 2−δδct, where δct = ctace-2 − ctβ-actin and δδct = δct treatment − δct control .media from cells plated in a total volume of 1 ml were collected in a 15 ml conical tube containing 300 µl of 10× complete protease inhibitor edta-free cocktail (roche). cell debris from the sample was removed through centrifugation. samples were prepped for dialysis using spectra/por biotech cellulose ester dialysis membranes with a mwco 10 kda (spectrum laboratories, rancho dominguez, ca) according to manufacturer's protocol. membranes containing the samples were then kept at 4 °c in a 2 l beaker of deionized water with gentle stirring until the media sample became clear (~2 d). at the completion of dialysis, samples were transferred to a new 15 ml canonical tube and frozen at −80 °c. completely frozen samples were lyophilized using the labconco freeze dryer/freezone 4.5 system according the manufacturer's protocol. lyophilized samples were diluted in 100 µl of sterile deionized water. western blot for ace-2 and β-actin was done by standard protocols.with the capability of inducing elevated expression of ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), the cellular receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) or ace inhibitors treatment may have a controversial role in both facilitating virus infection and reducing pathogenic inflammation. we aimed to evaluate the effects of arbs/ace inhibitors on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in a retrospective, single-center study. one hundred twenty-six patients with covid-19 and preexisting hypertension at hubei provincial hospital of traditional chinese medicine in wuhan from january 5 to february 22, 2020, were retrospectively allocated to arbs/ace inhibitors group (n=43) and non-arbs/ace inhibitors group (n=83) according to their antihypertensive medication. one hundred twenty-five age- and sex-matched patients with covid-19 without hypertension were randomly selected as nonhypertension controls. in addition, the medication history of 1942 patients with hypertension that were admitted to hubei provincial hospital of traditional chinese medicine from november 1 to december 31, 2019, before the covid-19 outbreak were also reviewed for external comparison. epidemiological, demographic, clinical, and laboratory data were collected, analyzed, and compared between these groups. the frequency of arbs/ace inhibitors usage in patients with hypertension with or without covid-19 were comparable. among patients with covid-19 and hypertension, those received either arbs/ace inhibitors or non-arbs/ace inhibitors had comparable blood pressure. however, arbs/ace inhibitors group had significantly lower concentrations of hs-crp (high-sensitivity c-reactive protein; p=0.049) and pct (procalcitonin, p=0.008). furthermore, a lower proportion of critical patients (9.3% versus 22.9%; p=0.061) and a lower death rate (4.7% versus 13.3%; p=0.216) were observed in arbs/ace inhibitors group than non-arbs/ace inhibitors group, although these differences failed to reach statistical significance. our findings thus support the use of arbs/ace inhibitors in patients with covid-19 and preexisting hypertension.effects of angiotensin ii receptor blockers and ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors on virus infection, inflammatory status, and clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19 and hypertension: a single-center retrospective studyto the editor:the journal of allergy and clinical immunology: in practice published a contingency planning article by shaker et al 1 to guide the allergists/immunologists through the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic. they provided suggestions for a logical approach to quickly adjust our services to mitigate risk to both medical staff and patients during the pandemic, while social distancing is being encouraged. in this context, there is an ongoing worldwide debate regarding the use of angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and ibuprofen in patients with covid-19. the concern is that these drugs could worsen the prognosis of patients with the infection. 2 the 2 coronaviruses of the ''severe acute respiratory syndrome,'' china, 2002/2003, and of the ''middle east respiratory syndrome,'' middle eastern countries, 2012, use angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4, respectively, as their receptors to infect human cells. 3 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the coronavirus involved in covid-19, also depends on ace2 for cell entry. 4 drugs that inhibit ace paradoxically upregulate ace2 expression on the cell surface and could theoretically facilitate coronavirus infection and progression. 5 there is no definitive evidence that this effect is clinically relevant, but some retrospective observational studies suggest an association between the use of these drugs and a worse outcome of covid-19. 6 a cause-effect association cannot be confirmed, and ace inhibitors could be confounding factors that indicate comorbidities, such as cardiopathy, hypertension, and diabetes, besides advancing age, which are well-recognized risk factors for worse outcome of covid-19. myocardial injury, indicated by increased serum levels of troponin t, and cardiovascular disease had a significant association with fatal outcomes of covid-19. 6 moreover, withdrawal of ace inhibitors could aggravate an underlying disease and make patients more unstable to overcome a coronavirus infection.coincidentally or not, the receptors of coronavirus, ace2 and dipeptidyl peptidase 4, are enzymes that break down bradykinin in addition to their main functions. after sars-cov-2 binding to ace2, the viral complex undergo endocytosis and surface ace2 is downregulated (figure 1 ). ace also degrades bradykinin and drugs that inhibit this enzyme lead to an increase in tissue bradykinin and may even trigger cough and angioedema in hypersensitive individuals. we speculate whether the excess of bradykinin in patients taking ace inhibitors could complicate coronavirus infection, because of its effects of vasodilation, increase in vascular permeability, and cough reflex exacerbation. 7 however, no study has been done investigating this hypothesis and current data do not justify the discontinuation of ace inhibitors in patients at risk or with covid-19. figure 1 . interaction between the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the bradykinin system. during sars-cov-2 infection, there is downregulation of ace2 at type ii pneumocytes surface, decreasing bradykinin degradation. ace also degrades bradykinin, and drugs that inhibit this enzyme increase bradykinin levels. red dashed line (ace, ace2, and dpp4 degrade bradykinin); blue dashed line (ace2 degrades angiotensin i to angiotensin 1-9 and angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7); blue solid line (conversion of angiotensin i to angiotensin ii). dpp4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4. some experts' opinions and unpublished french cases suggested an association between the use of ibuprofen and a worse outcome of covid-19, 8 but there are no studies supporting this hypothesis. a recent publication stated that ibuprofen also increases ace2 expression, but the authors did not provide the reference that supports this statement. 2 ibuprofen use could be a marker of disease severity and not necessarily the cause of a worse prognosis. patients more toxemic and symptomatic, having fever, asthenia, and myalgia, are more prone to use nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids). if ibuprofen is indeed associated with worse covid-19 outcomes, whether or not a possible association would relate to the specific agent ibuprofen or the larger group of nsaids would require further investigation. the european medicines agency concluded that there is currently no scientific evidence establishing a link between ibuprofen or nsaids and worsening of covid-19. 8 knowledge of sars-cov-2 infection increases daily and further studies are needed to better understand the influence, if any, of ace inhibitors and nsaids in covid-19 severity. at present, there is no evidence to generate even a weak recommendation to discontinue these medications during the pandemic. patients' care must be personalized, and ace inhibitors and/or nsaids may be used if indicated, after weighing the benefits and risks.in the past two decades, coronaviruses have caused three epidemic diseases: covid-19 1 , the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) 2 , the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) 3 . they are enveloped viruses with a positive sense single-stranded rna genome (26-32 kb) from sequence analysis revealed a high sequence similarity among the coronaviruses causing the covid-19, sars, and mers 1 . because of the high similarity with sars coronavirus, usually termed sars-cov, the 2019ncov is also named sars-cov-2. the high similarity also favours the understanding of many aspects related of the infection in the human body thanks to knowledge derived from scientific experiments and studies performed on previously human infecting "relatives" of sars-cov2 4 , which are also causing severe acute respiratory stress. the genome of sars-cov-2 contains at least ten open reading frames (orfs) useful to viral replication and transcription and coding for structural proteins. specifically, four main structural proteins have been recognized which are: spike (s), envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n) and membrane (m) proteins. the spike protein plays a critical role to start the viral infection.s proteins of coronaviruses are large membrane linked glycoproteins that are responsible both for binding to receptors on host cells and for membrane fusion 2 . the s proteins are organized by the s1 and s2 domains, which are respectively similar to the s1 and s2 domains in both human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) and influenza proteins. the s1 domain of all characterized coronaviruses, sars-cov and sars-cov2 included, mediates the initial high-affinity association with their receptors 5 . experimental analyses proved that sars-cov2 does not use known coronavirus receptors, such as aminopeptidase n (apn) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4). sars-cov-2, instead, it requires the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) to enter cells 1 . this was clearly shown for sars-cov 5 . studies on the african green monkey kidney cell line vero e6, which permits viral replication, highlighted the mechanisms of association of the s1 domain of sars-cov with human cell receptors. the authors confirmed that a soluble form of ace2, but not of the related enzyme termed ace, blocked association of the s1 domain with vero e6 cells, and also that anti-ace2, but not anti-ace antibodies blocked viral replication in vero e6 cells. the role of ace2 as a functional receptor for sars-cov was recently confirmed also for sars-cov2 1, 4 . it was demonstrated that also sars-cov2, as well as sars-cov, use endosomal cysteine proteases cathepsin b and l (catb/l) and the transmembrane serine protease tmprss2 for s protein priming in cell lines, a step required for viral entry into the cell. 4 tmprss2 had previously been revealed as a host cell factor that is critical for entry in the cells and not for viral replication, affecting the s protein at the cell surface and inducing virus-plasma membrane fusion 6 . furthermore, lysosometropic reagents, like e64d, which inhibits catb/l, failed to completely inhibit sars-cov2, as well as sars-cov, entry in the cells. indeed, the entry full inhibition also needed tmprss2 inhibitors (like camostat mesylate) 4 . this concurrent action had been previously shown to be required for robust blockade of sars-cov 7 .host susceptibility to sars -cov2 infection is primarily determined by the affinity between the viral s1 binding site (receptor binding site, rbd) and host ace2, and this determines the initial viral attachment step 8 . moreover, since the bind of ace2 to the s1 domain of s proteins should require the priming of the s protein at the cell surface to induce virus-plasma membrane fusion for viral entry 4 , the copresence of both molecule should be investigated to determine the possible occurrence of the infection in the cells. ace2 appeared to have a restricted distribution in human tissues, being initially reported to be expressed mainly in the heart, kidney, and testis. 9,10 interestingly, remarkable findings since 2004 11 revealed the surface expression of ace2 on lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes of the small intestine, as well as in arterial and venous endothelial cells and arterial smooth muscle cells in all organs studied, explaining the relationship with sars coronavirus infection. together with the presence of ace2 in vascular endothelium, these results highlighted possible routes of entry for the sars-cov. recently, single-cell transcriptomes showed the presence of ace2 rna (here indicated as ace2) in type ii alveolar cells of lung, esophagus upper and stratified epithelial cells, absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon, cholangiocytes, myocardial cells, kidney proximal tubule cells, and bladder urothelial cells, suggesting that those organs could be considered as potential high risk for 2019-ncov infection. in particular, presence of ace2 was revealed also in the mucosa of the oral cavity, being highly enriched in epithelial cells. moreover, the research highlighted that among different oral sites, ace2 expression was higher in tongue than buccal and gingival tissues. here we also investigated the expression pattern of tmprss2 from public biological databases, [https://www.proteinatlas.org/ensg00000184012-tmprss2/tissue]. this analysis revealed that protein and mrnas are not typically present in lung in physiological condition. nevertheless, it is interesting to note, that tmprss2 expression correlates with sars-cov infection in the upper lobe of the lung 6 . the protein is almost present also in paratyroids and salivary glands, while the mrna expression is detected in lung, salivary gland and in the tongue. these findings further indicate that the mucosa of the oral cavity may be a potentially high risk route for the starting of the infection 12 .it is worthy to mention in this context that chatepsins, that can also contribute to the internalization of the virus 4 , are stimulated by cytokines, key proteins in the inflammatory response. interleukin 6 (il-6) leads a relevant increase in cathepsin l, whereas tgf-beta1 decreases the amount of cathepsin l, at both mrna and protein levels, proving that the cytokines il-6 and tgf-beta 1 modulate cathepsin gene expression. 13 remarkably, il6 and not tgf-beta1 appear to by overproduced in covid-19 patients 14, 15 .public data from documented computed tomography (ct) and radiography imaging from covid19 infected patients [https://www.sirm.org/category/senza-categoria/covid-19/] highlight that a cytokine storm-syndrome rather than the virus itself could be the cause of severe lung injuries and death. 16 a cytokine storm is an overproduction of cytokines and an accumulation of immune cells that is often associated with lung inflammation and fluid buildup, and that can lead to respiratory distress and mortality. moreover, it is widely known (information also available from wikipedia) that the principal symptoms of a cytokine storm are high fever, fatigue and nausea, which correspond to the principal ones from covid19 infected patients [https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-symptoms/]. cytokines are proteins produced and secreted by a broad range of cells, including immune cells and endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and various stromal cells in response to varied stimuli. they act as chemical messengers and are released from cells in contact with the stimulus, a pathogen, affecting the actions of other cells by binding to receptors on their surface. over the past two decades, much has been learned about the diagnosis and treatment of cytokine storm syndromes even for intervention in sars 17 and mers 18 . the development of biological therapies for a variety of rheumatic, oncologic, and other conditions, offered novel approaches to treating the immune response, going beyond a not targeted immune suppression by corticosteroids or other relatively non-selective immune suppressants. as an example, recently, a number of specific anti-cytokine approaches have proven effective in treating a variety of cytokine storm syndromes, including those triggered by coronaviruses. data are becoming available from cytokine content in patients affected by covid19 as they are from patients involved in previous pandemic infections. 19,20, this reveals the intricate patterning of gene expression associated to the inflammatory status and the possible side effect from untargeted treatments. 17 the ras signalling although its relevance for the sars-covs infection, ace2 9,10 was first discovered for its role as a transmembrane exopeptidase that catalyses the conversion of angiotensin ii (ang-ii) to angiotensin (1-7) , a vasodilator 21, 22 . angiotensin ii (angii) is a peptide hormone that can bind the type 1 angiotensin ii receptor (at1), giving place to a number of effects that result in vasoconstriction and, therefore, in increased blood pressure. angii also stimulates the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex in the kidney to promote sodium retention. angii is produced from the angiotensin i by the transmembrane protein angiotensin-converting enzyme, or ace (ace1), that was discovered in 1956 23 . ace2 may also convert angiotensin i to angiotensin (1-9) 10 , which has a prothrombotic activity 24 . the ras system acts as a homeostatic regulator of blood pressure, fluid and electrolyte balance, and vascular resistance, as well as of the function of several organs, with a fundamental role in both health and disease. the complexity of the whole system is complicated by its systemic and local tissuespecificity, which includes a wide range of molecules with different biological actions (including the alternative ang ii receptor, the angiotensin type 2 receptor (at2r), the mas-related g-proteincoupled receptor, other metabolites, like aldosterone, ang iii, ang iv, etc.). 25 in a more simplistic way, it is conventional to consider the ace-angii-at1r and the ace2-ang(1-7) pathways as the two main axes representing the renin angiotensin system signalling (ras signalling) 26 .the discovery of an enzyme that cleaves the vasoactive peptide angii soon highlighted its possible role in the treatment of hypertension, attracting attention also for pharmacological applications. several observations and experimental evidence suggested the beneficial role of ace2 in diseases and cardiovascular disfunctions 27, 21 . ace2 is also essential for the expression of neutral amino acid transporters, influencing the composition of the gut microbiota 28 . ace2 is shown to increase in a number of pathologies, including myocardial infarction 24 , atherosclerosis 29 , renal diseases 30,31 and diabetes 32, 33 , liver cirrhosis 34 . inflammatory lung injuries 35, 36 and, in these studies, the general protective role of the enzyme when inhibiting the angi-ace-angii axis of ras is discussed. 37 the overwhelming scientific production in the field also reports on the spread role of ace2 increase as anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant agent, in several tissues, lungs 38 , liver 39 , 40 , in neuroprotection 41 , and also in atherosclerosis, cerebral ischemia, obesity, chronic kidney disease, and asthma. indeed, it induces cytokins depletion, antiproliferative effects, anti-fibrosis and antihypertrophy effects 42 , addressing its key action and its role as target for therapies in inflammatory diseases. 26, 43, 44, 45, 46 ace2 has been considered as protecting from predisposition to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) 47 , as also demonstrated in sars-cov infection, where its decrease, due to the interaction with the virus, favours the syndrome 48 . this indicates that a reduction in pulmonary ace2 activity also contributes to the pathogenesis of lung inflammation, accompanied by the expression of cytokins that cooperate with the direct effects of viral infection. as an example among the many, the loss of ace2 function in mouse shows the release of proinflammatory chemokines, such as c-x-c motif chemokine 5 (cxcl5), macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (mip2), c-x-c motif chemokine 1 (kc), and tnf-α from airway epithelia, increased neutrophil infiltration, and exaggerated lung inflammation and injury 38 . interesting, smog and nicotins also favour lung inflammation increasing ace activity and, therefore, affecting ace2 functionality. 49the need to reduce the negative effects of the ace-angii-at1r axis, launched a series of therapeutic approaches aiming to amplify the ace2-ang(1-7) axis. ace inhibitors, at1r blockers and mineralocorticoid receptor blockers (mrb), pioglitazone and ibuprofen 50 included, are reported to have direct effects on suppression of the ace-ang ii-at1r axis, often increasing ace2 and ang (1-7) significantly 21 , in contrast with the inhibitory effects on the ace2-ang(1-7) axis by glucocorticoids 51 . on the other hand, other substances are usually considered dangerous in some treatments for their negative effects on ace2 levels. the discovery of the role of ace2 as the membrane receptor of sars-covs and sars-cov2, raises controversial opinions concerning the effect of medical treatments in facilitating virus infection in human body. because of the comorbidity of covid19 with several diseases, like hypertension and diabetes 52 , conventional pharmacological treatments are also under consideration. hypotheses have been therefore put forward, especially from social media, to suggest potential adverse effects of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ace-i) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs or sartans), in covid-2019, because of their action on the ras pathway. this also provoked justified alarmed recommendations from different scientific societies 53 that underlined the lack of evidence against ace-i or arb medication (http://www.nephjc.com/news/covidace2). however, scientific evidence concerning the effects of pharmacological treatments acting on the ras signalling system are available from animals 24, 54, 55, 56 and also from human tissues treatments 46 . this is the reason why a careful analysis on previous results can now help to clarify possible relationships of these medical treatments in predisposing to covid19.this effort aimed to depict the main pathways determining the infection of sars-cov19 in the human body and the molecular framework for its establishment. the molecular model that emerged represents the ras signalling system components and the possible links with sars-cov19 infection, mediated by the transmembrane protein ace2 1 (ace2m) (figure 1 ). documented (solid lines) as well as hypothetical edges (dashed lines) in the network inferred from the public available scientific research are reported. the effects of ace2 shedding 55 and/or internalization 56 which are mediated by at1r, one of the two receptor of angotensin ii, are also shown. ace2 shedding is determined by the cleavage of its ectodomain and its release in the plasma 55 , producing free ace2 (ace2p). the alternative route represents ace2 internalization 56 , where the ectodomain is supposed to be imported into the cell, inhibiting its functioning outside of the membrane, and producing what is here indicated as the internalized ace2 (ace2i). both processes are reported to be mediated by at1r when not blocked with arbs. in case of at1r blockage, eventually by pharmacological treatments, these two routes are not working (figure 2, panels b and c) . the model also includes the s-priming, which is required for the entry of sars-cov19 in human cells 4 , and the action described for cytokins il6 and tgf beta 1 in favouring or limiting the intracellular production of cathepsins, respectively 3 . the model represents the documented role of ace2 levels in triggering the anti-inflammatory response, in case of high expression, or in inhibiting it 42, 38 . the possible connections with lung severe damages are also shown 47 .in figure 2 , we summarize the effects of treatments on ras molecules resulting from experimental studies on animal 24,54 and on human tissues 57 . molecules levels in terms of concentration or activity are reported in table 1 . interestingly, the results here reported highlight that the treatments with sartans alone, or in combination with ace inhibitors determine high activity of ace2, while treatments with ace inhibitors determine no changes in ace2 activity. colours in figure 2 highlight the differential levels of the molecules (black: corresponding to the control or not reported; red: high; blue: low). solid red lines indicate the favoured routes that emerge in case of sars-cov19 presence. the possible pathways (red routes) are inferred based on molecule concentrations in the respective condition. in green boxes, clinical parameters to be collected and further investigated for disease progress monitoring, since their value could be affected when the viral infection is occurring. as an example, the monitoring of ang(1-7) and ang-ii levels could reveal the activity of ace2 in the ras signalling pathways, together with ace2p levels. cov19/ace2p (ace2p in the plasma bound to virus) levels could further depict the extent of virus upload. as a result, high risk and low risk medical treatments as well as the disease development could be traced appropriately timely configuring individual predisposition and progress of clinical conditions.this study was inspired and confirmed by one covid19 case in naples.sixty three years old man, under therapy for hypertension, treated with reaptan (ace-inhibitor). the dosage was set for an overweight man (105kg). the man was on diet during the last year till he reached 80kg, while under the same medical treatment. showing weakness, his dosage was reduced a couple of days before he discovered to be positive for covid-19. when declared positive, the man was suggested to change his treatment using only valsartan (courtesy from direct personal communication). during the disease, he manifested mild fever and nausea. the man fully recovered in 10 days and is now waiting for negative confirmatory tests.the long term, overdosage, ace-inhibitor treatment limited the sars-cov2 virulence in the single case patient here reported for two main reasons, which are clearly depicted by the model. first, the virus attack was hampered by the reduced ace2 availability known to be triggered by the medical treatment 54 , that provoked a decrease of the number of viral s-domain receptors (ace2m) on cell membranes, therefore limiting the viral entry in cells. second, in case shedding 55 would have occurred, favoured by the availability of at1r which is not blocked by other medical treatments, ace2m is cleaved and released in the form of a soluble molecule (acep), thus increasing the amount of circulating sars-cov2 receptor domain in the plasma. because sars-cov2 replication can be blocked by soluble forms of ace2 1 , we hypothesize that ace2p in plasma sequesters sars-cov2 and reduces the probability of viral internalization in human cells, conferring the additional protection from the viral infection. proactive compounds based on the administering to individuals of free ace2 as a medical treatment have already been proposed for limiting viral cellular invasion 58, 44 . hence, prolonged exclusive use of ace-inhibitors and avoidance of at1r blockade by arbs (sartans), that could be exerted by a combine treatment, could have provided a higher protection from the virus invasion for this patient. the later administering of medical treatments based on sartans, that was inappropriately suggested, fortunately did not affect a milder progress of the disease that favoured a successful recovery. this was highly probable due to an initial limited viral infection because of lack of ace2 cell receptors conferred by the overdosage treatment based on ace-inhibitors. monitoring of free ace2p or of soluble ace2 bound to viruses (ace2v), together with ang-ii and ang(1-7) levels and aldosterone in positive patients, can be the appropriate clinical trial that could further support the proposed hypothesis and be associated to current screening and monitoring for disease predisposition testing. unfortunately, the patient could not at all be monitored based on these parameters because of the emergency status in italy.many information to fight covid19 can be inferred from the scientific efforts and public biological databases thanks to studies on previous epidemic coronaviruses. the main effort here was to exploit this knowledge to define the sars-cov2 pathways when infecting the human body and the molecular bases for considering risk factors related to specific treatments. our molecular model elucidates the relationships between the ras signalling and the sars-cov infection, including additional routes that can be inferred based on scientific evidence. the levels of the involved molecules were estimated considering six different experiments related to treatments for hypertension in both animals 24, 54, 55, 56 and human tissues treatments 46 . these results, when associated with the model, highlight infection risk prone and protective medical interventions. in the case of arbs (sartans) and ace inhibitor treatments, the model reveals that arbs alone, or in combined treatments, that confer an increased ace2 activity on the cell membranes, results in higher risk for viral infection. in contrast, ace-inhibitors (when not combined with arbs) appear to exert a twoway protective role, decreasing ace2m on cell membranes and increasing ace2p in the plasma, thus offering a possible alternative to medical treatments for hypertension. one evidence from a positive fast recovering patient is surely not enough to prove our hypothesis, but it was the evidence that inspired it, and this should encourage clinical trials and appropriate statistics that are still lacking and are urgently required. we are suggesting, as an example, the monitoring of ras metabolites or of free or virus bound-ace2 in the plasma, that could provide crucial information to answer questions on disease predisposition, on its progress and on mechanisms that are affected by the viral infection. such approaches could be associated with the screening, the diagnostic, the monitoring and will surely highlight novel opportunities: as an example, in confirming the administering efficacy of ace2 or ace2-like molecules to prevent viral invasion in the organism. this data would also provide further evidence to convince the mainstream beliefs on the evidence here shown, for those who hardly accept model driven knowledge. the good news is that there are alternatives for hypertension treatments, and suitable medical guideline could be fast adopted based on recommendations of the pertinent medical societies. attention should also focus on monitoring covid19 propensities for the other diseases or treatments that trigger ace2 increase, therefore predisposing to the critical progress of the viral infection. 24, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 in parallel, careful studies should also consider covid19 progress in cases in which a decreased ace2 content occurs, ards included. 47, 48 beyond being supportive for the presented model, these studies could also reveal additional pathways of infection, expanding current knowledge and paving the way to novel investigations. low ace2 levels, in principle, depress the risk of a viral invasion since the depletion of viral receptor binding sites; on the other hand, one should keep in consideration that such predispositions were indeed revealed in occurrence of injuries triggered by the negative action on the ace2-ang(1-7) axis of the ras signalling. some questions therefore arise: who will play the major role in the viral attack? the decrease in viral receptor binding site, the presence of preceding injuries, or the medical care that was provided to overcome the injuries and the poor ace2 content?the world health organization communicated that the sars typically attacks the lungs in three phases: viral replication, immune hyper-reactivity, and pulmonary destruction [https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2020/02/here-is-what-coronavirus-does-to-thebody/]. scientific evidence, however, highlights that the distribution of the sars-covs receptor (ace2), does not strictly correlate with sars-covs cell tropism in lungs. expression patterns distribution in different organs and tissues of molecules triggering the viral entry 9,10,11 revealed that the virus could enter the cells through the tongue 12 , thanks to the co-presence of ace2 and of proteases favouring the s-priming, triggering the initial immune response. the release of specific cytokines such as il6 could also cooperate to the s-priming 4,13 . remarkably, il6 and not tgf-beta1 appears to be overproduced in covid-19 patients 14, 15 . the evidence that the inflammatory response could also contribute to the viral entry highlights an intriguing cooperative mechanism and an alarming scenario on the viral mechanisms of infection and on its evolution. the spreading of the infection to the lung cells could be through the vascular system, modulated by patient predisposition (i.e. ace2 levels on cell membranes along the vascular endothelium) 11 and by the individual capability to mount the appropriate immune response. the initial lung disturb, presumably due to viral destruction of lung infected cilia cells, like in sars, produce necrotic cells shed onto the luminal surface of the epithelium, contributing to a less reactive tissue response. 59 the critical development of the disease depends on further additional conditions. predisposing effects eventually due to previous injuries or inflammatory status, or to preceding pharmacological treatments, or to erroneous pharmacological treatments at the initial stage of infection 50, 21 , could facilitate the virus fast spreading, accompanied by an advantageous environment emerging from the side effects caused by its infection (for example ace2 depletion with further injuries and increased inflammation). the starting infection in the mouth and the secondary attack in the lungs via the vascular transportation is also suggested by evidence of the early bilateral lung injuries, highlighted by computational tomography and radiography images. the acute severe pneumonia is the result of both a depletion of ace2 content on cell membranes, noticeable creating damages, and a delayed mounting of the adaptive immune response 60 , contributing to alveoli engulfment due to an excessive innate response. this could furthermore justify the emergency from aged population, that could mount a slower response, putatively because of the reduced leukocytes levels. subsequent organ failure could be facilitated by an initial higher ace2m content in many key tissues 9,10,11 , then depleted by the viral attack. organ failure is also triggered by the infection mediated increase of dangerous components from the ace-angii axis of the ras signalling, with consequent cascades of events that cause typical effects like cardiovascular and kidney injuries. kidney has a high content of ace2 in physiological conditions and the renin/aldosterone branch can be the part of the ras system playing a role in the organ failure, also linking aldosterone levels to disease propensity. this also explains why men are more disease prone than women 61 , as it comes evident from the number of death on number of cases per sex (male: 4.7%; female: 2.8%), as reported in the disease statistics on march 23, 2020 [https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-age-sex-demographics/]. all concurrent events to be added to the severe cytokine storm that is damaging the lung tissues causing hypoxia. hypoxia is the main aspect today faced during the emergency in the hospitals. the medical intervention against the cytokines storm to reduce the acute respiratory distress syndrome need to be carefully targeted to avoid immune depression and consequent infection by secondary pathogens, although the immune depression is not a predisposing factor for this disease. attention should also be focused on avoiding medical treatments that could increase ace2m content with the aim to decrease inflammation 50, 21 . all the relevant molecular connections are elucidated in the proposed model, accompanied, by the depicting of the possible routes for the infection, based on scientific evidence and the analysis of the expression pattern per tissue of the main proteins involved in the viral entry from public biological databases. what this research is also teaching is that, although a severe pandemy was expected, useful information was available, possible preparative actions were suggested at least since 2005 62 , we were not ready! one example comes from the evidence that the infection is connected with the ras signalling and that there is still lack of appropriate trials to investigate on hypertension parameters for risk assessment and disease progress monitoring. the lack of public digitalized data from diagnostics in the hospitals, and from the medical surveillance at home, on covid19 positive patients that do not manifest a severe disease is also evident. shared tools for diagnostics and coordinated intervention should be fixed soon. the emergency must be faced with proper instruments. what can we do now? while working to fight the disease with vaccine development and adopting new or re-purposed antiviral medicines to limit the virus attack, we must also use all the knowledge at our disposal to treat those patients most at risk of dying, collecting other data for further understanding the disease. this includes primarily to urgently implement evidence-based and science driven approaches that could efficiently accompany those who are on the front line in the hospitals and are facing the emergency. the implementation of diagnostics methods, medical treatments and tools based on the monitoring of the individual clinical conditions, and the set-up of appropriate intervention for targeted groups of patients, should profit of a joint action with a proactive scientific community and the support of stakeholders. we really hope that this alerting will be foster these actions.in table 2 we report the take home messages that were gained from the presented analysis covid19. the model is presented in a dedicated website in the framework of "lets'be: let's be ready!", a transdisciplinary initiative to make scientific knowledge understandable and accessible to the interested community, to be conscious for the current fight and be prepared for the next. for further information and possible interest in giving a contribution, please subscribe to http://bigdatainhealth.org/letsbe. table 2 . summary of the main evidence derived from the work.-the presence of ace2 and associated proteins favouring the viral entry in oral tissues suggests that the initial infection could arise preferentially in the mouth and, if favoured by clinical conditions and not arrested by an efficient immune response, would spread to the lung through the vascular system, provoking a cytokine storm that can be fatal.-an over infection in lung tissues, mediated by previous or concurrent medical treatments or predisposition might enhance fast engulfment of the alveoli due to an over response of the innate immune system. this is accompanied by the cooperative effect of the misfunctioning of the ace2-ang(1-7) axis of the ras signalling system, that further contributes to the inflammatory response, while not anymore protecting lungs from injuries.-increase of ace2 content could favour viral invasion (evidence of ace2 increase are found in scientific literature for mineralocorticoid receptor blockers (mrb), ibuprofen, arbs-sartans).-substances could sequester or inactivate molecules that reduce ace2 content; as an example, at1r sequestering by arbs (sartans) increases ace2 content on cell membranes.-substances could favour shedding or internalization of ace2m could decrease the viral infection rate, although side effects due to the decreased functioning of the ace2-ang(1-7) ras signalling axis.-exclusive treatments by ace-inhibitors (not accompanied by arbs (sartan) treatments) could exert a protective effect.-targeted actions based on deep diagnostics to reduce cytokine overload (not using general antiinflammatory treatments) should be provided since some cytokines appears to favour while others inhibit the viral infection (examples are reported in model here provided (figure 1) ).-information on cytokines average content from covid-19 patients (critical or dead) are available from wuhan patients and from sars-cov previous pandemic. this diagnostic parameters could be useful to be traced per patient, and could provide relevant information for treatments and for further investigations on the disease progression.-inappropriate treatments could favour attacks from secondary pathogens (eg. decreasing cytokins) -inappropriate treatments could favour the viral invasion (eg. increasing ace2 content) -ace2 levels increase in a number of pathologies, as here reviewed, and that predispose to the infection. high risk and low risk treatments to viral infection are shown. a.results from in vitro experiments on human tubular cell lines (hk-2) which were performed to analyse the response to increasing dosages of ang ii 57 show up-regulation of ace mrna (ace) as well as of the encoded protein (ace), while reducing ace2 and ace2m content, respectively. b.exposure to losartan, an at1r blocker (arb), resulted in decreased ace levels for both mrnas and proteins and in the increase of ace2 (mrna and protein). results from treatments with sartans on rats 54 revealed increased ace2 and ace2, indicating high ace2 activity and high mrna levels, in agreement with what reported for human cell lines 57 for similar treatments (b). c. increased mrna levels and control-like ace2 activity were revealed under exposure to lisinopril (an ace inhibitor). d. control like ace2 mrna expression and an increased ace2 activity resulted in the combination of the two treatments. noticeable, in rats medicated with lisinopril, increased cardiac ace2 gene transcription did not elicit a comparable increase in ace2 activity. in green boxes, some of the parameters that would need monitoring for appropriate health and risk assessments in individuals.angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) has its homologue, ace2 discovered in 2000 as a ace related caroxypeptidase not inhibited by captopril (1, 2) . ace2 was firstly shown to be expressed in the kidneys of both the normotensive and the spontaneously hypertensive rat strains (3) . subsequent studies demonstrated down-regulation of renal ace2 in three different models of hypertension (4) . moreover, circulating and cardiac levels of angiotensin ii (at-ii) were shown to increase in the ace2-null mice. ace2 is the principal pathway for ang-(1-7) formation from at-ii (ang-1-8), protecting against excessive activation of at1 receptor in the heart tissues, however, newer findings suggested that ace2 can be an important element in the renin-angiotensin aldosterone system (5) . following these studies, ace and ace2 focused the attention of researchers for their contribution in diverse human disorders. recently, the new coronavirus (2019-ncov or sars-cov-2) outbreak which has affected people all over the world has further highlighted the role of ace2. this virus has about 80% sequence identity with the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-related coronaviruses (sars-covs) and 96% sequence identity to a bat coronavirus. most remarkably, sars-cov-2 was shown to utilize the similar cell entry receptor ace2 as sars-cov (6, 7). a recent study has shown that the ace2-binding pocket for sars-cov-2 spike protein receptor-binding domain (rbd) is almost identical to this one of sars-cov rbd. structural protein modeling led to identification of amino acid residues in sars-cov-2 rbd that critical in ace2 binding. notably, most of these residues are either highly conserved or have comparable side chain chemical properties with the sars-cov rbd.this similarity of the structure and amino acid sequence stimulated intensive debate on the convergent evolution of these viruses rbds under a pressure of enhanced binding to ace2 (8) . ace2 has been shown to be expressed as a membrane bound protein in several human tissues such as lung, intestine, heart and kidney. the surface expression of this protein on was j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f demonstrated on ciliated bronchial cells and on the lung alveolar epithelial cells but also in endothelial cells, which was stated a noticeable discovery (9) . moreover, a recent in silico analysis of rna-seq profiles verified expression of ace2 in the mucosa of oral cavity (10) . figure 1 shows the molecular mechanisms initiated after sars-covs entry into the cells and the significance of ace and ace2 in these processes. then, ace converts at-i to at-ii. finally, ace2 cleaves at-ii to produce at-(1-7). at-ii can bind with at1r to initiate inflammation and fibrosis in lung tissue. however, binding of at-(1-7) with masr inhibits this process. sars-covs exploits ace2 for their entrance into the cells. a transmembrane serine protease tmprss2 has a crucial role in activation of the fusion of a virus with cell membrane. moreover, the furin protease which is proconvertase physiologically required to activate proteins in the golgi apparatus mediates proteolysis of the spike protein s2 subunit, an unique feature for sars-cov-2 (11) . ace2 levels are decreased in sars-cov infected cells leading to increase in at-ii and decrease in at- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels. based on receptor effects of these proteins mediated by at1r and masr, these two alterations have synergic effects on induction of lung fibrosis. moreover, at-ii has a role in degradation of ace2 through ubiquitination (12) . sars-covs also enhance expression levels of mir-200c-3p and mir-429 in the infected cells, both of them being regarded as ace2 targeting mirnas (13, 14) (ace: angiotensin converting enzyme, acei: ace inhibitor, at: angiotensinogen, arb: angiotensin ii receptor blocker).in the current review, we discuss the expression pattern and function of the both ace proteins in relation with the underlying disorders, administration of certain medications and the existence of common genomic variants within ace genes to explain the differences in the response of affected individuals to sars-cov-2.in agreement with the role of ace2 on virus uptake by cells, up-regulation of human ace2 has increased disease severity in mice infected with sars-cov (15) . moreover, injecting sars-cov spike into mice has led to down-regulation of ace2, thus aggravating the lung injury (16, 17) . consequently, ace2 functions as the cellular receptor for sars-cov entrance but also confers a protective mechanism against lung injury (18) . based on these investigations, level of expression of ace2 is an important factor in the sars-cov infection. thus, comorbid conditions that influence expression of this protein might affect severity of disease. table 1 summarizes the available data on abnormal expression of ace and ace2 in human/ animal disorders. several medications have been shown to alter expression levels of ace or ace2.administration of these medications not only can modify a risk of infection with sars-cov, but also can affect the disease course. table 2 summarizes the results of studies which reported alteration of ace or ace2 levels following administration of certain medications.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f several potentially functional gene polymorphisms have been identified in ace and ace2. table 3 shows the results studies which assessed the association between ace polymorphisms and human disorders. micorna (mirnas) as regulators of gene expression have been involved in several acerelated pathways and have been shown to alter expression of ace proteins or being altered by ace proteins. these small-sized rnas can bind with the 3′ untranslated region (3′ utr) of their targets to stimulate degradation of the target mrna and suppress translation.moreover, mirnas can interact with 5′ utr, coding regions, and promoters, thus regulating gene expression by various mechanisms. secretion of mirnas in extracellular components provides them the ability to participate in the cell-cell communication (85) . table 4 shows the results of studies which assessed association between mirnas and ace proteins. on the other hand, a meta-analysis has reported association between the administration of ace inhibitors and reduction in risk of pneumonia. notably, ace inhibitors may be more efficient in reducing the risk of pneumonia in asian patients. also, treatment with ace j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f inhibitors was associated with a significant reduction in risk of pneumonia-related mortality compared with controls (96) . this may be also related to the dual effect of ace2 in viral infection and protection against acute respiratory distress syndrome.although the ace/ace2 regulation is complicated, it seems that in the absence of ace the accumulation of angiotensin i may lead to the upregulation of ace2. whether this could facilitate the viral infection, is plausible because ace2 is considered as a specific target for coronavirus treatment (95) . it means that the population-based differences in the ace2 expression may affect the efficacy of a future antiviral treatment.in brief, we summarize that coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and sars-cov-2, utilize ace2 receptor for cell entry and infection. we know that the most severe consequence of the expression.in addition to the routine models for investigation of the pathological events during infections, tissue engineering methods particularly "advanced biomaterials" or "functionalized scaffolds" (101) would provide study models to investigate the potential of such approaches in the treatment of the disorder. as an advance in the field of functional studies, the obtained results from "safe" in-vitro models which work without any additive can be applied in human models (102) .taken together, the data presented above show the diversity of factors that modulate ace/ angiotensin ii type 2 receptor (at 2 r) [7] (fig. 1 ). ang ii signaling through at 1 r mediates the effects of vasoconstriction, inflammation and fibrosis, whereas at 2 r activation has opposing effects through vasodilation, the antiinflammatory response and antifibrosis effects [7] . angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a homolog of ace, has distinct enzyme active sites and is a key counterregulatory enzyme that degrades ang ii to ang-(1-7), thereby attenuating its effects on vasoconstriction, sodium retention, inflammation, and fibrosis through the mas receptor [7] . ace2 also cleaves angiotensin i to angiotensin-(1-9) [7] . the effects of ace2 are not suppressed by ace inhibitors (aceis) [7] . under normal physiological conditions, activities of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r axis, ace/ ang ii/at 2 r axis, and ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor axis are in a dynamic equilibrium state, maintaining the normal function of the corresponding system [7] . aceis and at 1 r blockers (arbs) not only inhibit the ace/ang ii/at 1 r pathway but also modulate the ace/ang ii/at 2 r pathway and ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor pathway [7] .previous studies have revealed a cell-specific expression pattern of ace2 in multiple organs, and ace2 is broadly expressed in the heart, kidneys, and intestine as well as in alveolar epithelial cells of the lungs, which are the principal target of and the main site of injury caused by sars-cov-2 [8] . under normal conditions, ace2 expression in the lungs is lower than that in other organs, including the heart, kidneys, and intestine [8] . the degree of expression and the biological relevance of ace2 may vary depending on the tissue and clinical state. the functional role of ace2 in the lungs appears to be relatively minimal under normal conditions [9] , but ace2 may be upregulated in certain clinical states, probably for organ protection. it has been shown in experimental models that ace2 is upregulated by relatively high doses of aceis and arbs in the heart, kidneys, and arteries, leading to organ protection [10] . however, the evidence was not always consistent among the diverse ras inhibitors or distinct organs [10] . in the tanno-sobetsu study, a japanese population-based cohort, we previously showed that the urinary level of ace2, which is derived mainly from the kidneys, was significantly higher in hypertensive patients who had been treated with olmesartan, an arb, for more than 1 year than in untreated control subjects and patients who had been treated with calcium channel blockers, including amlodipine and longacting nifedipine, the acei enalapril or other arbs, including losartan, candesartan, valsartan and telmisartan [11] . this finding suggests that olmesartan uniquely increases renal expression and urinary excretion of ace2, potentially leading to additional renal protection via pleiotropic effects. however, data showing the effects of ras inhibitors, including aceis and arbs, on the expression of ace2 in the lungs are lacking in experimental animal models and in humans.similar to the entry receptor of sars-cov in sars, sars-cov-2 in covid-19 invades the host through ace2 as the host cellular receptor for the viral spike protein [12] (fig. 1) . therefore, the expression and distribution of ace2 are key determinants for coronavirus entry into cells. two distinct mechanisms for sars-cov-2 infection have been reported: endocytosis by ace2-binding sars-cov-2 entry [13, 14] and transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2)-mediated cleavage of sars-cov-2 accompanied by ace2 [12, 14] (fig. 1) . given that ace2 is the receptor that allows coronavirus entry into cells, pretreatment with ras inhibitors, such as aceis and arbs, might modulate sars-cov-2 infection and the development of lung injury and other organ damage caused by the virus.it has been reported that sars-cov infection in sars reduces ace2 expression, resulting in lung injury via an imbalance between the ace/ang ii/at 1 r axis and the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor axis [15] . in addition, exposure to the sars-cov spike protein in a mouse model induced acute lung injury, which was rescued by losartan, an arb [15] , indicating that activation of the ace/ang ii/ at 1 r pathway is involved in lung injury. it has also been shown that dysregulation of ace2 mediates acute lung injury in mouse models of infection by other viruses, such as influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus [16] . furthermore, continued viral infection and replication contribute to reduced membrane ace2 expression in cultured cells [16] . after the initial engagement of the sars-cov-2 spike protein, there is a subsequent downregulation of ace2 abundance on cell surfaces, as seen in sars-cov [15] . under such conditions, ace2, which converts ang ii angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) converts angiotensin i (ang i) to angiotensin ii (ang ii). ang ii signaling leads to organ damage, such as lung injury, by promoting inflammation and fibrosis through the ang ii type 1 receptor (at 1 r) and has opposing effects through the ang ii type 2 receptor (at 2 r). angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) converts ang ii to ang-(1-7) and ang i to ang-(1-9). ang-(1-7) signaling attenuates the effects of inflammation and fibrosis through the mas receptor (mas-r). it has been suggested that ace2 is upregulated by some ace inhibitors (aceis) and at 1 r blockers (arbs). ace2 is also a receptor of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). ace2-binding sars-cov-2 is internalized by endocytosis into the cell, and membrane-anchored ace2 on the cell surface is downregulated. downregulation of ace2 promotes organ damage through activation of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r pathway and deactivation of the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas-r pathway. another mechanism of sars-cov-2 infection is transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2)-mediated cleavage of sars-cov-2 accompanied by ace2. ace2 is also shed from the membrane by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17), and the soluble form of ace2 may intercept the virus from binding to membrane-anchored ace2 in the cell plasma membrane. possible increases in the expression and soluble form of ace2 induced by ras inhibitors would have beneficial effects of protection against lung injury and other organ damage but not infection with sars-cov-2 to ang-(1-7), is unable to exert protective effects in organs. it has been reported that ang ii levels were higher in patients with covid-19 (n = 12) than in healthy controls (n = 8) and that elevated plasma ang ii levels were correlated with the total viral load and degree of lung injury [17] . data regarding the effects of ras inhibitors on lungspecific expression of ace2 are lacking. however, even if ras inhibitors modify the expression of ace2 in the lungs, there is a possibility of facilitation of greater engagement and entry of the sars-cov-2 spike protein during sars-cov-2 infection. conversely, a possible increase in ace2 expression induced by ras inhibitors would protect against lung injury and other organ damage in covid-19 by inhibiting downregulation of ace2-induced activation of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r pathway (fig. 1) . clinical trials are currently underway to test the safety and efficacy of several arbs, including losartan (clinicaltrials.gov number: nct04312009, nct04311177, and nct04335123), valsartan (nct04335786), and telmisartan (nct04355936), in patients with covid-19.on the other hand, ace2, a membrane-bound enzyme, is distinctly shed from the membrane by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17), and a soluble form of ace2 exists in body fluids [18] (fig. 1) . in pathological states, shedding of ace2 is increased, resulting in elevated soluble ace2 levels in blood, urine, and other body fluids [19] . it has been suggested that a soluble recombinant ace2 protein intercepts the virus from binding to membrane-anchored ace2 in the cell plasma membrane [20] . restoration of ace2 through administration of recombinant ace2 was reported to reverse lung injury in mouse models of other viral infections [21] . furthermore, treatment with recombinant human ace2 safely reduced ang ii levels in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome [22] . clinical trials to test whether administration of recombinant ace2 protein may be beneficial in restoring balance to the ras network and potentially preventing organ injury have also been arranged in patients with covid-19 (nct04287686 and nct04335136). possible induction of ace2 in lungs by ras inhibitors would result in increased soluble ace2 and may have a beneficial effect of protection from membrane-anchored ace2-mediated infection with sars-cov-2 (fig. 1) .because of a lack of evidence, there are still concerns about an increased risk of sars-cov-2 infection and worsening lung injury in covid-19 patients receiving ras inhibitors. however, withdrawal of ras inhibitors or switching from ras inhibitor therapy to another antihypertensive therapy may require careful follow-up to avoid unstable control of blood pressure. clinical trials are currently underway to evaluate the effects of continuation (nct04357535), switching (nct04330300), and discontinuation (nct04353596 and nct04329195) of aceis and arbs in covid-19 patients. based on the currently available evidence, multiple societies of the specialty announced that administration of ras inhibitors should be continued in stable hypertensive patients who are at risk for, are being evaluated for, or have covid-19 [23] . interestingly, it has been reported that covid-19 patients with hypertension who were receiving a ras inhibitor, an acei or an arb, (n = 17) had a significantly lower peak viral load of sars-cov-2 in cells than did covid-19 patients who were not receiving a ras inhibitor (n = 25) [24] . in a retrospective, multicenter study in hubei, china, the unadjusted mortality rate was significantly lower in covid-19 patients with hypertension taking an acei or arb (n = 188, 3.7%) than in those not taking an acei or arb (n = 940, 9.8%) [25] . furthermore, a mixed-effect cox model after adjustment for age, sex, comorbidities and in-hospital medications showed that the risk for all-cause mortality was lower in a group of patients treated with an acei or arb than in a group of patients not treated with an acei or arb [25] . on the other hand, according to a report in the new york city area, mortality rates for patients with hypertension who were not taking an acei or arb (n = 953), those who were taking an acei (n = 168), and those who were taking an arb (n = 245) were 26.7%, 32.7%, and 30.6%, respectively, though the results were unadjusted for known confounders including age, sex, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and comorbidities [2] . further detailed investigations using a large number of patients regarding ras inhibitors and covid-19 need to be addressed.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.clinical considerations for patients with diabetes in times of covid-19 pandemic dear sir, as of today's reports, the global number of confirmed cases of covid-19 has surpassed 150,000. the number of known cases is increasing by several thousand every day. on march 11, 2020, who publicly characterized covid-19 as a pandemic. the issue is of serious concern and deserves momentous attention.coronaviruses are a family of viruses that cause respiratory illnesses. most of them cause illness in animals, but seven known types of coronaviruses cause illness in humans. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2) is one of those viruses e it causes the illness currently known as coronavirus disease-2019 (covid- 19) .though we are still learning what exactly puts someone at greater risk of developing a severe illness with covid-19, early information indicates older patients and those with chronic medical conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and cardiocerebrovascular diseases may be at higher risk [1e3] . infection caused by covid-19 is likely to disturb metabolic regulation. diabetic patients with covid-19 may face an altered immune response on the background of an already compromised health status owing to the diabetes-related complications and/or aging.the most important findings in patients with hyperglycemia and a viral infection were significant worsening of symptoms, which implies greater morbidity in these patients when compared to those without diabetes [3] . however, the pathophysiology of this association remains uncertain. it is not known whether hyperglycemia changes the virulence of the infection, or if the virus modifies the glycemic metabolism. what we know is that diabetic patients are more susceptible to infection, and this can impact on glucose metabolism [4] . dm is not just a disorder of glucose metabolism, but a chronic inflammatory condition characterized by multiple changes in lipid, carbohydrate and protein profiles [5] . such inflammatory processes are due to hyperglycemia which leads to increased synthesis of glycosylation end products (ages), activates macrophages and other cells of the immune system, increase oxidative stress and promote the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, besides stimulating the synthesis of adhesion molecules that facilitate inflammation in the tissues [5] . the inflammatory process and its complications might provide a higher propensity to infections or a greater severity of these conditions. another important issue is how this inflammatory and immune response occur in diabetic patients who acquire a viral infection, as well as whether the virus itself interferes with insulin secretion or the glycemic control.at this stage, the biological mechanism of the relationship between covid-19 and diabetes is not known, but the association for the severity of cases and death is pronounced. we need to develop a hypothesis to explain the causal path underlying the more severe clinical presentation of covid-19 infection and subsequent death in diabetic patients. biochemical tests are also essential to clarify the molecular pathophysiology involved. the association of covid-19 and dm is of substantial public health importance and deserves proper attention, since a large and diverse population is being affected globally. nowadays this comorbidity poses a relevant threat to human health, and prospective well-designed studies to elucidate the biological mechanism and the best clinical management of this association are urgently needed.it was very useful to see the review published in the journal on diabetes and covid 19 infection [6]. in it you highlight that people with diabetes have a death rate perhaps around four times that of the background population, and i note that it has been suggested over 20e40% of deaths in china/wuhan were in people with diabetes [7,8], clearly it is important to understand why.there will be some confounders here in the form of associations with other risk factors for dying with a covid-19 infection, notably age and cardiovascular disease, but these cannot explain all the excess. we need to understand this better to mitigate the risk.it is reported that most of the deaths are occurring in the context of pneumonitis [7, 8] , and in particularly onset of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards), a condition in which excess fluid in the alveoli blocks gas exchange between air and blood.people with diabetes, and many with cardiovascular disease (cvd) without diabetes, have a very permeable vasculature, identified since the 1980s as albumin lead through the kidneys (microand macro-albuminuria), but even prior to that as a late blush over the retina with intravenous fluorescence marker injection [9] . this leaky vasculature is associated with vascular inflammation, metabolic syndrome, and steatohepatitis, as well as cvd per se.it would seem not too far a stretch, in the absence of further research as yet, to assume that prior enhancement of vascular permeability could account for the increased rate of ards and death in people with diabetes, particularly type 2 diabetes, and also some with cvd.aside from further research i would suggest that those already with albuminuria (a routine yearly test for people with diabetes), those with higher liver enzyme markers (alt), and perhaps those with diabetes associated dyslipidaemia (low hdl cholesterol) should take particular steps to self-isolate.it is unclear to me how fast vascular inflammation can be ameliorated by improved blood glucose control (nearly all glucose-lowering medications reduce microalbuminuria in time), but tight glucose control in infected persons with insulin would meanwhile seem sensible. very poor glucose control is further known to interfere with leukocyte/lymphocyte function [10]. dear editor,we recently published an article highlighting the special concerns while managing patients with diabetes in the times of covid-19 pandemic [11] . there have been some concerns about the use of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which were not clarified in our publication [12] . we are summarising the current evidence in this regard and will try to arrive at a reasonable conclusion.in the absence of a vaccine and an antiviral drug for the covid-19 infection, several therapeutic approaches are being studied. one such approach is the use of inhibitors of the renin angiotensin system, namely ace inhibitors and arbs. on the other hand, some concern has been raised about the fact that patients on these agents might be at an increased risk of infection by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2).angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) is the receptor for sars cov-2 as well as other coronaviruses and is expressed in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells and endothelium. the s-glycoprotein on the surface of coronavirus binds to ace2. this leads to a conformational change in the s-glycoprotein and allows proteolytic digestion by host cell proteases (tmprss2) ultimately leading to internalization of the virion [13] . viral s-glycoprotein, tmprss2 and ace-2 inhibition are potential targets of therapy and possibly vaccine development.as ace-2 is essential to coronavirus infection, its blockade is thought to be beneficial in preventing/treating this infection. a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors [14] . mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan [15] . as far as cvid-19 infection is concerned, the data on ras activation or the effect of its blockade is limited at present. hypokalaemia could be a marker of ras activation and high incidence of hypokalaemia has been reported in patients with covid-19 infection [16] .despite these small studies suggesting the benefit of drugs acting on ras, there is some data, albeit scarce, from animal models and human studies that treatment with ace inhibitors and arb could cause up regulation of ace2 [17] . ibuprofen and thiazolidinediones have also been shown to do the same [18, 19] . increased expression of ace2 could theoretically increase the risk of infection with sars cov-2. this could be a concern in people with diabetes who are at already elevated risk of infections because of many other factors. however, currently, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by european society of cardiology council on hypertension and european society of hypertension [20, 21] .humanity is trying to understand coronavirus disease-19 at the same time severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection overcomes frontiers and spreads out through the world. four human infecting species of coronavirus (hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, and hcqv-hku1) were already known as causative agent of cold and pneumonia; this viral family was responsible for the sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) outbreaks. the consequences from the species that emerged from wuhan, china are far more catastrophic.sars-cov-2 infection depends on viral polyprotein processing, an event catalysed by the main proteinase (mpro) (also known as 3clpro). since mpro is unique in the virus and not found in the host cells, this protein is a prominent target for the development of antivirals against coronavirus infections. (1) recently, the solution of the sars-cov-2 mpro tridimensional structure allowed the investigation of potential inhibitors of viral replication. mpro is composed of three domains (i-chymotrypsin, ii-picornavirus 3c protease-like and iiiglobular cluster involved in protein dimerisation) and crystallography structures indicate the region between domains i and ii for protein activity inhibition. that region contains the catalytic cysteine 145.the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 mpro was published by zhang et al. (2) we selected a list of existing antivirals drugs (64 compounds) and protease inhibitors (80 compounds) from the drugbank database (3) as ligands. the drugbank database was used for a larger screening, evaluating 4190 compounds randomly se-lected. the crystal protein structure (pdb 6y2e) was energy-minimised using mmtk package on chimera version 1.14. (4) in silico molecular docking of ligand selection was performed using pyrx-virtual screening tool consisting of autodock (5) and autodockvina. (6) the pyrx-virtual screening tool was used for docking with the protocol: (i) the sars-cov-2 mpro protein structure (pdb 6y2e) was checked for missing atoms, bonds and contacts, removal of water molecules and energy minimisation was done with following parameters, force field: amber ff14sb, steepest descent steps: 100, steepest descent step size: 0.02 å, conjugate gradient steps: 10, conjugate gradient step size: 0.02 å using molecular modelling toolkit (mmtk) package on chimera version 1.14. (4) this minimised structure was used as the receptor for docking analysis. (ii) the minimised structure was saved as a pdb file and imported into pyrx software. (iii) ligands are imported in pdb format as well. autodock tools module was used to generate pdbqt input files. (iv) autodock vina algorithm was used to perform docking with the selected ligands. in autodock vina the grid box was set to cover the active site of mpro with the following dimensions in å: centre (x, y, z) = (-16.46, -26.70, 1.58), dimensions (x, y, z) = (23.34, 19.09, 10.98). the docking simulation was then run at an exhaustiveness of eight. the docking results were evaluated using the lowest binding affinity score (kcal/mol) predicted by the build in scoring function of autodock vina module.the results showed 1,321 molecules with scores above 6.5 as mpro partners [supplementary data (table) ]. due to the urgency in providing therapeutics to patients, we focus on the analysis of commercially approved drugs. argatroban (blood clotting), linagliptin (diabetes), saquinavir (antiviral), edoxaban (blood clotting), apixaban (blood clotting), cilazapril (ace inhibitor), betrixaban (blood clotting), alogliptin (dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors), sitagliptin (dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors), ramipril (ace inhibitor), lopinavir (antiviral), saxagliptin (diabetes), indinavir (antiviral), zofenopril (ace inhibitor), nelfinavir (antiviral), quinapril (ace inhibitor), dihydroergotamine (antimigraine agents), risperidone (atypical antipsychotics), astemizole (antihistamine) presented the higher scores (fig. 1) . the list includes antiviral components (as expected) and drugs classified as coagulation modifiers (4) and ace inhibitors (4).lin et al. (7) propose a pathogenic mechanism for the disease, based on clinical evidence and studies of other coronavirus strains. they divide the clinical phase in the viraemia phase, acute phase and the recovery. the specific effects of covid-19 on the cardiovascular system remain unclear, though there have been reports of acute cardiac injury, arrhythmias, hypotension, tachycardia, and a high proportion of concomitant cardiovascular disease in infected individuals, particularly those who require more intensive care. (8) also, there are signs of coagulopathy in many patients, usually associated with death. (9) among coagulation modifiers, argatroban is a direct thrombin inhibitor (10) for prophylaxis or treatment of thrombosis in patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. the three other compounds (edoxaban, apixaban, betrixaban) bind to factor xa. (11) edoxaban is used to prevent stroke and systemic embolism in patients with atrial fibrillation. (12) apixaban is indicated for the control of recurrence of thromboembolic events, such as stroke in patients with non-valve atrial fibrillation. betrixaban inhibits free and prothrombinase bound factor xa in a concentration-dependent manner. (13, 14) betrixaban was more potent at inhibiting thrombin-antithrombin complex. (15) superposing of sars-cov-2 mpro with factor xa and thrombin structures presents a rmsd value of 2.57ᾰ and 2.49ᾰ, respectively. these low values are an indication of fold similarity ( fig. 2a-b) . thrombin, the known target of argabotran, is a serine protease (16) as mpro is a protease itself with leu-gln↓(ser,ala,gly) as a recognition sequence. (2) this similarity may indicate a direct perturbation in pro-clotting coagulation by covid-19 through mpro protein. in fact, changes in pro-clotting factors in covid-19 patients were already detected showing significant decreased antithrombin (at) values and increased d-dimer, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (fdp) and fibrinogen (fib). (17) additionally, the gradual progression of disease severity was mirrored by increasing values of d-dimer and fdp. this pattern might indicate the activation of a coagulation system due to throm- bosis or disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic). (18) heparin, as an anticoagulant therapy, was associated with a better prognosis in some patients. (9) also, the risk of developing dic due to sars-cov-2 infection which has an obvious negative impact on the prognosis, (19, 20) was previously speculated. (21) moreover, excessive activation of fibrinolysis may be observed during cardiopulmonary bypass also leading to dic and haemorrhage. (22) the feasibility and robustness of our interactions are strengthened by comparing the docking results of thrombin interaction with argatroban and the corresponding crystallographic structure deposited under the code 4hfp. both structures present a rmsd of 0.49ᾰ, indicating both docking and experimental structures are almost identical (fig. 2c ). in addition, the comparison of docking results of factor xa interaction with apixaban and the corresponding crystallographic structure deposited under the code 2p16 present a rmsd of 0.11ᾰ, which also corroborates with the assertiveness of our approach (fig. 2d) . finally, it is important to highlight that the score of thrombin interaction with argatroban is 9.6 kcal/mol against 8.3 kcal/mol with sars-cov-2 mpro. otherwise, apixaban interaction with factor xa presents a score of 5.1 kcal/mol against 7.0 kcal/mol with sars-cov-2 [supplementary data (table) ]. all these are preliminary evidence that argatroban has more affinity to thrombin, but apixaban tends to have more affinity to sars-cov-2 mpro.we also performed fold similarity investigation for the ace inhibitors (aceis) with mpro. the high rmsd values (6.03 ᾰ and 5.57 ᾰ for the ace receptors structures deposited under the codes 2x92 and 2ewb, respectively) indicate the low structural conservation among those proteins. also, the use of ace inhibitors contributes for the up-regulation of ace2 expression. (23, 24) even as a potential target for the treatment of coronavirus infection, some groups suggest that the use of these inhibitors could lead to higher viral loads, because the ace2 augmented expression. (25) this could be a drawback for the use of aceis as covid19 treatment.in conclusion, we show the potential applicability of some coagulation compounds for the first time to our knowledge to treat covid-19 infection. we highlight the fold similarity among sars-cov-2 mpro and coagulation factors thrombin and factor xa. the effects of this similarity should urgently be investigated by in vitro approaches. blockers of the renin-angiotensin system and the risk of covid-19 infection study objectives primary objective: is to evaluate the association between use of angiotensin receptor antagonists (arbs) and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis), and the risk of covid-19 infection secondary objectives: -to assess the association between use of arbs and aceis, and the severity of covid-19 infection -to assess the above-mentioned associations in men and women -to assess the above-mentioned associations in younger and older patients animal studies have shown that the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a membrane-bound aminopeptidase that is abundantly expressed in the lungs, the heart, as well as in other tissues [1] , is utilized by coronaviruses as a functional receptor for their entrance into the cells [2] [3] [4] . this has generated the hypothesis that drugs commonly used for the treatment of hypertension, heart failure, renal disease and post-myocardial infarction states such as angiotensin receptor antagonists (arbs) and ace inhibitors (aceis) modify the susceptibility, severity and mortality rate of the current human infections with the covid-19 because of their well-known association with an overexpression of ace2, more consistent and marked for arbs than for aceis [5] [6] [7] . this modification has been interpreted as to lead to an increased risk of infection due to a drug-induced increase in the ace2 substrate, i.e. angiotensin ii [8] . it has also been suggested, however, that, on the contrary, blockers of the renin-angiotensin system might have a protective effect [9] because 1) the increased angiotensin ii might compete with the virus at the receptor level; and 2) ace2 converts angiotensin ii into inactive compounds [1] and may directly attenuate tissue injury [10] , making its overexpression mechanistically favorable. unfortunately, published clinical data are largely limited to general demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients, with no focused information on the type of antihypertensive treatment they were prescribed at or close to the time of the covid-19 infection [11, 12] . this means that no evidence is available on whether blockers of the renin-angiotensin system modify the human response to the covid-19 infection, as well as whether the modification might have an adverse or a protective sign [13] . this represents a serious problem because the possibility that blockers of the renin-angiotensin system may have a relationship with the susceptibility to the covid-19 infection has had a worldwide large echo in the media, as a result of which many patients have stopped their use [14, 15] . blockers of the reninangiotensin system are widely used life-saving drugs for cardiovascular and renal disease, and there is strong evidence that treatment withdrawal is associated with a marked increase in related morbidity and mortality risk [16] [17] [18] .the main goal of this population-based case-control study is to evaluate the association between use of arbs and aceis, and the risk of covid-19 infection. secondary objectives are: (i) to evaluate the associations between use of arbs and aceis, and the severity of covid-19 infection, (ii) to assess the association of interest in men and women, and (iii) to assess the association of interest in younger and older patients.a population-based case-control study will be carried out in lombardy region (italy).inclusion criteria (cases): -beneficiaries of the regional health service -age ≥ 40 years -diagnosis of covid-19 infection from 21st february until 11th march 2020diagnosis of covid-19 infection. since february 21st 2020, individual data on patients who had a confirmed diagnosis of covid-19 infection were signaled to the regional health authority from several sources. the latter included: (i) public and private hospitals (inpatients, and among these, those who required assisted ventilation), (ii) general practitioners (outpatients receiving domiciliary care), and (iii) municipal registries (deaths due to covid-19 infection). laboratories accredited from the regional health authority finally gave a fundamental contribution to the active reporting system by signaling of patients underwent to diagnostic procedure for covid-19.the diagnostic algorithm is based on the protocol released by the world health organization (who), i.e., on nasopharyngeal swab specimens tested by real time polymerase chain reaction for sars-cov-2 rna within three hours. laboratory confirmation of the virus is performed using real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. after performing formal inspection of individual signaling, regional health authority carries out their record linkage, and provides official data on day-by-day new cases and deaths. the process centralization ensures homogeneity of signaling and uniformity of diagnostic testing along the entire period of observation. the date of covid-19 diagnosis will be considered as the index date and patients will be extracted from the registry until march 11, 2020. patients who required assisted ventilation or died during intensive care will be classified as having a critical/fatal infection, the remaining being regarded as affected from mild clinical manifestations of the infection. matching: for each case, up to five controls will be randomly selected from the target population to be matched for gender, age at index date and municipality of residence. density incidence approach will be used for selecting controlsuse of aceis and arbs dispensed during 2019.previous hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease, cancer, respiratory and kidney disease suffered by cases and controls will be traced from the regional databases. in addition, cases and controls will be categorized according to the chronic related score (cresc), a new index of patients' clinical profile derived from inpatient and outpatient services provided by the regional health service and validated for outcome prediction [19] .major blood-pressure lowering agents dispensed to cases and controls during 2019 (calcium channel blockers, diuretics, and β-blockers) will be traced from the healthcare utilization databases along with the dispensation of a variety of other drugs: lipid-lowering agents (mainly statins), oral antidiabetic, insulin, antiplatelet, antiarrhythmic, anticoagulant, digital, nitrates, inhaled corticosteroids, immunosuppressant agents (i.e., glucocorticoids, calcineurin inhibitors, antiproliferative agents and monoclonal antibodies), short-acting and long-acting β-agonists (saba/laba) and other agents used for chronic respiratory diseases. animal studies have shown that the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a membrane-bound aminopeptidase that is abundantly expressed in the lungs, the heart, as well as in other tissues [1] , is utilized by coronaviruses as a functional receptor for their entrance into the cells [2] [3] [4] . this has generated the hypothesis that drugs commonly used for the treatment of hypertension, heart failure, renal disease and post-myocardial infarction states such as angiotensin receptor antagonists (arbs) and ace inhibitors (aceis) modify the susceptibility, severity and mortality rate of the current human infections with the covid-19 because of their well-known association with an overexpression of ace2, more consistent and marked for arbs than for aceis [5] [6] [7] . this modification has been interpreted as to lead to an increased risk of infection due to a drug-induced increase in the ace2 substrate, i.e. angiotensin ii [8] . it has also been suggested, however, that, on the contrary, blockers of the renin-angiotensin system might have a protective effect [9] because 1) the increased angiotensin ii might compete with the virus at the receptor level; and 2) ace2 converts angiotensin ii into inactive compounds [1] and may directly attenuate tissue injury [10] , making its overexpression mechanistically favorable. unfortunately, published clinical data are largely limited to general demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients, with no focused information on the type of antihypertensive treatment they were prescribed at or close to the time of the covid-19 infection [11, 12] . this means that no evidence is available on whether blockers of the renin-angiotensin system modify the human response to the covid-19 infection, as well as whether the modification might have an adverse or a protective sign [13] . this represents a serious problem because the possibility that blockers of the renin-angiotensin system may have a relationship with the susceptibility to the covid-19 infection has had a worldwide large echo in the media, as a result of which many patients have stopped their use [14, 15] . blockers of the reninangiotensin system are widely used life-saving drugs for cardiovascular and renal disease, and there is strong evidence that treatment withdrawal is associated with a marked increase in related morbidity and mortality risk [16] [17] [18] .the main goal of this population-based case-control study is to evaluate the association between use of arbs and aceis, and the risk of covid-19 infection. secondary objectives are: (i) to evaluate the associations between use of arbs and aceis, and the severity of covid-19 infection, (ii) to assess the association of interest in men and women, and (iii) to assess the association of interest in younger and older patients. a population-based case-control study will be carried out in lombardy region (italy).inclusion criteria (cases): -beneficiaries of the regional health service -age ≥ 40 years -diagnosis of covid-19 infection from 21st february until 11th march 2020diagnosis of covid-19 infection. since february 21st 2020, individual data on patients who had a confirmed diagnosis of covid-19 infection were signaled to the regional health authority from several sources. the latter included: (i) public and private hospitals (inpatients, and among these, those who required assisted ventilation), (ii) general practitioners (outpatients receiving domiciliary care), and (iii) municipal registries (deaths due to covid-19 infection). laboratories accredited from the regional health authority finally gave a fundamental contribution to the active reporting system by signaling of patients underwent to diagnostic procedure for covid-19.the diagnostic algorithm is based on the protocol released by the world health organization (who), i.e., on nasopharyngeal swab specimens tested by real time polymerase chain reaction for sars-cov-2 rna within three hours. laboratory confirmation of the virus is performed using real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. after performing formal inspection of individual signaling, regional health authority carries out their record linkage, and provides official data on day-by-day new cases and deaths. the process centralization ensures homogeneity of signaling and uniformity of diagnostic testing along the entire period of observation. the date of covid-19 diagnosis will be considered as the index date and patients will be extracted from the registry until march 11, 2020. patients who required assisted ventilation or died during intensive care will be classified as having a critical/fatal infection, the remaining being regarded as affected from mild clinical manifestations of the infection. matching: for each case, up to five controls will be randomly selected from the target population to be matched for gender, age at index date and municipality of residence. density incidence approach will be used for selecting controlsuse of aceis and arbs dispensed during 2019.previous hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease (including coronary artery disease, percutaneous coronary intervention and heart failure), cancer, respiratory (including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma) and kidney disease (including chronic kidney disease and dialysis) suffered by cases and controls will be traced from the regional databases. in addition, cases and controls will be categorized according to the chronic related score (cresc), a new index of patients' clinical profile derived from inpatient and outpatient services provided by the regional health service and validated for outcome prediction [19] .major blood-pressure lowering agents dispensed to cases and controls during 2019 (calcium channel blockers, diuretics (including subtypes, i.e., thiazide/thiazide-like, loop, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists), and β-blockers) will be traced from the healthcare utilization databases. dispensation of drugs operating through the renin-angiotensin system will be extended to renin inhibitors and sacubitril/valsartan. we will also trace blood pressure lowering drugs dispensed as monotherapy and combination therapies, those with a renin-angiotensin system blocker being the vast majority. other drug treatments dispensed during 2019 will include lipid-lowering agents (mainly statins), oral antidiabetic (as a whole and the more commonly dispensed classes), insulin, antiplatelet, antiarrhythmic, anticoagulant, digital, nitrates, inhaled corticosteroids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids), immunosuppressant agents (i.e., glucocorticoids, calcineurin inhibitors, antiproliferative agents and monoclonal antibodies), short-acting and long-acting βagonists (saba/laba) and other agents used for chronic respiratory diseases.primary outcome measure: odds ratios for association between use of arbs and aces and covid-19 infection secondary outcome measures: 4. odds ratios for association between use of arbs and aces and critical/fatal covid-19 infection 5. odds ratios for association between use of arbs and aces and covid-19 infection in men and women 6. odds ratios for association between use of arbs and aces and covid-19 infection in younger and older patients (< 60 years and ≥ 60 years old, respectively)a better clinical characterization of patients included in the study was considered in the revised protocol. indeed, several other comorbidities and co-treatments were included: -cardiovascular disease: coronary artery disease, percutaneous coronary intervention, heart failure -respiratory diseases: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma -kidney disease: chronic kidney disease, dialysis -diuretics: thiazide/thiazide-like, loop, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists -oral antidiabetic drugs: metformin, sulfonylureas, dpp-4 inhibitors, glp-1 agonists, sglt2 inhibitors, thiazolidinediones, other oral antidiabetic agents -non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: non-selective cox inhibitors, selective cox2 inhibitorsprimary analysis conditional logistic regression models will be fitted for estimating odds ratio (or), and corresponding 95% confidence interval (ci), of the risk of covid-19 infection associated with exposure to each individual blood-pressure lowering drug. adjustments will be made for the aforementioned baseline covariates.secondary analyses analyses will be restricted to strata having a critical/fatal infection. stratifications for gender and age categories (<60 years, ≥61 years), will be performed as secondary analyses.two further analyses will be performed to verify the robustness of the findings. first, to minimize the inconvenience that exposure to antihypertensive medicaments will not be available after december 2019, data will be analyzed according to three criteria i.e. (i) any prescriptions during 2019, (ii) at least three consecutive prescriptions during 2019, (iii) at least one prescription in the last quarter of 2019, assuming that the two latter criteria might identify more reliably an unchanged treatment. second, because the strategy used for sars-cov-2 rt-pcr testing changed, i.e., on 26 february the italian national institute of health recommended that swabbing would only be performed on symptomatic patients, rather than to all suspected covid-19 cases as done in the initial phase, analyses will be stratified according to the date of covid-19 diagnosis (before or after 26 february).primary analysis conditional logistic regression models will be fitted for estimating odds ratio (or), and corresponding 95% confidence interval (ci), of the risk of covid-19 infection associated with exposure to each individual blood-pressure lowering drug. adjustments will be made for the aforementioned baseline covariates.secondary analyses analyses will be restricted to strata having a critical/fatal infection. stratifications for gender and age categories (<60 years, ≥61 years), will be performed as secondary analyses.two further analyses will be performed to verify the robustness of the findings. first, to minimize the inconvenience that exposure to antihypertensive medicaments will not be available after december 2019, data will be analyzed according to three criteria i.e. (i) any prescriptions during 2019, (ii) at least three consecutive prescriptions during 2019, (iii) at least one prescription in the last quarter of 2019, assuming that the two latter criteria might identify more reliably an unchanged treatment. second, because the strategy used for sars-cov-2 rt-pcr testing changed, i.e., on 26 february the italian national institute of health recommended that swabbing would only be performed on symptomatic patients, rather than to all suspected covid-19 cases as done in the initial phase, analyses will be stratified according to the date of covid-19 diagnosis (before or after 26 february).the work under consideration for publication section 2.did you or your institution at any time receive payment or services from a third party (government, commercial, private foundation, etc.) for any aspect of the submitted work (including but not limited to grants, data monitoring board, study design, manuscript preparation, statistical analysis, etc.)?are there any relevant conflicts of interest? yes no ✔ relevant financial activities outside the submitted work.are there any relevant conflicts of interest? yes no ✔ place a check in the appropriate boxes in the table to indicate whether you have financial relationships (regardless of amount of compensation) with entities as described in the instructions. use one line for each entity; add as many lines as you need by clicking the "add +" box. you should report relationships that were present during the 36 months prior to publication.do you have any patents, whether planned, pending or issued, broadly relevant to the work?are there other relationships or activities that readers could perceive to have influenced, or that give the appearance of potentially influencing, what you wrote in the submitted work?yes, the following relationships/conditions/circumstances are present (explain below):no other relationships/conditions/circumstances that present a potential conflict of interest ✔ relationships not covered above section 5.at the time of manuscript acceptance, journals will ask authors to confirm and, if necessary, update their disclosure statements. on occasion, journals may ask authors to disclose further information about reported relationships.based on the above disclosures, this form will automatically generate a disclosure statement, which will appear in the box below.section 6.dr. apolone has nothing to disclose.please visit http://www.icmje.org/cgi-bin/feedback to provide feedback on your experience with completing this form.the purpose of this form is to provide readers of your manuscript with information about your other interests that could influence how they receive and understand your work. the form is designed to be completed electronically and stored electronically. it contains programming that allows appropriate data display. each author should submit a separate form and is responsible for the accuracy and completeness of the submitted information. the form is in six parts.the work under consideration for publication.this section asks for information about the work that you have submitted for publication. the time frame for this reporting is that of the work itself, from the initial conception and planning to the present. the requested information is about resources that you received, either directly or indirectly (via your institution), to enable you to complete the work. checking "no" means that you did the work without receiving any financial support from any third party --that is, the work was supported by funds from the same institution that pays your salary and that institution did not receive third-party funds with which to pay you. if you or your institution received funds from a third party to support the work, such as a government granting agency, charitable foundation or commercial sponsor, check "yes".this section asks about your financial relationships with entities in the bio-medical arena that could be perceived to influence, or that give the appearance of potentially influencing, what you wrote in the submitted work. you should disclose interactions with any entity that could be considered broadly relevant to the work. for example, if your article is about testing an epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) antagonist in lung cancer, you should report all associations with entities pursuing diagnostic or therapeutic strategies in cancer in general, not just in the area of egfr or lung cancer.report all sources of revenue paid (or promised to be paid) directly to you or your institution on your behalf over the 36 months prior to submission of the work. this should include all monies from sources with relevance to the submitted work, not just monies from the entity that sponsored the research. please note that your interactions with the work's sponsor that are outside the submitted work should also be listed here. if there is any question, it is usually better to disclose a relationship than not to do so.for grants you have received for work outside the submitted work, you should disclose support only from entities that could be perceived to be affected financially by the published work, such as drug companies, or foundations supported by entities that could be perceived to have a financial stake in the outcome. public funding sources, such as government agencies, charitable foundations or academic institutions, need not be disclosed. for example, if a government agency sponsored a study in which you have been involved and drugs were provided by a pharmaceutical company, you need only list the pharmaceutical company.this section asks about patents and copyrights, whether pending, issued, licensed and/or receiving royalties.use this section to report other relationships or activities that readers could perceive to have influenced, or that give the appearance of potentially influencing, what you wrote in the submitted work.definitions. instructions 1.3.other: anything not covered under the previous three boxes pending: the patent has been filed but not issued issued: the patent has been issued by the agency licensed: the patent has been licensed to an entity, whether earning royalties or not royalties: funds are coming in to you or your institution due to your at the time of manuscript acceptance, journals will ask authors to confirm and, if necessary, update their disclosure statements. on occasion, journals may ask authors to disclose further information about reported relationships.based on the above disclosures, this form will automatically generate a disclosure statement, which will appear in the box below.section 6.dr. corrao reports grants from european community, grants from italian medicines agency (aifa), grants from italian ministry of education, university and research (miur), grants from novartis, grants from gsk, other from roche, grants from amgen, grants from bms, outside the submitted work; .the purpose of this form is to provide readers of your manuscript with information about your other interests that could influence how they receive and understand your work. the form is designed to be completed electronically and stored electronically. it contains programming that allows appropriate data display. each author should submit a separate form and is responsible for the accuracy and completeness of the submitted information. the form is in six parts.the work under consideration for publication.this section asks for information about the work that you have submitted for publication. the time frame for this reporting is that of the work itself, from the initial conception and planning to the present. the requested information is about resources that you received, either directly or indirectly (via your institution), to enable you to complete the work. checking "no" means that you did the work without receiving any financial support from any third party --that is, the work was supported by funds from the same institution that pays your salary and that institution did not receive third-party funds with which to pay you. if you or your institution received funds from a third party to support the work, such as a government granting agency, charitable foundation or commercial sponsor, check "yes".this section asks about your financial relationships with entities in the bio-medical arena that could be perceived to influence, or that give the appearance of potentially influencing, what you wrote in the submitted work. you should disclose interactions with any entity that could be considered broadly relevant to the work. for example, if your article is about testing an epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) antagonist in lung cancer, you should report all associations with entities pursuing diagnostic or therapeutic strategies in cancer in general, not just in the area of egfr or lung cancer.report all sources of revenue paid (or promised to be paid) directly to you or your institution on your behalf over the 36 months prior to submission of the work. this should include all monies from sources with relevance to the submitted work, not just monies from the entity that sponsored the research. please note that your interactions with the work's sponsor that are outside the submitted work should also be listed here. if there is any question, it is usually better to disclose a relationship than not to do so.for grants you have received for work outside the submitted work, you should disclose support only from entities that could be perceived to be affected financially by the published work, such as drug companies, or foundations supported by entities that could be perceived to have a financial stake in the outcome. public funding sources, such as government agencies, charitable foundations or academic institutions, need not be disclosed. for example, if a government agency sponsored a study in which you have been involved and drugs were provided by a pharmaceutical company, you need only list the pharmaceutical company.this section asks about patents and copyrights, whether pending, issued, licensed and/or receiving royalties.use this section to report other relationships or activities that readers could perceive to have influenced, or that give the appearance of potentially influencing, what you wrote in the submitted work.definitions. instructions 1.3.identifying information section 1. at the time of manuscript acceptance, journals will ask authors to confirm and, if necessary, update their disclosure statements. on occasion, journals may ask authors to disclose further information about reported relationships.based on the above disclosures, this form will automatically generate a disclosure statement, which will appear in the box below.section 6.dr. ludergnani has nothing to disclose.please visit http://www.icmje.org/cgi-bin/feedback to provide feedback on your experience with completing this form.the purpose of this form is to provide readers of your manuscript with information about your other interests that could influence how they receive and understand your work. the form is designed to be completed electronically and stored electronically. it contains programming that allows appropriate data display. each author should submit a separate form and is responsible for the accuracy and completeness of the submitted information. the form is in six parts.the work under consideration for publication.this section asks for information about the work that you have submitted for publication. the time frame for this reporting is that of the work itself, from the initial conception and planning to the present. the requested information is about resources that you received, either directly or indirectly (via your institution), to enable you to complete the work. checking "no" means that you did the work without receiving any financial support from any third party --that is, the work was supported by funds from the same institution that pays your salary and that institution did not receive third-party funds with which to pay you. if you or your institution received funds from a third party to support the work, such as a government granting agency, charitable foundation or commercial sponsor, check "yes".this section asks about your financial relationships with entities in the bio-medical arena that could be perceived to influence, or that give the appearance of potentially influencing, what you wrote in the submitted work. you should disclose interactions with any entity that could be considered broadly relevant to the work. for example, if your article is about testing an epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) antagonist in lung cancer, you should report all associations with entities pursuing diagnostic or therapeutic strategies in cancer in general, not just in the area of egfr or lung cancer.report all sources of revenue paid (or promised to be paid) directly to you or your institution on your behalf over the 36 months prior to submission of the work. this should include all monies from sources with relevance to the submitted work, not just monies from the entity that sponsored the research. please note that your interactions with the work's sponsor that are outside the submitted work should also be listed here. if there is any question, it is usually better to disclose a relationship than not to do so.for grants you have received for work outside the submitted work, you should disclose support only from entities that could be perceived to be affected financially by the published work, such as drug companies, or foundations supported by entities that could be perceived to have a financial stake in the outcome. public funding sources, such as government agencies, charitable foundations or academic institutions, need not be disclosed. for example, if a government agency sponsored a study in which you have been involved and drugs were provided by a pharmaceutical company, you need only list the pharmaceutical company.based on the above disclosures, this form will automatically generate a disclosure statement, which will appear in the box below.disclosure statement section 6.dr. mancia reports personal fees from bayer, personal fees from boehringer ingelheim, personal fees from cvrx, personal fees from daiichi sankyo, personal fees from ferrer, personal fees from medtronic, personal fees from menarini int., personal fees from merck, personal fees from novartis, personal fees from recordati, personal fees from servier, outside the submitted work; .please visit http://www.icmje.org/cgi-bin/feedback to provide feedback on your experience with completing this form.t h e ne w e ngl a nd jou r na l o f m e dicine s tudies in animals have shown that angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a membrane-bound aminopeptidase that is abundantly expressed in the lungs, the heart, and other tissues, 1 is used by coronaviruses as a functional receptor for their entrance into the cells. 2, 3 angiotensin-receptor blockers (arbs) and ace inhibitors are considered first-choice drugs in hypertension, heart failure, post-myocardial infarction states, and chronic kidney disease and also increase the expression of ace2. 4, 5 given these facts and observations, the hypothesis that their use may modify susceptibility to infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in humans has developed. there is, however, no consensus as to whether the risk and severity of sars-cov-2 infection might be increased or reduced with the use of such agents. 1, [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] current published clinical data are largely limited to small, uncontrolled studies of the demographic and clinical characteristics of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , with little or no information regarding the type of antihypertensive treatment that they were taking at or close to the time of infection. [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] this lack of information has been problematic, given the possibility that blockers of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) may affect the susceptibility to and the severity of covid-19, an issue that has received much press and may influence patient behavior with respect to taking or discontinuing these agents, despite the advice of a number of professional scientific societies not to discontinue them. [16] [17] [18] [19] to date, reports indicate that withdrawal of raas blockers in patients with conditions for which these medications are commonly used leads to a marked increase in the risk of complications and death. [20] [21] [22] the recent covid-19 epidemic spread to and increased exponentially in italy earlier than in any other western country. by far the most severely hit part of italy is lombardy, a northern region in which sars-cov-2 has infected thousands of patients and has been associated with a high incidence of hospitalization for intensive care and a high mortality. 23 the regional health authority promptly established a population-based registry of patients with a confirmed diagnosis of infection with sars-cov-2. taking advantage of the regional availability of databases of health care use that cover the dispensed essential drugs and services provided to beneficiaries of the regional health service (i.e., virtually all residents), we carried out a case-control investigation to evaluate the association between the use of raas blockers and the risk of covid-19. the analysis was extended to other antihypertensive agents as well as to a large number of other medications. data were also analyzed according to sex, age, and the severity of covid-19 (i.e., patients receiving intensive hospital care or who died vs. other patients with the disease).residents in lombardy, 40 years of age or older, who were beneficiaries of the regional health service formed the target population (just over 6 million people, approximately 17% of the entire italian population in that age group). italian citizens have equal access to essential health care services provided by the national health service. in lombardy, that association has been paired with an automated system of databases that collect a variety of information, including codes in the international classification of diseases, 9th revision, clinical modification, for inpatient diagnoses and services supplied from public or private hospitals as well as anatomical therapeutic chemical codes of outpatient dispensation of drugs reimbursed to the pharmacies after filing doctors' prescriptions. these various types of data can be interconnected, since a single individual identification code is used by all databases for each citizen enrolled. to preserve privacy, each identification code was automatically deidentified, the inverse process being allowed only to the regional health authority on request from judicial authorities.all the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the study to the protocol (available with the full text of this article at nejm.org). deidentified data were extracted and processed from the regional repository, using statistical programs developed by the authors, according to a protocol previously discussed with and approved by the regional health authority. further details of the databases of health care use in lombardy have been reported in previous studies. [24] [25] [26] since february 21, 2020, patients with a diagnosis of covid-19 have been revealed to the regional r aas blockers and the risk of health authority from several sources: public and private hospitals (persons seen in the first aid service for an acute respiratory infection and infected inpatients, including those who received assisted ventilation); general practitioners (symptomatic outpatients receiving only home care); municipal registries (deaths due to ; and laboratories accredited by the regional health authority. diagnosis was based on the protocol released by the world health organization 27that is, positive nasopharyngeal swab specimens tested with at least two real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction assays targeting different genes (e, rdrp, and m) of sars-cov-2. up to february 25, diagnostic tests were carried out in all patients with suspected cases, whereas only symptomatic patients were tested from february 26 onward.the date of covid-19 diagnosis was considered as the index date, and patient data were extracted from the registry until march 11, 2020. we excluded patients who were not beneficiaries of the regional health service (361 patients); who became beneficiaries of the regional health service after january 1, 2019 (8 patients); or who were younger than 40 years of age at the index date (619 patients). the remaining 6292 patients were included in the study as case patients. among them, the 617 patients who received assisted ventilation or died were classified as having a critical or fatal infection; the remaining patients were regarded as having relatively mildto-moderate clinical manifestations of the infection. approximately half the patients with mildto-moderate cases received home care, and the remaining patients were hospitalized but did not received intensive care.for each case patient, up to five controls were randomly selected from the target population to be matched for sex, age at index date, and municipality of residence. before matching, persons who became beneficiaries of the regional health service after january 1, 2019, were excluded from the target population. patients who had received a diagnosis of covid-19 had been eligible as potential controls until they became case patients, and all matches had to be at risk for covid-19.previous hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease, cancer, respiratory disease, and kidney disease in case patients and controls were traced in the regional databases for a 5-year period before the index date. in addition, case patients and controls were categorized according to the chronic related score (cresc), a new index of patients' clinical profiles derived from inpatient and outpatient services provided by the regional health service and validated for outcome prediction. 28 a detailed description of the cresc, which scores the presence or absence of 31 diseases or conditions in each patient, is provided in the supplementary appendix, available at nejm.org. cresc values range from 0 to 4, with higher values indicating a worse clinical status.major classes of antihypertensive agents (ace inhibitors, arbs, calcium-channel blockers, diuretics [including subtypes], and beta-blockers) that were dispensed to case patients and controls during 2019 were traced from the databases of health care use. in addition to ace inhibitors and arbs, other drugs that were dispensed and are known to act through the raas were notedrenin inhibitors and sacubitril-valsartan, the latter used only in heart failure. we also noted antihypertensive drugs dispensed as monotherapy and as combination therapies (typically an raas blocker with another agent). other drugs that were dispensed during 2019 included lipidlowering agents (mainly statins), oral hypoglycemic agents (noted together and as the more commonly dispensed individual classes), insulin, antiplatelet agents, antiarrhythmic agents, anticoagulant agents, digitalis, nitrates, inhaled glucocorticoids, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, immunosuppressive agents (i.e., glucocorticoids, calcineurin inhibitors, antiproliferative agents, and monoclonal antibodies), short-acting β-agonists, long-acting β-agonists, and other agents used for chronic respiratory diseases. diagnostic, therapeutic, and procedural codes that were used for the current study are shown in table s1 in the supplementary appendix.the between-group relative difference in clinical features and drug exposures was used for comparing case patients and controls. conditional logistic-regression models were fitted for estimating the odds ratio and corresponding 95% confidence interval for the risk of covid-19 associated with exposures of interest. models separately included clinical features and drug exposures listed above (unadjusted models), as well t h e ne w e ngl a nd jou r na l o f m e dicine -19) were diagnosed between february 21 and march 11, 2020. ace denotes angiotensin-converting enzyme, arb angiotensin-receptor blocker, cox cyclooxygenase, cox-2 cyclooxygenase 2, dpp-4 dipeptidyl peptidase 4, glp-1 glucagon-like peptide 1, mv matching variable, and sglt2 sodium-glucose cotransporter 2. † data are for patients who received at least one prescription during 2019. only 10 patients (1 case patient and 9 controls) received renin inhibitors, and 87 patients (28 case patients and 59 controls) received sacubitril-valsartan. ‡ the chronic related score is a new index of patients' clinical profile that is derived from inpatient and outpatient services provided by the regional health service and is validated for outcome prediction. 28 five categories of progressively worsening clinical profile are considered. * ci denotes confidence interval, and raas renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. † shown are odds ratios for covid-19 associated with exposure to treatments and coexisting conditions. absence of exposure was considered as the reference, unless otherwise indicated. estimates were obtained by fitting conditional logistic-regression models. both unadjusted estimates and estimates that were fully adjusted for drugs and coexisting conditions are shown. fully adjusted estimates were obtained from a unique multivariate analysis. ‡ data are for patients who received at least one prescription during 2019.available for the remaining 257 case patients (4.1%). at the index date, the mean (±sd) age of case patients and controls was 68±13 years, and nearly 37% were women (matching variables). table 1 shows that arbs and ace inhibitors were both more frequently prescribed in case patients than in controls. the percentage of patients who received arbs was 22.2% among case patients and 19.2% among controls (relative difference, 13.3%); the percentage of patients who received ace inhibitors was 23.9% and 21.4%, respectively (relative difference, 10.5%). other antihypertensive drugs were also used more in case patients than in controls, the difference usually being larger than for ace inhibitors and arbs, particularly for loop diuretics (13.9% vs. 7.8%; relative difference, 43.6%) and mineralocorticoid-receptor antagonists (3.8% vs. 2.4%; relative difference, 37.1%). use of renin inhibitors (1 case patient) and sacubitril-valsartan (28 case patients) was uncommon, and no further analysis of these treatments was carried out. case patients also used a combination of antihypertensive drugs more frequently than controls, had a more frequent history of hospitalization for cardiovascular and noncardiovascular diseases, and, according to the cresc index, had an overall substantially worse clinical profile. table 2 shows unadjusted estimates of the risk of covid-19 according to the drugs shown in table 1 , which suggested a possible effect. however, after multivariable adjustment, neither arbs nor ace inhibitors had a significant association with the risk of covid-19. this was also the case for calcium-channel blockers, beta-blockers, and diuretics. an association with covid-19 after multivariable adjustment was maintained by loop diuretics and some other non-antihypertensive drugs (insulin, antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, immunosuppressant drugs, and drugs used for respiratory disease). as compared with patients who did not use antihypertensive drugs during 2019, those to whom antihypertensive agents were dispensed as monotherapy or as a combination of two or more agents appeared to have a greater risk of covid-19 in the unadjusted (crude) analysis, but after multivariable adjustment, neither monotherapy nor combination therapy showed a significant association with the risk of covid-19 ( table 3 ). the multivariable adjusted risk of covid-19 was increased in patients with previous hospitalizations for cardiovascular or noncardiovascular diseases. it also became progressively greater as the cresc increased (table 2) .data on the risk of covid-19 infection associated with the use of raas blockers and other drugs were similar in men and in women (table 4 and  tables s2 and s3 ). there was no statistical evidence that the findings obtained for the entire cohort were modified by age or the severity of the clinical manifestations and course of covid-19 (table 4 and tables s3 through s5). as shown in figure s1 , the data on covid-19 and antihypertensive drugs were consistent regardless of whether drug use was assessed through loose or more strict criteria. furthermore, the findings did not change substantially when case patients were stratified according to the date of covid-19 diagnosis (table s6) .in the present study, the use of arbs and ace inhibitors was more frequent among patients who were infected with sars-cov-2 than among the large number of controls who were matched for age, sex, and place of residence. however, all other major antihypertensive drugs, such as calcium-channel blockers, beta-blockers, and diuretics, were also used more frequently in patients with covid-19, with differences from controls that were larger than those shown by arbs and ace inhibitors. furthermore, in a multivariable analysis in which data were adjusted for a number of treatment-related covariates and markers of patient clinical status, the use of arbs or ace in- t h e ne w e ngl a nd jou r na l o f m e dicine hibitors was not significantly associated with the risk of covid-19. finally, there was no statistical evidence of an independent association between the use of a combination of antihypertensive drugs (in which an ace inhibitor or an arb is by far the most common component) and the risk of covid-19. thus, our results do not provide evidence of an independent relationship between raas blockers and the susceptibility to covid-19 in humans. we found that patients with covid-19 had a higher baseline prevalence of cardiovascular conditions and diseases (hypertension, coronary heart disease, heart failure, and chronic kidney disease) for which treatment with the medications studied here is often used. such observations confirm previous observations by chinese investigators that patients with covid-19 generally have poorer health than the general population, [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] a conclusion that in the present study is strongly supported by the evidence that patients with covid-19 were more frequently treated with drugs for many noncardiovascular diseases, had a higher incidence of previous hospitalizations for a variety of causes, and had higher scores for chronic coexisting conditions than controls. 6, 29, 30 the present study provides several additional findings. first, the conclusion that raas blockers do not modify susceptibility to covid-19 applies to both sexes as well as to younger and older persons. second, our data provide no evidence that, rather than modifying the susceptibility to covid-19, raas blockers alter the evolution of the disease, thereby mainly affecting its severity. in our study, neither ace inhibitors nor arbs showed an independent association with covid-19 in patients with mild-to-moderate disease or in those with severe disease. third, patients with covid-19 had much more frequent use of loop diuretics and mineralocorticoid-receptor antagonists than controls, and treatment with loop diuretics was associated with an increased risk of covid-19 in the multivariable analysis. rather than suggesting an association (for which there is no mechanistic support), this finding is likely to mean that use of loop diuretics reflects the existence of clinical conditions such as heart failure or advanced renal damage, the severity of which was not appropriately quantified by the available clinical data and scores. these observations from our study may account for the independent relationship that was found between covid-19 and some noncardiovascular drugs, although more direct investigations with appro- priate experimental designs would be required to clarify this issue. one strength of the study is the large number of case patients as well as the inclusion of a large and well-matched control group, without which interpretation of the collected data would have been difficult. it is also a strength that the lombardy database included previous hospitalizations and allowed the drugs prescribed to outpatients to be accurately observed, because pharmacists must file outpatient prescriptions to claim reimbursement, and incorrect reports carry legal consequences.limitations of the study include the fact that information on drug use is limited to prescriptions, and actual drug consumption by the case patients and controls could not be assessed. drugs that were purchased by the patients (because doctors prescribed them privately, and no records were in the national health service system) as well as those dispensed after december 31, 2019, were not captured by our analysis. however, the availability of free antihypertensive agents makes out-of-pocket purchase of these drugs rare, and an exploratory analysis involving patients in whom antihypertensive treatment had been taken regularly or closer to the time of infection did not modify the results. our results reflect the doses of raas blockers used in ital-ian medical practice but did not allow us to investigate other doses, because this information was not included in the database. it is likely that the control group included some persons with covid-19, since the general population in italy was not tested. unmeasured confounders may have been responsible for our findings. for example, given the hypothesis that raas blockers increase the risk of severe clinical manifestations of covid-19, there may have been preferential dispensation of raas blockers to patients with better clinical profiles and a lower perceived likelihood of the development of severe covid-19. however, there was no evidence that patients who received arbs or ace inhibitors had a better clinical profile than those who received other antihypertensive medications. finally, our results apply to a largely white population and cannot be generalized to other races.the present study does not provide evidence that the use of ace inhibitors or arbs is independently associated with the risk of covid-19.disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at nejm.org.a data sharing statement provided by the authors is available with the full text of this article at nejm.org.we thank dr. roberto blaco, head of the epidemiologic observatory of lombardy region, for designing and managing the population-based covid-19 registry and for making data available for the current study.we thank mourad and levy for their constructive correspondence (interaction between raas inhibitors and ace2 in the context of covid-19. nat. rev. cardiol. 10.1038/s41569-020-0368-x (2020))1 on our comment article (covid-19 and the cardiovascular system. nat. rev. cardiol. 10.1038/s41569-020-0360-5 (2020))2. we agree with their comments and acknowledge that different renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors have different effects on angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) levels. ferrario and colleagues3 reported that administration of either ace inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers (arbs) increased the levels of ace2 mrna in lewis rats compared with rats receiving placebo. in particular, cardiac levels of ace2 mrna increased by 4.7-fold or 2.8-fold in rats given either lisinopril (an ace inhibitor) or losartan (an arb), respectively. furthermore, the researchers found that losartan treatment, but not lisinopril treatment, increased ace2 activity compared with placebo. however, the researchers did not shed light on the mechanisms that might account for these differences. nevertheless, li and colleagues4 found that treatment with captopril (an ace inhibitor) can significantly increase ace2 protein expression in rats with acute lung injury. furthermore, wösten-van asperen and colleagues5 reported that, in a rat model of acute respiratory distress syndrome, ace activity and angiotensin ii expression are increased, whereas ace2 activity and angiotensin-(1–7) levels are reduced.the protective effects of the ace2–angiotensin-(1–7)–mas receptor axis are primarily mediated by reductions in angiotensin ii level6. both ace inhibitors and arbs can reduce angiotensin ii levels7. the former inhibit the substrate of angiotensin ii generation, and the latter directly inhibit the conversion of angiotensin i to angiotensin ii. therefore, raas inhibitors, including ace inhibitors and arbs, can activate the ace2–angiotensin-(1–7)–mas receptor axis. however, as mentioned in our comment article2, whether patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and hypertension who are taking an ace inhibitor or arb should switch to another antihypertensive drug remains controversial. in one study, the use of ace inhibitors or arbs did not increase mortality in 112 patients with covid-19 and cardiovascular disease8. further evidence is required to clarify the effects of ace inhibitors and arbs in patients with covid-19. on 12 march 2020, the european society of hypertension published a statement on the topic of hypertension, raas blockers and covid-19, concluding that the available data do not support the differential use of raas blockers (ace inhibitors or arbs) in patients with covid-19 (ref.9). however, the authors cautioned that the statement reflected the current evidence at the time of release and might need updating according to new evidence.indeed, ace2 might be equivalent to a natural arb or ace inhibitor10. decreasing the levels of ace2 will shift the balance of the raas to promote the ace–angiotensin ii–angiotensin ii receptor type 1 axis, leading to lung injury and the progression of inflammatory storms. increasing the levels of ace2 will transfer the balance towards the angiotensin-(1–7)–mas receptor axis, which has anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects that are cardiopulmonary protective.in their correspondence article, mourad and levy also suggest that aliskiren treatment could be an interesting option in the context of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection, given that aliskiren can reduce the expression of ace2. although ace2 has been identified as the functional receptor for sars-cov-2, the role of ace2 in the progression of covid-19 after sars-cov-2 infection is still controversial, so the benefits of aliskiren use in patients with covid-19 needs further investigation.the cell surface, particularly of some cell types, is endowed with proteolytic activity able to modulate the activity of membrane proteins or circulating regulatory peptides. these proteases or peptidases, mostly metalloenzymes using zinc as cofactor, are structurally organised as ectoenzymes with their catalytic sites facing into the extracellular space. examples include neutral endopeptidase (neprilysin, nep), aminopeptidases and carboxypeptidases of various specificities and the subjects of this article, the angiotensin-converting enzymes (ace and ace2). these ectopeptidases mainly exist as single membrane-spanning proteins of type i (c-terminus intracellular), type ii (nterminus intracellular) topology, or glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol-linked proteins. undoubtedly the best studied of these ectopeptidases by far is ace, largely because of its physiological and pathological roles. for almost 50 years, ace was a unique mammalian enzyme distinct from other growing peptidase families. the discovery of a human homologue of ace (aceh or ace2) has led to the resurgence of studies on ace biology coupled with detailed structural information on the enzyme itself. the pace of knowledge concerning ace2 has been breathtaking in comparison to the relatively leisurely developments in understanding ace structure and function over several decades [1] . in a period of 4 years, ace2 has been cloned, purified, knocked-out, knocked-in, inhibitors have been developed, its 3d structure determined and new functions have emerged. ace2 is implicated in cardiovascular and renal biology, diabetes, and obesity, and most remarkably, ace2 may serve as a receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) virus.cardiovascular diseases continue to be one of the leading causes of death in developed countries, most commonly resulting from hypertension and congestive heart failure. a major revolution in the treatment of hypertension came with the development of inhibitors of ace. ace inhibitors (e.g., captopril and lisinopril) have proved to be highly effective and safe drugs, which are used clinically to treat not only hypertension, but also congestive heart failure and renal disorders. inhibition of ace imposes its effects primarily via the ras. the ras mediates numerous effects in the cardiovascular system including blood pressure homeostasis and maintenance of fluid and salt balance [2] . ace is a crucial regulator of the ras, converting the inactive decapeptide angiotensin i to the potent vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii [3] whilst also metabolising the hypotensive peptide, bradykinin [4] .in 2000, a novel mammalian homologue of ace, originally termed aceh and subsequently ace2, was identified by two distinct molecular strategies [5, 6] . the ace2 gene maps to the human x chromosome and encodes an 805-amino-acid, type i membrane-bound glycoprotein with an apparent molecular weight of approximately 120 kda. the amino-terminal domain of ace2 shares around 40% sequence identity with the corresponding domain of somatic ace and contains a single hexxh zinc-binding motif [5] . intriguingly, the carboxy-terminal domain displays 48% sequence homology with collectrin, an enzymically inactive glycoprotein of unknown function expressed exclusively in the kidney [7] . ace2 initially appeared to be more limited in its tissue distribution than ace, with significant levels only detected in the heart, kidneys, testes and gastrointestinal tract [5, 8] . a recent study, however, detected significant levels of ace2 expression in a wide variety of tissues [9] .on first inspection, owing to the high degree of sequence similarity that exists between ace2 and ace, it could be assumed that ace2 might function, like ace, as a dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase. indeed, the only previously characterised ace-like proteins, the drosophila ace orthologues ance and acer, do display such an activity [10] . surprisingly, however, ace2 functions as a carboxypeptidase, cleaving only a single c-terminal residue from its peptide substrate (table 1) . indeed, ace2 is unable to cleave the archetypal ace substrates, bradykinin and hip-his-leu, and is insensitive to the potent ace inhibitors lisinopril and captopril [5] . further characterisation using a panel of biologically active peptides has provided a consensus sequence of pro-x-pro-hydrophobic/basic for the protease specificity of ace2 [11] . this consensus sequence is supported by the ace2 active site model proposed by guy et al. [11] . it has also been ascertained that the chain length of hydrolysed peptides is not limiting although the cleavage of dipeptides is very slow. the catalytic activity of ace2, like ace, is ph-and aniondependent [11] [12] [13] .the structures of tace [14] and the drosophila homologue ance [15] have recently been elucidated. the minimum glycosylation requirement for expression and processing of enzymically active tace was investigated by progressive deglycosylation [16] . a truncated, soluble form of tace, lacking the first 36 residues at the nterminus, expressed in cho cells in the presence of the glycosidase-i inhibitor (n-butyldeoxynojirimycin) retained the activity of the native enzyme and yielded crystals that diffracted to 2.0-2 resolution. natesh et al. [14] described the structure of tace alone and in complex with the inhibitor lisinopril and thereby provided a detailed picture of the active site. the tace molecule has an overall ellipsoid shape with a central groove that extends approximately 30 2 into the protein dividing it into two subdomains with the active site located towards the bottom of this groove. simultaneously, the crystal structure of drosophila ance was determined [15] . it is not clear from the information presented if a minimally glycosylated form of ance was expressed and purified for the crystallisation studies. however, a previous report by a separate group has shown that ance does not require glycosylation for secretion or activity [17] . data from the ance crystals revealed that, like ace, a large internal channel encompasses the entire protein molecule and the active site is located at the bottleneck connecting two chambers of unequal size within this cavity. most recently, the crystal structures of the extracellular domain, lacking the transmembrane and cytosolic regions, of native and inhibitor-bound ace2 have been determined to 2.2-and 3.0-2 resolution, respectively [18] . these data confirm the integrity of the active site model of ace2 proposed by guy et al. [11] . this model, based on the crystal structure of tace, indicated that the catalytic mechanism of ace2 resembles that of ace. the predicted structural differences between the active site of ace (dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase) and ace2 (carboxypeptidase), responsible for the differences in specificity, were also verified by the ace2 structure. in essence, the main differences occur in the ligand-binding pockets, particularly at the s2v subsite of ace and in the binding of the peptide carboxy-terminus. the cavity in tace is larger than that of ace2, allowing an extra amino acid to bind in the specificity pocket. most importantly, the r273 to q substitution between ace2 and ace appears to be largely responsible for the elimination of the s2v pocket in ace2. these structural differences offer an explanation as to why the classical ace inhibitor lisinopril is unable to bind to ace2.the ace2 crystals, grown in the presence of mln-4760 [19] , revealed an unanticipated inverse binding orientation of the inhibitor in the active site ( fig. 1 ). this can be rationalised by the y510 to v substitution between ace2 and ace whereby the size of the s1 pocket, in ace2, is considerably reduced and can no longer accommodate the bulky dichlorobenzyl group. moreover, this explains why substrates like bradykinin, angiotensin-(1-9) and leu-enkephalin are poor substrates for ace2, but good substrates for ace. another surprising observation is the absence of a bound chloride in ace2 in an identical position to the second binding site (cl2) of tace [14] , as an occupied cl2 site is largely responsible for the chloride activation of ace [20] . ace2 is clearly different from ace and displays unique enzyme function despite the sequence similarity that exists between the two proteins and the common features of their activity profiles.the first class of selective inhibitors for ace2 includes a series of non-peptide compounds whose design was based upon the substrate specificity of ace2 and the requirement of a centrally located carboxylate to coordinate the inhibitor [19] . the lead compound possesses sub-nanomolar affinity (ic 50 0.44 nm) for ace2 and 220 000-and 22 000-fold less affinity for human tace and bovine carboxypeptidase-a (cp-a), respectively. using an alternative strategy, potent ace2 peptide inhibitors have been identified through screening of constrained peptide libraries [13] . a stable peptide inhibitor of ace2, dx600, displays a k i of 2.8 nm with angiotensin i as substrate. dx600 is a 26-amino-acid n-terminal acetylated and c-terminal amidated peptide. in addition, the dipeptide pro-phe has been identified as an inhibitor of ace2 activity [11] . this finding would allow for a peptide-based approach to inhibitor design by comparison of the inhibitory effect of pro-phe and pro-leu (not a substrate for ace2 and a weaker inhibitor than pro-phe) with other dipeptides. these ace2 inhibitor compounds are fundamental tools for exploring ace2 biology and enzymology.in comparison with ace2, the way in which the very first inhibitors of ace were discovered was quite different. teprotide is a nonapeptide that owes its potency and selectivity to natural selection, being a component of the venom of a brazilian pit-viper. captopril, on the other hand, owes its potency and selectivity to chemical design and this was guided not only by the hypothetical active site model but also by data on the substrate specificity of ace and comparison with cp-a. for example, the study carried out by cheung et al. [21] was a major contributing factor in the design of second-generation inhibitors of ace. here, the active site binding and other properties of substrates and competitive inhibitors of ace were investigated. using a series of simple tri-and dipeptides, it was determined that the binding of a substrate or inhibitor to ace is wholly dependent upon the c-terminal residues and their subsite interactions. in this vein, the importance of an exhaustive study to determine structure-activity correlations for ace2 is critical for the systematic development of inhibitor compounds. although ace inhibitors were designed in part on the basis of similarities between the enzymic properties of ace and those of cp-a, no significant segmental homology was found with carboxypeptidases (m14 family) upon solution of the crystal structure of tace [14] .in contrast to the growing availability of data on the enzyme kinetics and possible physiological roles of ace2, comparatively little is known about ace2 at the cellular level. in keeping with predictions made from its peptide sequence and its interactions as a viral receptor, recombinant ace2 expressed in cho and hek293 cells is localised predominantly in the plasma membrane. analysis of media taken from cells expressing ace2 has revealed the presence of a soluble form of ace2, most likely a product of a proteolytic cleavage event. indeed, proteolytic release of ace2 has been observed from cardiomyocytes in which ace2 is overexpressed [22] , and a soluble form of ace2 has been detected in urine (d.w. lambert, g.i. rice, n.m. hooper and a.j. turner, unpublished data). preliminary evidence indicates that the secretase responsible for the shedding of ace2 is distinct from that of ace (d.w. lambert, n.m. hooper and a.j. turner, unpublished data). in light of the ability of soluble ace2 to prevent sars cov infection [23] , further study of ace2 secretion is of prime significance.analysis of the ace2 sequence reveals the presence of seven potential n-glycosylation sequons [5] . the recently resolved crystal structure of ace2 provided evidence that six of these sites (n53, n90, n103, n322, n432 and n546) are glycosylated; it is not clear from this data whether the most c-terminal site is also occupied [18] . this study reported that soluble ace2 expressed in insect cells has a molecular weight of 90 kda, compared to the predicted 83.5 kda, a difference accounted for by the presence of the carbohydrate groups. this molecular weight of 90 kda has also been reported for ace2 in rat and mouse tissue [22, 24] . it should be noted, however, that other studies have reported a molecular weight of 120-130 kda in the same species [25, 26] . indeed, ace2 overexpressed in mammalian cells has an apparent molecular weight of 120 kda, which is reduced to approximately 85 kda following enzymic deglycosylation [5] . whilst the difference between the reported molecular weights of ace2 in insect and mammalian cells can be assigned to species differences in posttranslational modification, the reasons for the remaining discrepancies are unclear. disruption of normal glycosylation of ace2 expressed in cho cells, by treatment with the glycosidase inhibitor tunicamycin, prevented correct cellular sorting of full-length ace2 and abolished secretion of a truncated mutant lacking the transmembrane and cytosolic domains (d.w. lambert, k. pogson and a.j. turner, unpublished observations). the resulting unglycosylated protein was also catalytically inactive, indicating a requirement for glycosylation for membrane targeting and activity.in vivo, ace2 expression is confined to endothelial cells and renal tubular epithelium; it has also been identified in vascular smooth muscle cells and the leydig and sertoli cells of the testes [6, 25] the first direct evidence concerning the physiological role of ace2 was provided by studies on transgenic ace2 knockout mice (ace2 à/à ) carried out by crackower et al. [27] . these mice show no gross abnormalities, are fertile, and have normal blood pressure and renal function despite moderately elevated angiotensin ii levels. closer examination, however, revealed the mice suffered from severe cardiac dysfunction manifest in a profound decrease in cardiac contractility resulting from the thinning of the left ventricle wall and an increase in ventricle chamber dimensions. this disruption of heart function was associated with an up-regulation of genes induced by hypoxia and bore a remarkable resemblance to a condition resulting from cardiac surgery referred to as dcardiac stunningt. significantly, ablation of the ace gene against an ace2 knockout background rescues the cardiac phenotype, suggesting that ace2 serves as a regulator of the effects of ace in the ras. in a separate study, targeted disruption of the ace2 gene resulted in viable, fertile progeny lacking gross anatomical/structural abnormalities [28] and displaying only moderately elevated systolic blood pressure. after chronic infusion of angiotensin ii (at a level that does not induce hypertension), increased blood pressure and decreased heart rate were evident in ace2 null mice compared with wildtype littermates. thus, it appears that in the absence of ace2 the mice are more susceptible to angiotensin iiinduced hypertension.transgenic mice in which ace2 was overexpressed exclusively in cardiac myocytes exhibited complete atrioventricular block from 3 weeks of age [22] . the transgenic mice appeared healthy with a grossly normal heart structure and only slightly lowered blood pressure. however, the mice suffered from an increased susceptibility to sudden cardiac death, which directly correlated with the transgene dose. detailed electrophysiological analysis revealed severe, progressive conduction and rhythm disturbances along with sustained ventricular tachycardia and terminal ventricular fibrillation. in light of the observation that the gap junction proteins connexin40 and connexin43 were down-regulated in the hearts of these transgenic mice, it was suggested that the electrical remodelling was a result of gap junction dysregulation. in surviving older mice the expression of human ace2 in cardiac myocytes was progressively down-regulated (the down-regulation of proteins under the control of the heart-specific amhc promoter is a phenomenon reported for other models). this coincided with the reciprocal up-regulation of connexin43 resulting in partial restoration of the cardiac phenotype. however, it is important to note that ace2 is not normally expressed in cardiac myocytes but rather in cardiac endothelium.the ability of ace2 to cleave vasoactive peptides such as angiotensin ii indicates a possible role in blood pressure regulation. this theory was given increased credence by the observation that the ace2 gene maps to a candidate quantitative trait locus (qtl) in a salt-sensitive rat model of hypertension. furthermore, these rats display reduced ace2 mrna and protein expression compared to healthy littermates [29] . overlapping qtls have also been identified in other rat models of hypertension. in addition, two single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) were identified in the ace2 locus, which have been associated with the risk of cardiovascular disease in a caucasian population [30] .chronic administration of omapatrilat, a dual inhibitor of the vasopeptidases ace and neprilysin (nep), in spontaneous hypertensive rats (shrs) results in a significant reduction in blood pressure, marked diuresis and augmented renal excretion of the vasodilatory peptide angiotensin-(1-7) [31] . ace2 is capable of producing angiotensin-(1-7) from angiotensin ii in vitro and is abundantly expressed in the kidney [5] . upon treatment of shrs with omapatrilat, increased staining of both angiotensin-(1-7) and ace2 is observed in the renal proximal tubules, with a simultaneous increase of ace2 mrna expression in the cortex. the authors suggest that omapatrilat exerts this effect by inducing ace2 expression, resulting in a concomitant increase in angiotensin-(1-7) production from angiotensin ii and an associated decrease in blood pressure, rather than via the inhibition of ace and nep, both of which are known to cleave angiotensin- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . it has been demonstrated that the concentrations of angiotensin-(1-7) in kidney and urine are increased during normal pregnancy in rats [32] . in light of the evidence of renal ace2 expression, brosnihan et al. [33] investigated the possibility that changes in ace2 expression may be associated with the previous finding that the levels of angiotensin-(1-7) increase during pregnancy. it was found that the renal distribution of angiotensin-(1-7) and ace2 is similar and does not change during gestation; however, the intensity of staining for both was elevated (56% and 117%, respectively) in pregnant rats. these findings suggest that ace2 is the primary candidate for the local production and increased angiotensin-(1-7) generation during pregnancy.further evidence of the role ace2 may play in the ras came from a study by zisman et al. [34] in which they report up-regulation of ace2 expression in failing human heart ventricles. in a parallel paper, the same group presented evidence of the involvement of a novel angiotensin-(1-7) activity in the intact failing heart [35] . the later study demonstrated that formation of angiotensin-(1-7) was correlated with the level of ace2 expression and could be completely abolished by administration of an ace2-specific inhibitor. these data indicated that in failing hearts the major route for the increased production of angiotensin-(1-7) is from angiotensin ii via ace2 rather than from angiotensin i via neprilysin, as had previously been suggested.a separate study has implicated renal ace2 in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy [26] . in this study it was shown that ace2 mrna and protein expression levels were significantly reduced in the kidneys of 24week-old streptozocin-induced diabetic rats. the reduction in ace2 mrna expression was not influenced by ace inhibitor treatment. however, the decrease in ace2 protein expression was prevented under the same conditions, thereby suggesting that ace2 protein expression is associated with ace activity. in contrast, renal ace2 protein was found to be higher, with the absence of a concomitant increase in ace2 mrna levels, in young diabetic mice (db/db) before the onset of diabetic nephropathy [36] . the balance between ace and ace2 (low versus high protein levels, respectively) may be renoprotective in the early stages of diabetes with this balance being lost upon progression to renal damage. hence, it is postulated that ace2 is involved in the aetiology of diabetes via the ras, a role for which has been previously characterised in this disease state (for a review, see ref. [37] ).collectively, these studies in vivo provide strong evidence of a role for ace2 in the ras through localised production of angiotensin-(1-7) from angiotensin ii, perhaps serving as a negative regulator of the vasoconstrictive effects of ace to maintain blood pressure homeostasis and maintain cardiac and renal function (fig. 2 ).a surprising discovery is that ace2 is a functional receptor for the sars coronavirus, the causative agent of sars. in a series of elegant experiments, li et al. [23] coimmunoprecipitated the virus attachment glycoprotein (s1) with lysates from an african green monkey kidney cell line (vero e6) and subjected the precipitated proteins to mass spectrometry. among the sequences, a number were obtained corresponding to ace2. subsequently, it was demonstrated that recombinant soluble ace2, but not ace, was able to block the association between vero e6 cells and the sars cov s protein. expression of recombinant ace2 and of s1 protein resulted in cell fusion and the formation of syncytia in 293t cells, a cell line normally resistant to sars cov infection. furthermore, 293t cells expressing ace2 permitted efficient replication of the coronavirus, with viral genome copies increased 100 000-fold over a 48-h period, compared to 10-fold in untransfected cells. an ace2specific antibody inhibited the cytopathicity of sars-cov in a dose-dependent manner.the expression profiling of mrna, performed by harmer et al. [8] , demonstrates the expression of low levels of ace2 in the bronchus and lung parenchyma. this, taken together with evidence that the primary sites of murine ace2 expression are in the lung and the kidney [38] , led li et al. [23] to suggest that the tissue distribution of ace2 is consistent with the pathology of sars-cov. furthermore, hamming et al. [9] recently provided evidence that ace2 is abundantly expressed in the epithelia of the lung and the small intestine, possible entry sites for the sars virus.whilst research determining the receptor binding properties of the sars cov s protein has progressed at a rapid rate, little is known about the residues of ace2 involved in binding. preliminary experiments performed by li et al. [23] indicate that disrupting the active site of ace2 has no effect on s1 binding; further studies are required to understand the nature of the protein:protein interactions.until recently, it was widely assumed that the intricacies of the ras had largely been elucidated. recent studies examining the properties of ace2, however, have provided evidence that this crucial pathway may be significantly more complicated than previously thought. whilst, as yet, the precise physiological role of ace2 remains to be determined, it is becoming increasingly apparent that ace2 may act as a counterbalance to the effects of ace in the ras. given the significance of ace inhibitors in the treatment of a number of pathophysiological disorders, the contribution of ace2 to the regulation of the ras cannot be ignored. indeed, modulation of ace2 activity may provide a significant new therapeutic opportunity in the treatment of cardiovascular disease, either in isolation or in conjunction with existing ace inhibitors. this exciting possibility highlights the need for continuing efforts to elucidate the in vivo roles and biochemical properties of this emerging player in the ras. fig. 2 . schematic representation of the renin-angiotensin system (ras). ace, angiotensin-converting enzyme; nep, neprilysin; at 1 , angiotensin ii type i receptor; and at 2 , angiotensin type ii receptor. the conversion of angiotensin i to angiotensin-(1-9) by ace2 is kinetically much less favourable than the conversion of angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7).tors and arbs have known benefit against the harm to their cardiovascular and kidney health associated with discontinuing them. three articles now published in the journal provide data about whether ace inhibitors and arbs are indeed harmful in the context of the covid-19 epidemic. all are observational studies with the looming possibility of confounding, but each has unique strengths, and their message is consistent -none of the three studies showed evidence of harm with continued use of ace inhibitors and arbs.mehra et al. 9 conducted a database study involving patients who had been hospitalized in 11 countries on three continents. the study included 8910 patients who had received a diagnosis of covid-19, who had been admitted to the hospital between december 20, 2019, and march 15, 2020, and who had either died in the hospital or survived to hospital discharge. in multivariate logistic-regression analysis, an age greater than 65 years, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, history of cardiac arrhythmia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and current smoking were associated with an increased risk of inhospital death. female sex was associated with a decreased risk. neither ace inhibitors nor arbs were associated with an increased risk of in-hospital death. a secondary analysis that was restricted to patients with hypertension (those for whom an ace inhibitor or arb would be indicated) also did not show harm.mancia et al. 10 conducted a case-control study involving patients with confirmed covid-19 in the lombardy region of italy, which has been severely affected by the pandemic. in this analysis, 6272 people with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection that had been diagnosed between february 21 and march 11, 2020, were compared with 30,759 controls who were matched according to age, sex, and municipality of residence. in a conditional logistic-regression multivariate analysis, neither ace inhibitors nor arbs were associated with the likelihood of sars-cov-2 infection. an additional analysis comparing patients with severe or fatal infections with matched controls also did not show an association between these drugs and severe covid-19.reynolds et al. 11 conducted a study based on data from the electronic health records of 12,594 patients in the new york university (nyu) langone health system who were tested for covid-19 between march 1 and april 15, 2020. a total of 5894 patients had a positive test, among whom 1002 had severe illness (defined as admission to the intensive care unit, mechanical ventilation, or death). propensity-score matching was performed among all tested patients and among patients with hypertension (to assess whether the likelihood of a positive test result was associated with each of several antihypertensive drug classes), as well as among covid-19-positive patients and all such patients with hypertension (to assess whether the likelihood of severe illness among those with a positive test was associated with the same drug classes). the investigators' bayesian analysis showed no positive association for any of the analyzed drug classes, including ace inhibitors and arbs, for either a positive test result or severe illness.taken together, these three studies do not provide evidence to support the hypothesis that ace inhibitor or arb use is associated with the risk of sars-cov-2 infection, the risk of severe covid-19 among those infected, or the risk of in-hospital death among those with a positive test. each of these studies has weaknesses inherent in observational data, but we find it reassuring that three studies in different populations and with different designs arrive at the consistent message that the continued use of ace inhibitors and arbs is unlikely to be harmful in patients with covid-19. several other smaller studies from china and the united kingdom have come to the same conclusion. [12] [13] [14] [15] we note that mehra et al. found that use of either ace inhibitors or statins may be associated with a lower risk of in-hospital death than non-use, but neither of the other two studies estimated a lower risk of covid-19 or the likelihood of a positive test among patients treated with these agents. the unexpected result in the study by mehra et al. may be due to unmeasured confounding and, in the absence of a randomized trial, should not be regarded as evidence to prescribe these drugs in patients with covid-19.professional scientific societies and experts have spoken with one voice in advising that patients should not discontinue ace inhibitor or arb therapy out of a concern that they are at increased risk for infection, severe illness, or death during the covid-19 pandemic. [16] [17] [18] the data from these three studies support those recommendations. ultimately, one or more randomized trials will be needed to answer definitively the question of whether ace inhibitors or arbs pose a harm to patients with covid-19.disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this editorial at nejm.org. this editorial was published on may 1, 2020, at nejm.org.dear sir,as of today’s reports, the global number of confirmed cases of covid-19 has surpassed 150,000. the number of known cases is increasing by several thousand every day. on march 11, 2020, who publicly characterized covid-19 as a pandemic. the issue is of serious concern and deserves momentous attention.coronaviruses are a family of viruses that cause respiratory illnesses. most of them cause illness in animals, but seven known types of coronaviruses cause illness in humans. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2) is one of those viruses – it causes the illness currently known as coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19).though we are still learning what exactly puts someone at greater risk of developing a severe illness with covid-19, early information indicates older patients and those with chronic medical conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and cardio-cerebrovascular diseases may be at higher risk (1, 2, 3). infection caused by covid-19 is likely to disturb metabolic regulation. diabetic patients with covid-19 may face an altered immune response on the background of an already compromised health status owing to the diabetes-related complications and/or aging.the most important findings in patients with hyperglycemia and a viral infection were significant worsening of symptoms, which implies greater morbidity in these patients when compared to those without diabetes (3). however, the pathophysiology of this association remains uncertain. it is not known whether hyperglycemia changes the virulence of the infection, or if the virus modifies the glycemic metabolism. what we know is that diabetic patients are more susceptible to infection, and this can impact on glucose metabolism (4). dm is not just a disorder of glucose metabolism, but a chronic inflammatory condition characterized by multiple changes in lipid, carbohydrate and protein profiles (5). such inflammatory processes are due to hyperglycemia which leads to increased synthesis of glycosylation end products (ages), activates macrophages and other cells of the immune system, increase oxidative stress and promote the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, besides stimulating the synthesis of adhesion molecules that facilitate inflammation in the tissues (5). the inflammatory process and its complications might provide a higher propensity to infections or a greater severity of these conditions. another important issue is how this inflammatory and immune response occur in diabetic patients who acquire a viral infection, as well as whether the virus itself interferes with insulin secretion or the glycemic control.at this stage, the biological mechanism of the relationship between covid-19 and diabetes is not known, but the association for the severity of cases and death is pronounced. we need to develop a hypothesis to explain the causal path underlying the more severe clinical presentation of covid-19 infection and subsequent death in diabetic patients. biochemical tests are also essential to clarify the molecular pathophysiology involved.the association of covid-19 and dm is of substantial public health importance and deserves proper attention, since a large and diverse population is being affected globally. nowadays this comorbidity poses a relevant threat to human health, and prospective well-designed studies to elucidate the biological mechanism and the best clinical management of this association are urgently needed.homephilipphilip.home@newcastle.ac.uktranslational and clinical research institute, the medical school, framlington place, newcastle upon tyne, ne20 9hu, ukdear sirit was very useful to see the review published in the journal on diabetes and covid 19 infection [6]. in it you highlight that people with diabetes have a death rate perhaps around four times that of the background population, and i note that it has been suggested over 20-40 % of deaths in china/wuhan were in people with diabetes [7,8], clearly it is important to understand why.there will be some confounders here in the form of associations with other risk factors for dying with a covid-19 infection, notably age and cardiovascular disease, but these cannot explain all the excess. we need to understand this better to mitigate the risk.it is reported that most of the deaths are occurring in the context of pneumonitis [7,8], and in particularly onset of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards), a condition in which excess fluid in the alveoli blocks gas exchange between air and blood.people with diabetes, and many with cardiovascular disease (cvd) without diabetes, have a very permeable vasculature, identified since the 1980s as albumin lead through the kidneys (micro- and macro-albuminuria), but even prior to that as a late blush over the retina with intravenous fluorescence marker injection [9]. this leaky vasculature is associated with vascular inflammation, metabolic syndrome, and steatohepatitis, as well as cvd per se.it would seem not too far a stretch, in the absence of further research as yet, to assume that prior enhancement of vascular permeability could account for the increased rate of ards and death in people with diabetes, particularly type 2 diabetes, and also some with cvd.aside from further research i would suggest that those already with albuminuria (a routine yearly test for people with diabetes), those with higher liver enzyme markers (alt), and perhaps those with diabetes associated dyslipidaemia (low hdl cholesterol) should take particular steps to self-isolate.it is unclear to me how fast vascular inflammation can be ameliorated by improved blood glucose control (nearly all glucose-lowering medications reduce microalbuminuria in time), but tight glucose control in infected persons with insulin would meanwhile seem sensible. very poor glucose control is further known to interfere with leukocyte/lymphocyte function [10].yours sincerely.philip home.translational and clinical research institute, newcastle university, uk.references6guptar.ghosha.singha.k.misraa.clinical considerations for patients with diabetes in times of covid-19diabetes metabolic syndr clin res rev142020211e2127joint commission. report of the who-china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). 16-24 february 2020. available at https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf (accessed 13 march 2020)8the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team. the epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (covid-19) — china 2020. china cdc weekly 2020; 2(x): 1-10. available from https://github.com/cmrivers/ncov/blob/master/covid-19.pdf for china cvd weekly (accessed 13 march 2020)9rask-madsenc.kingg.l.vascular complications of diabetes: mechanisms of injury and protective factorscell metab17201320332331228110pozzilli p, signore e, leslie rdg. infections, immunity and diabetes. in, alberti kgmm, zimmet p, defronzo ra (ed) international textbook of diabetes, second edition. chichester: john wiley, 1997, 1231-1241. guptariteshfortis cdoc hospital, chirag enclaverenin angiotensin system blockade and covid-19 diseasedear editor,we recently published an article highlighting the special concerns while managing patients with diabetes in the times of covid-19 pandemic11. there have been some concerns about the use of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which were not clarified in our publication12. we are summarising the current evidence in this regard and will try to arrive at a reasonable conclusion.in the absence of a vaccine and an antiviral drug for the covid-19 infection, several therapeutic approaches are being studied. one such approach is the use of inhibitors of the renin angiotensin system, namely ace inhibitors and arbs. on the other hand, some concern has been raised about the fact that patients on these agents might be at an increased risk of infection by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2).angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) is the receptor for sars cov-2 as well as other coronaviruses and is expressed in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells and endothelium. the s-glycoprotein on the surface of coronavirus binds to ace2. this leads to a conformational change in the s-glycoprotein and allows proteolytic digestion by host cell proteases (tmprss2) ultimately leading to internalization of the virion13. viral s-glycoprotein, tmprss2 and ace-2 inhibition are potential targets of therapy and possibly vaccine development.as ace-2 is essential to coronavirus infection, its blockade is thought to be beneficial in preventing/treating this infection. a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors14. mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan15. as far as cvid-19 infection is concerned, the data on ras activation or the effect of its blockade is limited at present. hypokalaemia could be a marker of ras activation and high incidence of hypokalaemia has been reported in patients with covid-19 infection16.despite these small studies suggesting the benefit of drugs acting on ras, there is some data, albeit scarce, from animal models and human studies that treatment with ace inhibitors and arb could cause up regulation of ace217. ibuprofen and thiazolidinediones have also been shown to do the same18 , 19. increased expression of ace2 could theoretically increase the risk of infection with sars cov-2. this could be a concern in people with diabetes who are at already elevated risk of infections because of many other factors. however, currently, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by european society of cardiology council on hypertension and european society of hypertension.20 , 21.references11guptar.ghosha.singha.k.misraa.clinical considerations for patients with diabetes in times of covid-19 epidemicdiabetes metab syndr1432020 mar 102112123217217512fangl.karakiulakisg.rothm.are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased risk for covid-19 infection?lancet respir med2020 mar 11s2213-2600(20)30116-3011813hoffmannm.kleine-weberh.krügern.müllerm.drostenc.pöhlmanns.the novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) uses the sars-coronavirus receptor ace2 and the cellular protease tmprss2 for e ntry into target cellsbiorxiv20202020.01.31.92904214henryc.zaizafounm.stocke.ghamandes.arroligaa.c.whiteh.d.impact of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and statins on viral pneumoniaproc (bayl univ med cent).31420184194233094897015yangp.guh.zhaoz.wangw.caob.laic.yangx.zhangl.duany.zhangs.chenw.zhenw.caim.penningerj.m.jiangc.wangx.angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) mediates influenza h7n9 virus-induced acute lung injurysci rep4201470272539176716chen d, li x, song q, hu c, su f, daij, ye y, huangj, zhang x. hypokalemia and clinical implications in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). medrxiv preprint doi: 10.1101/2020.02.27.2002853017lix.c.zhangj.zhuoj.l.the vasoprotective axes of the renin-angiotensin system: physiological relevance and therapeutic implications in cardiovascular, hypertensive and kidney diseasespharmacol res125201721382861936718qiaow.wangc.chenb.zhangf.liuy.luq.guoh.yanc.sunh.hug.yinx.ibuprofen attenuates cardiac fibrosis in streptozotocin-induced diabetic ratscardiology13122015971062589680519zhangw.xuy.z.liub.wur.yangy.y.xiaox.q.zhangx.pioglitazone upregulates angiotensin converting enzyme 2 expression in insulin-sensitive tissues in rats with high-fat diet-induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitisscientific world journal201420146034092455831720position statement of the esc council on hypertension on ace-inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers. mar 11 2020. https://www.escardio.org/councils/council-on-hypertension-(cht)/news/position-statement-of-the-esc-council-on-hypertension-on-ace-inhibitors-and-ang21esh statement on covid-19. march 12, 2020. https://www.eshonline.org/spotlights/esh-statement-on-covid-19/(accessed 17 march 2020) a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) is spreading worldwide, and has caused over 250,000 deaths so far [1] . the mortality rate varies widely by age and across individuals, ranging from 0.2% among healthy, young-adults, to >10% among older persons with pre-existing conditions [1] .although the pharmacological treatment was not assessed, the first observational studies on patients with severe disease reported a high prevalence of comorbidities that are often treated with angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors, such as cerebrovascular diseases, coronary heart disease, hypertension and diabetes [2] [3] [4] . observing that human pathogenic coronaviruses bind their target cells through angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [5] [6] [7] [8] , and that a few studies reported an increase in ace2 expression mediated by angiotensin ii type-i receptor blockers (arbs) and ace inhibitors (more consistently on animals than in humans) [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] , some hypothesized that the increased expression of ace2 would facilitate infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), thus the hypertension treatment with ace2-stimulating drugs, as well as ace2 polymorphisms, might increase the risk of developing severe covid-19 [17] [18] [19] . consequently, this would lead to a serious conflict regarding treatment, because ace2 reduces inflammation and has been suggested as a potential new therapy for inflammatory lung diseases, cancer, diabetes, and hypertension [17, [20] [21] [22] [23] . in the wake of two preliminary cohort studies reporting a lower [24] or similar [25] covid-19 mortality among inpatients hypertensive subjects treated with arbs and ace inhibitors, the potential predictors of covid-19 and of disease severity, including anti-hypertensive medications, were recently analyzed by a few observational studies [26] [27] [28] . with one exception [27] , no increased risk emerged from the use of arbs or ace inhibitors; however, the role of other potentially linked predictors, including age and cardiovascular comorbidities [17, 29, 30] , differed across the population analyzed, and still requires confirmation. we have performed a case-control study on all sars-cov-2 infected subjects diagnosed in two italian provinces, retrieving admission and pharmacological data up to two years before infection, in order to confirm the potential independent predictors of severe/lethal covid-19, including treatment with ace inhibitors and/or arbs.this case-control, retrospective study compared the proportion of subjects treated with arbs and/or ace inhibitors among three groups of subjects with sars-cov-2 infection: a. asymptomatic infection or mild disease, defined as fever or malaise plus at least one of the followings: sore throat, muscle pain, shortness of breath, dry cough, headache, conjunctivitis, and diarrhea [31] , with no hospital admission;b. severe disease, requiring hospital admission, not in an intensive care unit; c. very severe or lethal disease, requiring admission in an intensive care unit and/or causing death.the sample includes all subjects with diagnosis of infection made in the province of ferrara, up to april 2, and the province of pescara, italy, up to april 24, 2020, by the central laboratory of the university hospital of ferrara or the central laboratory of the pescara hospital (and confirmed by the national institute of health). all diagnoses were made using (real time) reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) on oropharingeal specimens. the assays were those originally proposed by the charité-universitätsmedizin berlin institute of virology [32] , and then endorsed by the who [33] .the data on background pharmacological treatment up to the previous two years (january 1, 2018) were obtained from the national database of drug prescription, and integrated with clinical chart information for hospitalized subjects. data have been collected on the following drugs: ace inhibitors (atc classes: c09a and c09b), arbs (c09c and c09d), and insulin or other anti-diabetic drugs (a10). information on age, gender, and pre-existing conditions of all subjects were obtained through data-linkage with hospital discharge abstracts (italian sdo), which have been queried from the day of the diagnosis until january 1st, 2015. all admission data have been revised manually by two physicians (lm and mef) and the following conditions have been included in the analyses: malignant tumors, major cardiovascular diseases (heart failure, myocardial infarction and stroke-cvd), type ii diabetes, renal disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (copd, bronchitis, pneumonia, asthma, and emphysema).the study complies with the declaration of helsinki, the research protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the emilia-romagna region (code 287, approved on march 24, 2020), and the requirement for informed consent was waived because of the retrospective and pseudo-anonymized nature of the data.first, the differences across groups with mild, severe or very severe/lethal disease were evaluated using two-way anova with post-hoc tukey hsd test for continuous variables, and mantel-haenzsel chi-squared test for categorical ones. a sample restricted to hypertensive subjects was used to compare the subjects treated and untreated with ace inhibitors or arbs.multivariate logistic regression was used to investigate the potential independent predictors of severe or very severe/lethal covid-19. four models were built, two were restricted to hypertensive subjects (a and b), and two included the total sample (models c and d) and. models a and c were fit to predict severe or very severe disease (grouped together), while models b and d to predict very severe/lethal disease only (and repeated to predict death, with similar results, which have not been shown to avoid redundancy). all recorded variables (age, gender, cvd, diabetes, renal disease, cancer and copd) were included a priori in all models, with the exception of treatments with ace inhibitors and arbs, that were excluded from models c and d because of multicollinearity with hypertension. standard diagnostic procedures were adopted to check all models validity: influential observation analysis (dbeta, change in pearson chi-square and similar), multicollinearity, interaction terms, hosmer-lemeshow test for the goodness of fit and c statistic (area under the receiving operator curve). statistical significance was defined as a two-sided p-value<0.05, and all analyses were carried out using stata, version 13.1 (stata corp., college station, tx, 2014).our sample of 129 hypertensive subjects with severe/lethal covid-19, and 414 hypertensive subjects with mild disease or asymptomatic infection, had 80% statistical power to detect a difference of 20% or higher (corresponding to a relative risk �1.20) in the risk of severe/lethal disease between users of arbs or ace inhibitors (exposed group), and non users (controls).the sample consisted of 1603 subjects (mean age 58.0y; 47.3% males): 454 (28.3%) had severe symptoms, 192 (12.0%) very severe or lethal disease ( table 1 ). the sample of infected subjects, compared with the available estimates of the general population of the two provinces [34] , showed higher prevalence of diabetes (12.1% in the sample versus ffi5% in the general population); hypertension (33.9% versus ffi17%), copd (6.0% versus ffi3%) and cvd (16.1% versus ffi3%). 154 subjects deceased (mean age 79.3 years; 54.6% males); of them, 70.8% were hypertensive, 42.2% were diagnosed a cvd; 27.9% diabetics. twenty subjects with very severe disease were younger than 60 years; the youngest being a male aged 33 years. of those deceased, eight were younger than 60 years, and the youngest was a female aged 44 years.at univariate analysis, as compared to the subjects with mild disease, those with severe or very severe/lethal disease were significantly more likely to be older, diabetics, hypertensive, diagnosed with copd, cvd, and renal disease, and treated with arbs and/or ace inhibitors (all p<0.05). among hypertensive subjects (n = 543), however, the proportion of those treated with arbs or ace inhibitors (whose medication was not discontinued during the follow-up) 11-3.20) , and older age, which showed an exponential increase after 70 years: compared with the subjects younger than 50 years, the aors of those aged 70-79 and �80 years were 5.72 (3.81-8.58) and 9.06 (6.04-13.6), respectively (model c; table 3 ). only male gender, older age and diabetes also predicted very severe/lethal disease (model d; table 3 ). the main findings of this retrospective, observational study, are the following: first, it is confirmed that, among hypertensive subjects, the use of ace inhibitors or arbs up to two years preceding sars-cov-2 infection did not affect the severity of covid-19. second, older age, male gender, diabetes, and the presence of copd or cvd were independent predictors of severe disease, with a sharp increase of risk among subjects older than 70 years. third, only older age, male gender and diabetes were associated with a higher likelihood of very severe/ lethal disease. several hypotheses have been made on the association between covid-19 progression and treatment with ace inhibitors and arbs [20-22, 35, 36] . on one side, some asked whether the therapy should be discontinued during sars-cov-2 pandemic [17, 37] because covid-19 was strongly associated with hypertension, which is frequently treated with arbs and ace inhibitors [2] [3] [4] . it was indeed hypothesized that: (a) ace2 up-regulation mediated by arbs (and, to a lesser extent, by ace inhibitors) might increase patients' susceptibility to sars--cov-2 entry into host cells and further viral propagation [18, 19] , (b) virus binding to ace2 might reduce its activity, thus leading to increased levels of angiotensin ii and consequent pulmonary vasoconstriction, inflammation and oxidative organ damage, and increased risk of acute lung injury [20] . on the opposite side, other scientists suggested that, other than being harmful, arbs and ace inhibitors use in patients with cardiovascular risk factors and known or suspected covid-19 may even exert a beneficial effect, as ace2 up-regulation could increase the conversion of angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7), a peptide with potentially protective anti-inflammatory properties [35, 36] .recently, a few large observational studies based upon in-and outpatient electronic health records [26] [27] [28] examined the association between antihypertensive medications and the risk of covid-19 and/or a severe/lethal disease: our results are in line with most of the previous findings on an absence of risk with ace inhibitors and/or arbs use. in brief, the studies by mancia et al [26] , and reynolds et al [28] reported no difference in covid-19 severity or death between treated and untreated subjects, for both arbs and ace inhibitors. instead, the results by mehta et al [27] were partially discordant: the study found no association between treatment with arbs and death, but those treated with ace inhibitors showed a significantly higher risk of icu admission. in our sample, in order to further investigate the potential beneficial effects of ace inhibitors, the impact of which might be larger in patients with diabetes, copd, or cardiovascular diseases, we performed additional analyses, stratified by comorbidities. we found however no significant differences in the risk of severe/lethal covid-19 among treated and untreated patients with either cvd, or diabetes and copd (data not shown).besides sample size and provenance, there were few differences between this and previous studies: all studies included all infected subjects, hospitalized or not, evaluated disease progression beyond mortality, and retrieved medications and admissions from electronic health records (with the exception of mehta et al, who assessed the medications exclusively at the time of testing for sars-cov-2 [27] ).overall, the present and previous findings confirm those from preliminary chinese cohorts [24, 31] , and although confirmation from randomized studies is required [38] , they strongly support the statements of several experts [39, 40] and scientific societies, including the european medicines agency [41] , the european society of cardiology [42] , and the american heart association [43] , who recommend continuation of arbs or ace inhibitors medication for all patients, unless otherwise advised by their physicians.with regard to the role of the other risk factors that have been suggested for severe covid-19, including age, male gender, hypertension, diabetes, copd, and major cardiovascular diseases, it has been correctly argued that, so far, available data were unadjusted, thus the relative importance of underlying health conditions was unclear [21, 29] . in this study, we found support for a potential role of gender, diabetes, copd and cvd, beyond age, in covid-19 progression to a severe disease, whereas only gender and diabetes significantly increased the risk of a lethal or very severe outcome. thus, the present study confirms prior findings on the independent relationship of older age and male gender with death [44] , and of copd with progression towards severe disease [26] . instead, at least two issues may have influenced the conflicting results on the role of cvd and copd in predicting very severe/ lethal disease (an association showed in some prior populations [44] -but lacking in the present as well as in other recent findings [26] ): first, the relatively small sample of the present study; second, a marked difference in the population here enrolled, as compared to previous studies which included randomly selected sars-cov2 negative subjects as controls [26] . given the present scenario, further population-based cohort studies, with longer follow-up are clearly needed [29] to clarify these findings.in addition to a relatively small sample, a limitation of the present study is the lack of tobacco smoking and body mass index among the variables that have been recorded, because we could not extract such information for half of the deceased subjects, as well as for many of those that were not hospitalized. other limitations are the lack of an evaluation of the severity of the underlying cardiovascular diseases, and the absence of data on other antihypertensive medications. however, their potential role in altering the relationship between arbs or ace inhibitors and risk of severe/lethal covid-19 remains unclear: none of the previous studies on the topic assessed cardiovascular diseases severity [26] [27] [28] , and the two studies that included the use of other antihypertensive drugs into multivariable analyses did not find substantial differences between the adjusted and unadjusted relative risks of death [26, 28] .in conclusions, the present study did not find any association between covid-19 severity and treatment with arbs, ace inhibitors, or both, and confirms previous findings in supporting the recommendation of several scientific societies to continue arbs or ace inhibitors medication for all patients, unless otherwise advised by their physicians, who should thus be reassured. the adjusted analyses substantially confirm prior reports, indicating that the risk of severe or lethal covid-19 largely and significantly increases among the elderly, males, diabetics, and those with copd or major cardiovascular diseases. coronaviruses (cov) are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov. the sars-cov-2, has caused a rapidly spreading outbreak (covid- 19) with over 300 000 infected cases and more than 13 000 deaths globally [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] , (https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html). the sars-cov-2, a positive strand rna virus, has been seen to infect humans through the angiotensin converting enzyme -2 (ace-2) receptor [9] .in covid-19 infections, emerging evidence demonstrates that older individuals and people with underlying metabolic conditions of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia are at higher risk of morbidity and mortality [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] .in individuals with hypertension, diabetes, and other cardiovascular disorders with vascular complications, the renin angiotensin system (ras) is known to be activated with an increase in ace activity and a downregulation of ace-2. modulation of this system by ace-inhibitors or at 1 -receptor blockers is now considered as the first-line therapy as well as for prevention and management of vascular complications.in this regard, the questions arise if (i) differences in ace-2 may explain the exacerbated course of disease in patients with metabolic diseases and (ii) if ace modulation in covid-19 patients is neutral, beneficial, or harmful. the latter question may have immediate therapeutic consequences for millions of patients. moreover, ace-2-based therapy has been proposed as a potential therapeutic approach in covid-19 pneumonia [10] .the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace-2), a single pass type 1 membrane monocarboxypeptidase, discovered 2 decades ago [11] consists of an n-terminal peptidase domain and c-terminal collectrin like domain [9] . it is the peptidase domain that is responsible for the main functions of the renin angiotensin system (ras) [9] . the ace-2 shares 40 % homology with the n-terminal catalytic domain of ace, and a hydrophobic region near the c-terminus likely to serve as a membrane anchor [9, 11] . the ace-2 protein is encoded by the ace-2 gene located on chromosome xp22. these ace-2 proteins are more abundantly expressed on the apical surface of the well-differentiated and mostly ciliated airway epithelium of the lungs (alveolar type-2 cells), and enterocytes of the small intestine [12] . furthermore, ace-2 protein is expressed in arterial and venous endothelial cells and arterial smooth muscle cells, in the heart, kidneys, adrenal glands, pancreas, skeletal muscle, and adipose tissues [11] .the coronavirus sars-cov-2, a single stranded rna virus, has been seen to infect humans through their envelope spike glycoprotein (s-protein), which is responsible for cov cell entry and hostto-host transmission. during viral infection, this s-protein cleaves into s1 and s2 [9] . the furin cleavage site in the sars-cov-2s protein may provide a priming mechanism [13] . the ectodomain s1 binds to the peptidase domain of the ace-2 enzyme, while the s2 is cleaved further by the host cell serine protease tmprss2 [14] resulting in membrane fusion. both these steps are essential for the viral entry into the cells.an in vivo study shows that the infection of human airway epithelia by sars coronavirus correlated with the state of cell differentiation and ace-2 expression and localization [15] . the infection tends to occur more readily through well differentiated ciliated cells with higher ace-2 expression [15] . it has been observed that ace-2 membrane expression and plasma levels are reduced after infection with sars coronavirus [16] . further, sars cov spike protein has been found to reduce ace-2 expression and to augment pulmonary injury [16] . however, treatment with blockers of the renin-angiotensin system reduced the pulmonary injury by activating the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis.in the classical endocrine model of the ras, renin cleaves its substrate, angiotensinogen (agt), to produce the inactive peptide, angiotensin i (ang i), which is then converted to angiotensin ii (ang ii) by endothelial angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace). the catalytic activity of ace to activate ang ii occurs most extensively in the lung. ang ii mediates vasoconstriction as well as aldosterone release from the adrenal gland, resulting in sodium retention and an increase in blood pressure through the angiotensin 1 receptor (at 1 r).however, recent evidence suggests that ras also includes local systems with autocrine (cell-to-same cell) and paracrine (cell-to-different cell) effects in addition to the classical circulating ras with its well-known classical endocrine effects. in particular, ang ii generation at the tissue level by the tissue specific ras appears to have physiologic effects that are as important as circulating/systemic ang ii and, under some circumstances, more important than circulating ang ii. therefore, the ras system is not only involved in controlling blood volume and blood pressure but with the tissue specific local systems it directs tissue remodeling, endothelial dysfunction, and fibrosis [17] [18] [19] [20] .simplistically, it can be seen as a dual function system, which acts through two apparently opposite arms: the one responsible for the main actions of this system is constituted by the ace ang ii-at 1 receptor axis and the other, a counterregulatory arm, is formed by the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis. the catalytic activity of ace results in increased ang ii levels and increased catabolism of ang-(1-7) whereas the catalytic activity of ace-2 is predominantly on ang i and ang ii and leads to formation of ang-(1-7). ang-(1-7) acts on the g-protein coupled receptor mas and is known to have counterregulatory actions on ang ii resulting in vasoconstriction and growth inhibitory effects [17] [18] [19] [20] (see ▶ fig. 1 ).a common mechanism by which diabetes, hypertension, and other metabolic disorders cause vascular complications is endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, and atherosclerosis. in these disorders, the ace-ang ii-at 1 receptor axis is activated with a downregulation of ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis [19] [20] [21] , which leads to increased local and circulatory ang ii with a decrease in ang-(1-7) and subsequent increased oxidative stress, activation of the endothelium, smooth muscle cell migration, growth, proliferation and thrombosis [19] [20] [21] . deficiency in ace-2 leads to increased formation of atherosclerotic plaques and blocking of ace-2 results in prevention of atherosclerosis [20] (▶ fig. 1) . ace-2 is present in multiple organs and has various functions. in the heart, ace-2 prevents progressive cardiac fibrosis associated with aging and/or cardiac pressure overload and is beneficial in heart failure [19, 20] . in most forms of chronic kidney disease including diabetic and hypertensive nephropathy, expression of ace-2 has been reported to be reduced in kidney tubules with an increased expression in the glomerula [20] . this imbalance has been postulated as a potential cause of diabetic nephropathy.in the adrenal glands, the local secretory ras stimulates aldosterone production and serves as an amplification system for circulating ang ii. importantly the regulation of the secretory adrenal ras is independent of the circulatory ras and the activity of the adrenal ras correlates with aldosterone production and regulation of potassium serum concentrations [22] . severe diabetes has been associated with hyporeninaemic hyperactivity of the adrenal gland [23] .in the pancreas, the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis has been described to protect the function of insulin-producing beta cells by improving the function of islet microvascular endothelial cells. further, activation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase and no signaling pathways via the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis may have anti-inflammatory beneficial effects in pancreatitis [23, 24] . in the skeletal muscle, the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis has been described to decrease insulin resistance [25] . ace-2 may exert potential anti-obesity effects via stimulating brown adipose tissue formation and induction of browning in white adipose tissue [26] .a study done in the survivors of the sars infections, the organ involvement correlated with the organ expression of ace-2 with significantly higher immunostaining in the lung, kidney, heart, and islets of pancreas [27] . in this series, 20 of the 39 patients had diabetes during hospitalization, which resolved subsequently suggestive of acute islet cell damage and diabetes, probably due to the use of the ace-2 receptor domain for viral entry [27] .the respiratory system is a major site of ace-activity and source of systemic ang ii synthesis. locally produced ang ii may trigger increasing vascular permeability facilitating pulmonary edema. the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis that is highly expressed in the lungs, may potentially induce pulmonary vasoconstriction in response to hypoxia, which is an important process in preventing shunting in patients with pneumonia or lung injury [19] . in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) mouse models, ace-2 knockout mice displayed more severe ards symptoms compared with wildtype mice, while overexpression of ace-2 appeared to be protective [19] .▶fig. 1 schematic representation to show the renin angiotensin system in diabetes and the interaction of the sars-cov 2 with the ace-2. 1. the sars-cov 2 interacts with the ace-2 through the spike proteins after priming by tissue serene proteases. it uses the ace-2 protein to enter the alveolar cells in the lungs. 2. the renin angiotensin system consists of renin which catalyzes the conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin 1 (ang 1). the subsequent axis depends on the balance between the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) and ace-2. ace converts ang 1 to ang ii and this acts in the angiotensin receptor (at 1 r), whereas ace-2 converts it to ang-(1-7), which acts on the mas receptor. 3. in the respiratory system activation of ace leads to a proinflammatory, pro-fibrotic , pro-hyperresponsiveness response in the respiratory system, whereas ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas induces a protective mechanism of anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic and anti-hyperresponsiveness. a lower ace-2 will put these individuals at higher risk of respiratory distress. 4. in hypertension, diabetes, and cvd, the ace related pathway is activated with downregulation of the ace-2 pathway. these results in the multi-organ complications seen in metabolic diseases with endothelial dysfunction promoting atherosclerosis, increased cardiac fibrosis and lv remodeling, diabetic nephropathy, hyperactivity of adrenal gland, and it decreases insulin release and increases insulin resistance. 5. infection with covid-19 may exacerbate the ace-2 deficiency in these patients in all organs and maybe responsible for the multiorgan failure.thus, stimulation of the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis may have anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic effects in the pulmonary system, and these actions could potentially be favorable in the recovery of patients with pulmonary inflammation. it is possible that an ace/ ace-2 imbalance is one of the potential mechanisms explaining why patients with cardio-metabolic problems are at higher risk for respiratory failure [20] .in an animal model study, it has been reported that infusion of sars cov spike protein reduced ace-2 expression and augmented pulmonary injury. however, treatment with blockers of the renin-angiotensin system reduced the pulmonary injury by activating the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis [16] . therefore, it may be assumed that the inherent downregulation of the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis (as seen in metabolic conditions) is exacerbated in the covid-19 state because (i) the virus uses the peptidase domain of the enzyme for entry into the cells and (ii) there is a decrease in ace-2 with an increase in ace [9] .in covid-19 infections, chest radiography typically shows patchy or diffuse asymmetric airspace opacities bilaterally more in the peripheral zones and in later stages ground glass opacities. ct scan typically shows bilateral involvement, which is different from sars and mers which starts unilaterally. moreover, it shows bilateral multifocal ground-glass opacities with a peripheral lung involvement in milder cases with more widespread consolidation in patients who go to the intensive care unit. pleural effusion, cavitation, pulmonary nodules, and lymphadenopathy have not been reported in patients with covid-19. an important clinical observation of covid-19 infection in china was that some individuals with early infection exhibited no symptoms. interestingly, they even had negative swab results (due to absence of infection in the upper respiratory tract) and normal chest x-rays, however, showed significant changes in the ct scan of the lungs [28] .histopathological examination of early covid-19 infected lungs, which were serendipitously detected in specimens operated for lung cancer, revealed exudative and proliferative phases of acute lung injury, edema and congestion of alveolar septa with inflammatory infiltrates (macrophages), type ii pneumocytes hyperplasia with viral inclusions, organization of inflammatory exudates and interstitial fibrosis [29] . these pathological findings corroborated with the ct findings of patchy ground glass opacities. intriguingly, these pathological findings of inflammatory and fibrotic changes are known to be exacerbated in animal models of ace-2 knockout mice [19] .histopathological examination from autopsies of individuals who have succumbed from covid-19 infections showed degenerated and necrotized cells in the myocardium and blood vessels with interstitial inflammatory infiltrates and focal necrosis. in the kidneys, proteinaceous exudates in the bowman's capsule surrounding the glomerulus, degeneration and shedding of the renal tubular epithelial cells and hyaline casts, microthrombi and fibrotic foci have been reported [30, 31] . some of these changes of myocardial fibrosis and renal changes are already seen in the chronic phase of metabolic disorders due to ace-2 downregulation and these may get exacerbated [19, 20] .the vast majority of covid-19 patients have mild symptoms. however, a significant percentage is critically ill with admission to an intensive care unit (icu, approx. 10 %) with 4 % case fatality rate globally (john hopkins coronavirus resource center: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/). mortality is higher in patients with underlying hypertension, type-2 diabetes mellitus, or cardiovascular disease [1] [2] [3] . to address this further, we performed a cumulative analysis of published data from china and south korea, which showed that a disproportionately higher percentage of patients with a higher morbidity (requiring icu care, ards) had hypertension (28 %), type-2 diabetes (17 %), cvd (8 %) as an underlying disease. moreover, patients admitted to the icu had a higher systolic bp when compared to asymptomatic cases [4] [5] [6] [7] and in a recent series reported none of the nonsurvivors had hypotension [3] (▶table 1). a limitation of the data summarized in ▶ table 1 is the posibility that some cases were reported twice in different series. interestingly, however, in a recent case report on a mild case extensively followed in australia, a low level of the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), a key biomarker of type-2 diabetes related vascular complications, was found to be associated with minor disease pathology [32] . in a recent preprint study, hypokalemia due to renal potassium wasting has been reported with 93 % of the critically ill patients having hypokalemia independent of gastrointestinal symptoms [33] .the presence of higher expression of ace-2 receptors or its upregulation although initially thought to be a risk factor for infection is unlikely the case. in a recent preprint study, wherein they integrated public genomics, epigenomics, and transcriptomics data, they found that the expression of ace-2 is relatively high in asian females and young people while it is lower in males, and further decreases with age and with the progression of type-2 diabetes [34] . this contradicts the hypothesis that higher expression is directly related to increased susceptibility as we know that sars-cov-2 infections are more common in males and in elderly patients with metabolic disorders.taken together, these observations suggest that patients with underlying type-2 diabetes, hypertension and/or cardiovascular diseases are at higher risk for requiring critical care and ventilation. there is evidence that although they are critically ill, they tend to demonstrate normotension to hypertension and hypokalemia, which are classical features of an activated ace related ras with a downregulation of the ace-2 pathway. as per current data, it does not appear that higher ace-2 expression is associated with an immediate predilection as individuals at risk will tend to have lower ace-2 expression.since ace-2 is the entry receptor for cellular infection by sars-cov-2, blocking entry using ace-2-related therapy could be feasible to prevent the spreading of infection in the lungs and the whole body. convalescent sera containing neutralizing antibodies against sars-s protein offer protection against sars-cov-2 infection [35] . therefore, it was suggested to use recombinant human ace-2 protein to saturate the viral s-protein and thus prevent cellular entry of sars-cov-2 [10] . this is especially of interest, since ace-2 has already been de-veloped as an experimental drug (apn01, gsk2586881) for adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and is therefore available for clinical trials. it was shown that ace-2 could successfully prevent lung injury by the original sars-cov-2 [16] . for ards, it had favorable effects in mice and piglets, but the results from a recent study in humans has been disappointing [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] .another crucial step in cellular infection involves the serine protease tmprss2 that cleaves the viral s-protein. the tmprss2 inhibitor camostat mesylate has been approved in japan for pancre-atic inflammation and has been shown to prevent cellular infection by sars-cov-2 [14] . consequently, it could prove being useful in covid-19.both ace inhibitors and at 1 receptor blockers have been used in diabetes and cardiovascular disorders to modulate this system in preference for vasodilation and maintenance of endothelial integrity. furthermore, in the diabetic kidney, reduced ace-2 protein expression could be prevented by ace inhibitor therapy suggestive of an upregulation with ace inhibitor [19] . it is worthwhile men-▶table 1 mortality (death) and morbidity (icu stay) associated with cardiometabolic disease based on reported cases in the literature. tioning that ace-2 receptor upregulation due to angiotensin receptor blockers that are commonly used in hypertension could be considered to be risk factor for increased transmission of sars-cov-2 . however, it has been seen that the at 1 receptors tends to associate with ace-2 in these cases, which prevent the internalization of the ace-2 receptor and hence may not be amenable to viral entry [40] . moreover, as mentioned earlier, higher expression of ace-2 was not associated with higher susceptibility to infection with sars-cov.according to the scientific data detailed above, it is tempting to speculate that blocking the ace-ang ii-at 1 receptor axis with at 1 blockers commonly used as antihypertensives may tilt the balance in favor of the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis, which may help to accelerate respiratory recovery in patients suffering from covid-19 [41] . however, it is intriguing that the patients most likely to be treated with ace-i or at 1 blockers are the ones with the poorest prognosis in covid-19 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . moreover, ace-2 upregulation concomitant with ras inhibitions may ease viral infection. consequently, it is also possible, that ras blockade may have a detrimental effect in covid-19. currently, there is no clinical data to support one or the other direction. thus, the heart failure society of america, the american college of cardiology, and the american heart association have all issued statement to suggest that there is no definitive evidence of harm or benefit with the use of ace-inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers and that patients should continue to take their medications as usual [42] . it is of the utmost priority to evaluate the growing stock of clinical data from china and worldwide to determine if ras inhibitors are beneficial or deleterious in covid-19.only then, we can know how to counsel our patients taking ras inhibitors . in fact some researchers are planning a clinical trial to study losartan in covid-19 patients [43].individuals with underlying hypertension, type 2 diabetes, or cardiovascular disease are at higher risk for respiratory failure and mortality in covid-19. one of possible mechanisms for this predilection may be the imbalance in the ace pathways and therapeutics targeting viral entry through the ace-2 receptor or the ace-ang ii-at 1 receptor axis as well as stimulating the ace-2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis may be beneficial in these individuals. further evidence needs to be gathered on whether modulation of the renin angiotensin system would be advantageous due to upregulation of mas activation or harmful due to the concomitant ace-2 receptor upregulation in the acute management of covid-19. coronaviruses (cov) belong to the family coronaviridae and are considered to be the largest rna viruses, with genomes ranging from 27 to 32 kb [1] . they have been known to exist across the timeframe of history and cause upper and lower respiratory tract infections [2] . these viruses are these proteases are also not prone to progressive mutations, which mostly occur in viral protein targets. in this study, we have identified potential natural product candidates which can inhibit these proteases efficiently.in the current study, we used computational biology to screen and dock a library of natural compounds to inhibit human tmprss2, which facilitates the entry of sars-cov-19 onto host cells. the three-dimensional structure of tmprss2 was built using the online server swiss-model, as shown in figure 1a . we validated the results of the model obtained with swiss-model and cross-checked in rampage, observing 319 (92.7%) residues in the favored region, 23 (6.7%) residues in the allowed region, and 2 (0.6%) residues in the outlier region, which indicated the correct geometry and three-dimensional arrangement of the model, as shown in figure 1b . alignment of the template (pdb id: 5ce1) and the target protein is shown in figure 1c .the validated structure of human serine protease 2 was prepared for molecular docking analysis using the molecular operating environment (moe) software. the protein was 3d protonated, and energy was minimized by using energy minimization in the compute option in the moe software. after energy minimization, the binding pocket of the protein was predicted by using the moe site finder option to select the active site residues in the binding pocket in the three-dimensional atomic coordinates of the protein. the predicted active site residues of tmprss2 are asn146, arg147, cys148, val149, arg150, leu151, asp187, met188, tyr190, ile221, tyr222, lys223, asn368, pro369, gly370, met371, lys449, asn450, ile452, and trp454.natural product activity and species source (npass) is a freely accessible database containing 30,927 natural compounds classified into 18 different superclasses, which include alkaloids and derivatives, lipids and lipid-like molecules, benzenoids, lignans, neolignans and associated compounds, and so on [32] . these natural products are found in the kingdom or super-kingdom of bacteria (6.7%), fungi (7.9%), metazoan (9.4%), and viridiplantae (67.8%) from 6814 genera. in silico screening of large databases is a cost-effective and time-saving approach towards drug discovery. in the present study, we used two approaches for compound screening, i.e., a pharmacophore-based approach and a molecular docking score-based approach. for the first compound screening approach, we selected 10 pharmacophoric features of the known inhibitor of serine protease 2 camostat mesylate, which includes anionic and cationic atoms, an h-bond donor and acceptor, an aromatic center, a pi ring center, and a hydrophobic centroid. based on these features of the known inhibitor, we got 2140 compounds out 30,927 in the result file. in the second compound screening approach, these 2140 compounds were docked against tmprss2 for the evaluation of potent inhibitors.the molecular docking analysis revealed 85 compounds with a docking score comparable or lower than that of the standard inhibitor camostat mesylate, an fda-approved drug. compounds with the lowest docking score are considered to be the most potent inhibitors.it is interesting to mention that camostat is approved by the japanese fda for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis and postoperative and reflux esophagitis. it could be considered for off-label treatment of sars-cov-2-infected patients. the standard inhibitor of tmprss2, i.e., camostat, interacted with four key residues of the protease active site by forming seven hydrogen bonds, as shown in figure 2 . asparagine 146 forms an arene cation and backbone acceptor h-bonds, while cys148 forms an arene-h bond with the benzene ring of the ligand. asparagine 450 forms two hydrogen bonds with the anhydrous carbonyl oxygen, with sidechain acceptor and backbone acceptor. aspartic acid 187 forms an acidic hydrogen bond with the primary amine and a sidechain donor hydrogen bond with the secondary amine of the ligand. we selected the top-ranked drug-like compounds (12 compounds, figure 3 ) shown in table 1 , with a docking score equal to −13 or lower, in the attempt to identify active natural compounds for drug development.among these drug-like compounds, compounds 1 (npc306344) showed the highest docking score of −14.69. all the selected drug-like compounds showed interaction with tmprss2, with a docking score (<−13) better than the docking score (−11.06) of the standard inhibitor compound 1 forms 10 hydrogen bonds with the active site residues of the receptor protein, as shown in figure 4 . among these h-bonds, six residues (asn146, arg147, arg150, lys449, and asn450) are sidechain acceptor, and two residues (asn146 and arg147) are both backbone acceptor and donor. this compound has the iupac name methyl (1s,4as,7as)-7-(hydroxymethyl)-1-[3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-(hydroxymethyl)oxan-2-yl]oxy-1,4a,5,7a-tetrahydrocyclopenta[c]pyran-4-carboxylate and the common name geniposide and is one of the major iridoid glycosides of gardenia fruit. it was previously shown to inhibit 5-lipoxygenase [33] and the tumor-promoting factor p-glycoprotein [34] and have anti-angiogenic activity [35] and potential antiasthma properties [36] . additionally, geniposide was shown recently to protect against sepsis-induced myocardial dysfunction by activating ampkα to suppress myocardial reactive oxygen species (ros) accumulation [37] . it is present in nearly 40 species belonging to various families, especially the rubiaceae, among which the most representative are tinospora capillipes (native to china), paederia scandens (native to china), cornus officinalis (native to china, japan, korea), eucommia ulmoides (native to china), lantana camara (weed native to mexico, central america, the caribbean, and tropical south america), paratinospora sagittata (present in southern taiwanese and mainland chinese disjunction), artemisia capillaries (chinese medicinal herb), plantago asiatica (native to china, japan, korea), rehmannia glutinosa (native to china), plantago depressa (native to china, korea, himalayas), and gardenia jasminoides (native to vietnam, southern china, korea, taiwan, japan, myanmar, india, and bangladesh). admet indicators suggested that this compound does not have gastrointestinal absorption capability, nor can it cross the blood-brain barrier. regarding its metabolic role, it was found to be a substrate of cyp450 3a4 enzyme and an inhibitor of oatp1b1. it possesses estrogen and androgen receptor, as well as aromatase binding properties. eye irritation, ames toxicity, and carcinogenicity were null, but toxicity for honey bee and fish was high. acute oral toxicity was 3.466 kg/mol, plasma protein binding was around 50%, and water solubility appeared low. the ld 50 (lethal dose, 50%) for rat acute toxicity was 2.79 mol/kg, the pigc50 (prediction of the toxicity) for tetrahymena pyriformis was 0.2 µg/l, and the plc50 (predicted toxicity values) for fish was 1.09 mg/l. it was predicted to be localized in mitochondria, and its biodegradability was negligible or low.asselta et al. [31] suggested that polymorphisms are responsible for enhanced expression of tmprss2 in the italian population, and hence, increased mortality. a substitution mutation at position 160, i.e., v160m was probed from a docking perspective to see if the drug would bind differently in individuals carrying this mutation. the binding energy values of the top 12 ligands were studied for both native and mutant proteins. the values for binding to the mutant protein were different from those of binding to the native protein (with energy s value difference of 1.2). a root-mean-square fluctuation of the main-chain atom coordinates from alpha carbon traces of the native tmprss2, its v160m mutant, and the ligand-bound native tmprss2 and mutant tmprss2 structures was also observed ( figure 5 ). the binding site residues were also altered significantly in the mutant. other top-ranked drug-like compounds, potential inhibitor of tmprss2 [32] , were the marine natural product excavatolide m (compound 2), a briarane-type diterpene, the cembranolide durumolide k (compound 6), predicted as toxic, the dibenzylcyclooctadiene lignan schisphenin a (compound 3) from shisandra sphenanthera, the fungal decalactone dictyosphaeric acid a, obtained from the green alga dictyosphaeria versluyii, with antibacterial activity against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa), vancomycin-resistant enterococcus faecium, and candida albicans [38] . (compound 4), the endogenous cytidine (5 )-diphosphocholine, known as citicoline, (compound 5), with beneficial effects in transient global and focal cerebral ischemia [39] , 5-methoxyhydnocarpin (compound 7), a berberis species flavonolignan similar to silymarin and reported as a strong inhibitor of the nora pump (an endogenous efflux transporter of s. aureus in the plasma membrane [40] ), compound 8 from the free-floating algae known as sargassum, the p-terphenyl antioxidant curtisian l (compound 9) from the wild mushroom paxillus, microcarpin (compound 10), a bianthraquinone from asphodelus microcarpus, the green tea polyphenol (-)-epicatechin 3-o-(3 -o-methyl) gallate (egcg3"me) (compound 11), and the aromatase inhibitor isogemichalcone b (compound 12), mainly from artocarpus and broussonetia genera. among the remaining 73 compounds with a docking score comparable to that of the standard drug inhibitor, it is worth mentioning the active principles of popular herbs used in ayurvedic traditional medicine and components of multi-ingredient food supplements formulations, i.e., fuscaxanthone a from garcinia spp. (29, docking score: −12.35), orthosiphonone d (44, docking score: −12.00) from java tea (orthosiphon stamineus), 7-hydroxy-14-deoxywithanolide u (77, docking score: −11.12) from withania somnifera, commonly known as ashwagandha, a plant of immense medicinal properties belonging to the family solanaceae [41] , and 6s,9r-roseoside (78, docking score: −11.12) from ocimum basilicum and ocimum sanctum [42] .molecules 2020, 25, x 5 of 12 supplements formulations, i.e., fuscaxanthone a from garcinia spp. (29, docking score: −12.35), orthosiphonone d (44, docking score: −12.00) from java tea (orthosiphon stamineus), 7-hydroxy-14deoxywithanolide u (77, docking score: −11.12) from withania somnifera, commonly known as ashwagandha, a plant of immense medicinal properties belonging to the family solanaceae [41] , and 6s,9r-roseoside (78, docking score: −11.12) from ocimum basilicum and ocimum sanctum [42] . 158  170  182  194  206  218  230  242  254  266  278  290  302  314  326  338  350  362  374  386  398  410  422  434  446  458  470  482 rmsf native_tmprss2 mutated_tmprss2tmprss2_with_ligand mutatedtmprss2_with_ligand 158  170  182  194  206  218  230  242  254  266  278  290  302  314  326  338  350  362  374  386  398  410  422  434  446  458  470  482 rmsf native_tmprss2 mutated_tmprss2tmprss2_with_ligand mutatedtmprss2_with_ligand the current study aimed to identify potential candidate molecules with the ability to inhibit sars-cov 2 by acting on the tmprss2 enzyme, responsible for the priming of the s proteins found on the surface of the virus [27, 43] . these spike proteins of coronaviruses facilitate viral entry into the target cells. the s glycoprotein is composed of s1 and s2 subunits. the s1 subunit contains a signal peptide, followed by an n-terminal domain (ntd) and an rbd, while the s2 subunit contains a conserved fusion peptide, heptad repeats 1 and 2, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain [14] .it has been observed in previous studies that most human and animal cell lines, including vero and mdckii, are equally susceptible to virus entry driven by sars-s and sars-2-s, suggesting similarity in the choice of receptors by the two coronaviruses [7] similarly, it has also been evident from sequence analysis that sars-2-s rbm, responsible for making contact with ace2, tends to harbor the same kind of amino acids present in sars-s, indicating the use of ace-2 for cellular entry [44] .studies have also proven that ace-2 is not a direct s-activating protease, as it binds through a region distant from the ace-2 enzyme pocket (14) . hence, the protease responsible for s protein activation should be available in the vicinity of ace-2 and be anchored in the membrane [25] . tmprss2, a serine protease family, is known for its longer, potentially palmitoylated 84-residue cytoplasmic tail, which may position it into lipid rafts of the plasma membrane [45] . in this context, endosomal cathepsin l (a cysteine protease) is known as an s-activating enzyme, capable of cleaving the s protein to promote viral-cellular membrane fusion [15, 28] . however, only tmprss2 activity is essential for viral spread and pathogenesis in the infected host, whereas cathepsin b/l is dispensable [19, 24, [26] [27] [28] .several serine protease inhibitors have been designed and are available in the market, including camostat mesylate (used as a standard inhibitor in this study), nafamostat mesylate, bromohexine hydrochloride, and the protein inhibitors pai-1 or hai-2 [29] . in this study, we focused on the inhibition of tmprss2, a host serine protease which is less prone to mutations over time compared to viral proteins, using natural products. for this purpose, we adapted computational analysis to screen and dock a library of natural compounds considered as potential inhibitors of tmprss2. camostat mesylate (a japanese approved drug, trade name fiopin) was taken as a standard drug to compare docking scores and physicochemical parameters. the standard drug is known to inhibit syncytium formation [27, 46] . an online swiss-modell homology structure of tmprss2 was generated and tested by using the rampage tool, showing 92.7% residues in the favored region and 6.7% in the allowed ones, thus indicating correct geometry and 3d arrangement. the active site was deduced using the moe software.npass, a freely accessible database containing 30,927 compounds, was used to mine the potent inhibitors. as a result, 2140 compounds were identified as potent candidates, after the first phase of physicochemical analysis. the compounds obtained were docked against tmprss2 in the second phase of the analysis. the second phase identified 85 compounds with binding energies comparable to or lower than that of the standard inhibitor camostat mesylate (−11.06). among these compounds, we focused on the compounds with the lowest docking scores, also following the lipinski rule of five shown in table 1 .the amino acid sequence of human transmembrane protease serine 2 (uniprot accession no: o15393) isoform-2 is 492 amino acids long and was chosen for analysis. it was retrieved in fasta format and uploaded to the online server swiss-model (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/) to build a homology model of the target protein. the three-dimensional modelled structure was validated by uploading on the rampage server (http://mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~{}rapper/rampage.php).we screened the natural product activity and species source database (npass, available at http://bidd2.nus.edu.sg/npass) which contains 30,927 compounds [32] . pharmacophore-and molecular docking-based screening were performed, using the moe software. in pharmacophore-based screening, we selected the pharmacophoric features of the standard serine protease inhibitor camostat mesylate, a trypsin-like protease inhibitor, for compound mining. the pharmacophore-based screened library of compounds was further docked with the target protein to identify lead compounds with the best docking scores.for molecular docking analysis, the three-dimensional structure of human tmprss2 in .pdb format was opened in moe software (chemical computing group, montreal, quebec, canada). then, 3d protonation and energy minimization were done with compute option, till a gradient of 0.05 was reached. polar hydrogens were added, and site finder was used to predict the active site residues in the binding pockets of the protein. for molecular docking, we selected the .mdb file of the library and used the following parameters: placement: triangle matcher, refinement: rigid receptor, poses: 1, and rescoring 1 and 2: london dg. the docked compounds were ranked based on their docking scores [29] . the compounds with the best docking scores were further evaluated according to the lipinski's rule of five for ligand properties in moe software. admet property analysis was done using admetsar2.0 (http://lmmd.ecust.edu.cn/admetsar2/). based on a report that tmprss2 mutation makes some individuals more susceptible to covid-19, a reported mutation v160m suggestive of changed disease susceptibility [31] was studied with respect to its docking conformation in the presence of the top compound. the protein residue was modified in pymol using the mutagenesis function. the mutated protein was docked, and structural binding of the apo-and holo-forms of native and mutated tmprss2 proteins was studied. visualization was done in pymol and moe.protein-ligand interaction is a potent approach to mine drugs. human judgment regarding these interactions has been facilitated by computational approaches. this study made use of a computational approach to sift out interactions that are beneficial for and exclusive to tmprss2 binding and, hence, curb sars-cov-2 priming. compounds showing interactions with low scores or unfavorable parameters were excluded, while those able to establish favorable interactions were retained. the docking score of compound 1 was found to be −14.69, indicating this compound as the best drug candidate, among those with promising features, for drug development. its binding site and energy value were altered when it was docked with the tmprss2 v160m mutant. this information adds an important and flexible dimension to natural-drug mining against covid-19 and has led to some concrete predictions, which would hopefully be confirmed experimentally. urther in vitro and in vivo testing of the compounds identified in this study is necessary, prior to their input in the clinical trial pipeline. funding: this work was funded by the "san giuseppe moscati" national hospital (aorn), avellino, italy, and the miur grant farb, university of salerno.the authors declare no conflict of interest. the funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.i n our recent short report [1] , we suggested that angiotensin receptor blocking drug (arb) prescribing in hypertension may possibly be adverse, because this drug class can increase angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace2) expression, this protein being the molecular latch for sars-cov-2 virus entry to cells in covid-19 infections. we also suggested, more generally, that reducing ace2 expression could be a therapeutic principle for covid-19 control. we now welcome medical letters from four correspondents. one, dr ekan cüre [2] extends the case for possible pharmaceutical hazard in covid-19, providing evidence that actually some drugs additional to those initially suspected increase membrane ace2 expression. the other three correspondents, paolo verdecchia [3] , francisco jose fernandez-fernandez [4] and liu and colleagues [5] , take a different tack. they suggest that increasing the expression of ace2 in the lungs can be beneficial in acute respiratory disease syndrome (ards), including perhaps that due to covid-19. accordingly, pharmacologically inducing increased pulmonary ace2 with renin-angiotensin system blockers might be helpful in covid-19.several types of experiment in animals give credence to the idea that the level of human ace2 expression may perhaps be important in covid-19 infection. knockout mice genetically modified to have no ace2 are totally resistant to coronavirus infections [6] . there is a converse to this. in two studies, transgenic mice were bred to overexpress human ace2 [7, 8] . these hace2 transgenic mice demonstrated markedly increased infectivity and lethality when exposed to sars coronavirus. despite this type of evidence, it is commonly said that with arb and ace-inhibitor dosing in humans, the induction of ace2 would be insufficient to matter, and anyway, may not be in the lungs. but this criticism can be discounted applying a body of relevant evidence, both experimental and clinical (described in more detail below), deriving from studies in which arb and ace-inhibitor dosing has been used to replenish ace2 in the lungs in lung failure syndromes resulting from influenza virus, acid inhalation and other noxious influences [6, [9] [10] [11] . pulmonary ace2 expression is demonstrably increased by renin-angiotensin block in this context, with strong evidence that it improves survival [6, [9] [10] [11] . in short, the drugs in question for our hypothesis do induce increased pulmonary ace2 expression, which has biological benefit in noncoronavirus arsd. with coronavirus exposure it is plausible to ask, as we do, whether the biological effect of drug-induced pulmonary ace2 expression may be deleterious, promoting infectivity and lethality.cüre and cumhur cüre [2] importantly extend the spectre of possible pharmaceutical hazard in covid-19 by providing evidence that statins, specifically rosuvastatin [12] and some antidiabetic drugs, possibly sodium-glucose transporter protein 2 (sglt2) inhibitors [13] and certainly glucagonlike peptide-1 receptor (glp-1) agonists [14] increase membrane ace2 expression. in our hypothesis [1] , we were circumscribed and specific, focusing on arbs and hypertension. cüre and cumhur cüre demonstrate that there may be a need to think more broadly on this matter. he has extended the issue to prescribing of statins and antidiabetics. how these drugs increase ace2 expression is unclear. for other drugs that influence ace2 expression, their action on body sodium balance appears to be a common link, with sodium depletion elevating ace2. arbs, and less consistently ace-inhibitors, increase ace2 expression, and decrease body sodium content [1] . aldosterone reduces ace2 expression [15] , mineralocorticoid block with spironolactone increases expression [16] . we suggested [1] that elevated plasma angiotensin, a substrate of ace2, which is elevated by arbs and accompanies sodium depletion in general, may regulate the expression of the linked enzyme, ace2. things turn out not to be as simple as that, which may partly explain why ace-inhibition, which reduces body sodium, but through a direct action lowers plasma angiotensin, elevates ace2 less consistently than arbs. much as for aldosterone dosing, dietary sodium loading reduces ace2 expression [17] . this effect of sodium ingestion is relevant to the use of proximal small intestine tissue, accessed by endoscopic biopsy, used in direct studies of human ace2 [18] . direct exposure of the duodenum to sodium in a meal could be a confounder.three of the correspondents, verdecchio et al. [3] , fernandez-fernandez [4] and liu and colleagues [5] , develop the case, which was first presented in relation to the sars epidemic [6] , which in severe lung injury pulmonary ace2 is depleted. a special form of this pulmonary ace2 depletion is seen with coronavirus infections, wherein after the virus binds to the ace2 protein both are internalized, depleting membrane ace2 [6] . depletion of ace2 is accompanied by accumulation of angiotensin, its substrate, in the lung, with adverse effects. the plasma concentration of angiotensin does rise substantially in severe covid-19 infections [19] . there is a body of experimental and clinical evidence, mentioned above, that renin-angiotensin block, by repleting ace2, is beneficial in noncoronavirus ards, caused by influenza viruses, acid inhalation and other noxious influences [6, [9] [10] [11] . could this benefit extend to covid-19 infection? a trial of the arb losartan in severe covid-19 infections, based on this line of thinking, has commenced (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04312009).such a trial may carry risks of worsening the infection. benefit from renin-angiotensin system block in acute severe lung disease has not been shown experimentally in coronavirus infections. augmenting pulmonary ace2 expression might increase coronavirus uptake and viral load. the classic study of kuba et al. [6] is often misquoted as providing evidence of arbs and ace-inhibitors benefiting coronavirus pneumonia. kuba et al. [6] actually administered coronavirus fragments, spike protein, not replicable entire virus. the spike fragments depleted pulmonary ace2 after binding, aggravating the existing experimental pneumonia, which was improved by pharmacological reninangiotensin system block. neither this study, or any others to our knowledge, have demonstrated benefit of reninangiotensin block in coronavirus infection. the transgenic experimental animals overexpressing hace2 mentioned above previously were demonstrated to have increased infectivity and lethality with sar coronavirus [7, 8] . augmentation of virus uptake and replication presumably overwhelmed any specific pulmonary benefits.hypotheses are made for testing, and for the hypothesis that some common drugs induce ace2 overexpression and may be adverse in the covid-19 pandemic, this testing is urgently required. the most immediate and direct clinical testing should come from interrogating the pandemic databases of china and lombardy. from these populations, presence of covid-19 illness, illness severity and death could be matched against, age, preexisting medical diagnoses and drugs prescribed at the onset of covid-19 illness. the multivariate analyses will not be straightforward. there will be a need to differentiate between any effects of ageing, effects of diseases with increased prevalence accompanying ageing (including hypertension, heart failure and diabetes) and the possible effects of drugs given to treat these diseases.why not test the hypothesis of drug-induced covid-19 risk in experimental animals? pretreat the animals with arbs and ace-inhibitors to induced overexpressed ace2, then in a blinded experiment expose the animals to the sars-cov-2 virus. but that would not work. most mammals do not have sufficient structural similarity in their ace2 protein to human ace2 to be infected by this virus which is now cursing the human mammal.it may be difficult to test this hypothesis. do we as clinicians just live with it, leaving prescribing unchanged? in hypertension, where there are easier alternative prescribing choices, perhaps we can substitute calcium channel blockers and beta-adrenergic blockers for arbs, and perhaps ace-inhibitors, if a decision to change antihypertensive medication is made. for chronic renal disease and heart failure, where arbs and ace-inhibitors are specifically protective, changes really cannot be recommended, on the basis of a hypothesis. and 'simply discontinuing medication is strongly discouraged and is not an option' [1] .some hypotheses in medicine just fade away. they are a product of their time, have no real importance and no enduring legacy. with this hypothesis for many there is plausibility, and for all such 'believers', urgency. what can be the way forward, to prove this hypothesis or refute it?according to five new studies, therapy with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers (arbs) is not associated with an increased risk of infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) or with an increased risk of severe disease or in-hospital death among patients with covid-19. these observations are reassuring after concerns had been raised about the possibility that blockers of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (raas) could predispose individuals to severe covid-19. although the findings from these studies, which were published in nejm, lancet and jama cardiology, should be considered exploratory given that all were observational, the findings were consistent across the different patient populations and the different study designs.mehra and colleagues used an observational database from 169 hospitals in asia, europe and north america to evaluate the association between cardiovascular disease, drug therapy and in-hospital death in 8,910 patients with a confirmed diagnosis of covid-19. logistic-regression multivariate analyses showed that age >65 years, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and current smoking were independently associated with an increased risk of in-hospital death. conversely, use of ace inhibitors (or 0.33, 95% ci 0.20–0.54) or arbs (or 1.23, 95% ci 0.87–1.74) was not associated with a higher risk of in-hospital death.mancia and colleagues conducted a population-based, case–control study in lombardy, italy, with 6,272 patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection and 30,759 matched control individuals. use of ace inhibitors and arbs was more frequent among patients with covid-19 than among control individuals, but conditional logistic-regression multivariate analyses showed no association between these drug classes and the likelihood of sars-cov-2 infection or the severity of covid-19.reynolds and colleagues carried out an observational study including data from 12,594 patients who had been tested for sars-cov-2 infection in a health network in new york city, ny, usa. bayesian analyses and propensity-score models showed that previous treatment with antihypertensive drugs (including ace inhibitors and arbs) was not associated with either a higher likelihood of a positive test for sars-cov-2 infection or a higher risk of severe covid-19.similar findings were obtained by mehta and colleagues in a cohort of 18,472 patients who had been tested for sars-cov-2 infection in the cleveland clinic health system in ohio and florida, usa. overlap propensity score weighting showed no association between the use of ace inhibitors or arbs and the likelihood of a positive test (or 0.97, 95% ci 0.81–1.15).finally, de abajo and colleagues conducted a case–population study in seven hospitals in madrid, spain, including 1,139 patients with a confirmed diagnosis of covid-19 requiring hospital admission and 11,390 matched controls. conditional logistic regression analyses showed that the use of raas inhibitors was not associated with a higher risk of covid-19 requiring hospital admission compared with the use of other antihypertensive drugs (adjusted or 0.94, 95% ci 0.77–1.15). of note, patients with diabetes mellitus who were taking raas inhibitors had a lower risk of covid-19 requiring hospital admission.interestingly, some findings suggest that ace inhibitors and arbs have different effects in patients with covid-19, although the findings are contradictory. mehra and colleagues found that ace inhibitor use, as well as statin use, was associated with better survival. by contrast, a secondary exploratory analysis by mehta and colleagues showed a higher risk of hospitalization among patients with sars-cov-2 infection who were taking ace inhibitors (or 1.84) or arbs (or 1.61). however, the investigators, and the authors of accompanying editorials, caution that these associations should be considered with extreme caution because of potential unmeasured confounding given the observational design of the studies and the small number of patients in the secondary exploratory analysis.use of ace inhibitors and arbs is not associated with increased susceptibility to covid-19 and does not have harmful effects in patients with covid-19taken together, these studies suggest that the use of ace inhibitors and arbs is not associated with increased susceptibility to covid-19 and does not have harmful effects in patients with covid-19.various theories about drugs such as ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) in relation to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and clinical outcomes of covid-19 are circulating in both mainstream media and medical literature. these are based on the fact that ace2 facilitates sars-cov-2 cell invasion via binding of a viral spike protein to ace2. however, the effect of ace inhibitors, arbs and other drugs on ace2 is unclear and all theories are based on conflicting evidence mainly from animal studies. therefore, clinical evidence is urgently needed. the aim of this study is to investigate the relationship between use of these drugs on clinical outcome of patients with covid-19. patients will be included from several hospitals in europe. data will be collected in a user-friendly database (digitalis) on an external server. analyses will be adjusted for sex, age and presence of cardiovascular disease, hypertension and diabetes. these results will enable more rational choices for randomised controlled trials for preventive and therapeutic strategies in covid-19.understanding the pathophysiology of the covid-19 pandemic is key to develop strategies for both prevention and treatment to improve clinical outcomes. it is known from the previous outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) that cell invasion is accomplished by binding of a viral spike protein to ace2. 1 recent reports show that this is the same for sars-cov-2. 2 3 this binding leads to ace2 downregulation, which may contribute to lung injury, since less ace2 is available for potential protective effects, as shown in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). 4 aces are regulatory proteins in both blood pressure and inflammation. ace1, the key enzyme in the renin-angiotensin aldosterone system (raas), converts angiotensin i to angiotensin ii which by binding to the angiotensin ii receptor type 1 leads to vasoconstriction, resulting in a rise of blood pressure, fibrotic and proliferative/inflammatory effects. ace1 is targeted for reducing blood pressure by ace inhibitors; angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) lead to similar effects by blocking the effects of angiotensin ii.ace2 degrades angiotensin i to angiotensin-(1-9) and angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7)(4). this pathway involving the mas receptor is thought to be counteracting the effects of angiotensin ii and is associated with protective effects for heart, lungs and kidneys. 5 however, studies targeting this pathway have not led to beneficial effects in cardiovascular and renal diseases including hypertension. 6 7 in addition to its role in raas modulation, ace2 is also involved in degrading several other substrates, such as apelin, bradykinin and opioids. recently, involvement in degrading bradykinin has also been suggested as playing a causal role in the development of severe ards, since downregulation of ace2 as a consequence of virus binding may enhance the proinflammatory bradykinin receptor leading to local vascular leakage. 8 the fact that patients with previous cardiovascular disease (cvd), hypertension and diabetes have an increased mortality risk due to sars-cov-2-induced infection could be explained by the common factor of use of ace inhibitors or arbs. 9 10 this was suggested by several authors and also reached the mainstream media including cnn. 11 12 however, well-designed studies on the effects of ace inhibitors, arbs and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on ace2 expression are scarce, show conflicting results and have not been conducted in humans. 6 13-15 this has led to statements from several societies, including the european society of cardiology and the european society of hypertension, emphasising the lack of evidence and the importance of not withdrawing ace inhibitors and arbs considering their major role in blood pressure lowering, nephroprotection and cardiac protection. 5 in reply to these first rumours, other authors, including versmissen et al, argued that raas inhibition might even be beneficial once infected. [16] [17] [18] other authors suggested that arbs might be beneficial while ace inhibitors might not. 19 based on these theoretical grounds, intervention studies, either starting or discontinuing ace inhibitors or arbs, are currently recruiting patients with covid-19 ( clinicaltrials. gov). however, observational data in humans are urgently needed to address the real effect of medication and the clinical course of covid-19 before starting potentially harmful interventions based on only theoretical and conflicting evidence from animal studies. therefore, the comet study aims to evaluate the relationship between use of certain drugs, starting with ace inhibitors and arbs, on clinical outcomes of patients with covid-19. the main objective is to describe the correlation between use of ace inhibitors or arbs and clinical outcome, defined by admission to the hospital, duration of stay, intensive care unit (icu) admission and survival, in patients with confirmed covid-19. secondary aims are to address the effect protocol of other drugs, such as immunomodulatory agents, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids.an observational cohort study has been designed. patients will be included from various hospitals in europe by a pharmacist, clinical pharmacologist or treating physician. the participating investigators are asked to consecutively include all patients registered at the emergency department (ed) on a certain day or several days until a minimum of 50 patients have been included. if ed registration is incomplete, all patients with covid-19 who are hospitalised during a specific period until a minimum of 50 patients has been reached (both icu and normal ward) will be entered. the major criterion for a patient to be included is covid-19 positive by a positive sars-cov-2 pcr or high clinical likelihood based on bilateral pulmonary infiltrates not explained by another cause or after consensus of the local covid-19 expert team based on clinical, biochemical and radiological criteria.to allow urgent analysis, data entry will be undertaken in two phases. for quick data entry, the number of collected parameters will be minimised and with a special focus on medication. the following subject parameters will be collected for all patients:year of birth, sex, international classification of primary care/international classification of diseases, 10th revision medical history including cvd, diabetes, hypertension, body mass index (normal 20-25 kg/m 2 , high 25-30 kg/m 2 or obese >30 kg/m 2 ), prescribed medication by anatomical therapeutic chemical code and dose (at moment of presentation), smoking history, clinical frailty score, 20 logistic course (presentation at ed/transmission from/to another hospital), clinical course (no admission/admission to hospital <48 hours/>48 hours, no icu, admission icu) and survival. if easily accessible, laboratory data at presentation will also be entered. in the second phase, additional parameters may be included such as more specific clinical outcomes such as pulmonary embolism or more extensive laboratory parameters.since the medical history may be incomplete at the ed as recorded by the collaborating researchers, medication data will be used to confirm cvd, diabetes, heart failure and hypertension or to correct when medical history appears to be incomplete. cvd, including coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease and peripheral arterial occlusive disease, will be considered present when entered as items in the medical history and when a patient is using antiplatelet therapy to prevent bias of misdiagnosed cvd, especially in the case of angina.diabetes will be considered present when antidiabetic medication is used, even in the absence of a note in the medical file, to prevent bias of undiagnosed diabetes. hypertension will be considered present when entered as an item in the medical history and antihypertensive medication is used or when a patient is using one or more antihypertensive drugs without other indication. heart failure will be considered present when entered as an item in the medical history or when a patient is using an ace inhibitor or arb, a beta blocker and a loop diuretic in the absence of severe renal insufficiency.outcome clinical outcome will be assessed during 2 weeks after the date of covid-19 diagnosis, and scored as no hospital admission, hospital admission <48 hours, hospital admission >48 hours without icu, hospital admission >48 hours with icu. in addition, survival data will be collected.the relation between ace inhibitors/arbs and clinical outcomes will first be assessed by univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses. adjustments will be made for the following potential confounding factors: sex, age and presence of cvd, diabetes and hypertension. a dose-response analysis will be performed to support a causal relationship.since only patients visiting the ed will be included, they might not be representative for the larger population not visiting the hospital. therefore, the aim is to compare the use of ace inhibitors/arbs in the dutch patients with the general dutch population of similar age (age group of 10 years; stichting farmaceutische kengetallen: foundation pharmaceutical key numbers). in addition, use of other blood pressure-lowering agents and other drug classes such as lipid-lowering drugs will be compared between patients with most severe outcomes and no hospital admission or a short stay (<48 hours).the medical ethical committee of erasmus mc and brabant concluded this research does not fall under the scope of the medical research involving human subjects act (non-wmo) because of its retrospective nature and full anonymisation. investigators from each hospital will fill in anonymised data (sex and birth year) and all will sign a data transfer agreement. each patient will be assigned a study number known only by the investigator who will keep a coding list in the own hospital. each hospital can only see their own patients in the system. data will be collected in a database ( digitalis. nl) on an external server and then stored using open clinica. all data will be treated according to the privacy regulations applicable for europe and the erasmus mc privacy regulations. collected data will be secured against unauthorised access and will be stored and secured by the department of hospital pharmacy. no data that can identify a patient will be processed on this database to protect and respect the privacy of all patients. the main research team including the principal investigator can see all anonymised data. the main article will be submitted to a general medicine journal; follow-up articles focusing more deeply on certain drug classes might be submitted to pharmacological journals or journals in the specific area of disease, for instance cardiovascular.currently, clinical trials targeting ace2, raas and the bradykinin pathway are initiated while the evidence that this might be beneficial is still weak. the results of this study may contribute to more rational choices for randomised controlled trials. in addition, when any negative effect of use of ace inhibitors or arbs is identified, changing medication might be an easy intervention to reduce morbidity and mortality from covid-19. for instance ace inhibitors and arbs are used by over 10% of the dutch population ( gipdatabank. nl); almost half of these users are aged above 70 years.the most serious limitation of this study is the selection bias, especially when ed registration of unhospitalised patients is incomplete. however, for comparing ace inhibitors and arbs the indications are similar preventing a bias by indication; in addition, other antihypertensive drugs and lipid-lowering drugs will be analysed. due to the urgency of need of this data, time to enter clinical data will be limited, potentially leading to incomplete data, especially the medical history. however, by using detailed medication data this can largely correct for incomplete medical history data.in response: we read with great interest the original investigation by zhang et al 1 and the accompanying editorial by shah et al. 2 the study question is urgent and important, given the potential relationships among ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitor or arb (angiotensin receptor blocker) use, ace2 expression/activity, and coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) severity. [3] [4] [5] we appreciate that the authors appropriately tempered their interpretation of the results based on several limitations noted in their publication and the accompanying editorial. nonetheless, we are concerned that many readers may still overinterpret the impressive hazard ratios. notably, exposure assignments were based only on antihypertensive medications administered at any point during hospitalization. patients had to survive long enough, or be clinically stable enough, to achieve the exposure (ie, ace inhibitors/arb use). this time-dependent bias (or immortal time bias) underestimates the hazard of the exposure group, 6 which may result in a false or exaggerated apparent protective effect of ace inhibitors/arbs. also, fewer patients were on ace inhibitors/arbs than expected (17% versus 30%-40% prevalent use 7,8 ), suggesting substantial unmeasured confounding and nonsystematic exposure ascertainment: sicker patients will almost invariably be less likely to receive ace inhibitors/arbs during hospitalization. these limitations may explain contradictory results in observational us veteran data which did not show an association between baseline ace inhibitors/arb use and need for intensive care in patients with covid-19 (unadjusted odds ratio, 1 based on several clinical and mechanistic considerations, we believe that there is equipoise regarding potential benefit or harm from ace inhibitors/arb use in patients at risk for or who have covid-19. 3, 4 the current study reinforces the urgent need for randomized controlled trial evidence to address this important issue. 2 we are currently conducting an international, multicenter, randomized controlled trial (replace covid trial [the randomized elimination or prolongation of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers in coronavirus disease 2019], url: https:// www.clinicaltrials.gov. unique identifier: nct04338009) randomizing patients on chronic ace inhibitors/arbs who are hospitalized with covid-19 to continuation versus withdrawal of their ace inhibitors/arb upon admission, evaluating a hierarchical outcome including death, mechanical ventilation, pressor requirement, and other markers of severity of critical illness. another ongoing trial in ireland (url: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov. unique identifier: nct04330300) is randomizing outpatients with hypertension to continuation versus withdrawal of ace inhibitors/arbs, evaluating the risk of covid-19-related hospitalization and mortality.some authors recently suggested that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) should be discontinued, even temporarily, given the current pandemic of sars-cov-2 virus. the suggestion is based on the hypothesis that ace-inhibitors and arbs may favor the entry and diffusion of sars-cov-2 virus into the human cells. ace-inhibitors and arbs may increase the expression of ace2 receptors, which are the sites of viral entry into the human organism. ace2 receptors are ubiquitous, although they are extremely abundant on the cell surface of type 2 pneumocytes. type 2 pneumocytes are small cylindrical alveolar cells located in close vicinity to pulmonary capillaries and responsible for the synthesis of alveolar surfactant, which is known to facilitate gas exchanges. the increased expression of ace2 for effect of ace-inhibitors and arbs can be detected by increased production of angiotensin1-7 and mrna related to ace2. there is the fear that the increased expression of ace2 induced by ace-inhibitors and arbs may ultimately facilitate the entry and diffusion of the sars-cov-2 virus. however, there is no clinical evidence to support this hypothesis. furthermore, available data are conflicting and some counter-intuitive findings suggest that arbs may be beneficial, not harmful. indeed, studies conducted in different laboratories demonstrated that ace2 receptors show a down-regulation (i.e. the opposite of what would happen with ace-inhibitors and arbs) for effect of their interaction with the virus. in animal studies, down-regulation of ace2 has been found as prevalent in the pulmonary areas infected by virus, but not in the surrounding areas. in these studies, virus-induced ace2 down-regulation would lead to a reduced formation of angiotensin1-7 (because ace2 degrades angiotensin ii into angiotensin1-7) with consequent accumulation of angiotensin ii. the excess angiotensin ii would favor pulmonary edema and inflammation, a phenomenon directly associated with angiotensin ii levels, along with worsening in pulmonary function. such detrimental effects have been blocked by arbs in experimental models. in the light of the above considerations, it is reasonable to conclude that the suggestion to discontinue ace-inhibitors or arbs in all patients with the aim of preventing or limiting the diffusion of sars-cov-2 virus is not based on clinical evidence. conversely, experimental studies suggest that arbs might be useful in these patients to limit pulmonary damage through the inhibition of type 1 angiotensin ii receptors. controlled clinical studies in this area are eagerly awaited. this review discusses facts and theories on the potential impact of ace-inhibitors and arbs in the setting of the sars-cov-2 pandemic.ace-inibitori, sartani e sindrome respiratoria acuta da coronavirus 2./ [ace-inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers and severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by coronavirus]some authors recently suggested that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) should be discontinued, even temporarily, given the current pandemic of sars-cov-2 virus. the suggestion is based on the hypothesis that ace-inhibitors and arbs may favor the entry and diffusion of sars-cov-2 virus into the human cells. ace-inhibitors and arbs may increase the expression of ace2 receptors, which are the sites of viral entry into the human organism. ace2 receptors are ubiquitous, although they are extremely abundant on the cell surface of type 2 pneumocytes. type 2 pneumocytes are small cylindrical alveolar cells located in close vicinity to pulmonary capillaries and responsible for the synthesis of alveolar surfactant, which is known to facilitate gas exchanges. the increased expression of ace2 for effect of ace-inhibitors and arbs can be detected by increased production of angiotensin1-7 and mrna related to ace2. there is the fear that the increased expression of ace2 induced by ace-inhibitors and arbs may ultimately facilitate the entry and diffusion of the sars-cov-2 virus. however, there is no clinical evidence to support this hypothesis. furthermore, available data are conflicting and some counter-intuitive findings suggest that arbs may be beneficial, not harmful. indeed, studies conducted in different laboratories demonstrated that ace2 receptors show a down-regulation (i.e. the opposite of what would happen with ace-inhibitors and arbs) for effect of their interaction with the virus. in animal studies, down-regulation of ace2 has been found as prevalent in the pulmonary areas infected by virus, but not in the surrounding areas. in these studies, virus-induced ace2 down-regulation would lead to a reduced formation of angiotensin1-7 (because ace2 degrades angiotensin ii into angiotensin1-7) with consequent accumulation of angiotensin ii. the excess angiotensin ii would favor pulmonary edema and inflammation, a phenomenon directly associated with angiotensin ii levels, along with worsening in pulmonary function. such detrimental effects have been blocked by arbs in experimental models. in the light of the above considerations, it is reasonable to conclude that the suggestion to discontinue ace-inhibitors or arbs in all patients with the aim of preventing or limiting the diffusion of sars-cov-2 virus is not based on clinical evidence. conversely, experimental studies suggest that arbs might be useful in these patients to limit pulmonary damage through the inhibition of type 1 angiotensin ii receptors. controlled clinical studies in this area are eagerly awaited. this review discusses facts and theories on the potential impact of ace-inhibitors and arbs in the setting of the sars-cov-2 pandemic.ace-inibitori, sartani e sindrome respiratoria acuta da coronavirus 2./ [ace-inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers and severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by coronavirus]older individuals and immunosuppressed patients. in 2002, an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in guangdong china was traced to sars-cov, a new beta-coronavirus. during this outbreak nearly 8100 patients were diagnosed with an overall mortality of 9%, which increased to 50% in patients over 60 years of age [3] . the disease was thought to have originated from infected bats and was easily contained as transmission appeared to require direct contact with infected individuals. a distinct group 2c b-coronavirus, genetically related to bat coronaviruses, was responsible for another outbreak in saudi arabia in 2012 and the disease was termed middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). this virus was associated with an initial 50% mortality but did not spread appreciably outside the region [4] . an outbreak of an unknown respiratory illness in wuhan china was reported in late december of 2019 and the causative agent was identified as sars coronavirus (sars-cov-2) and the disease was called coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [5] . the disease has rapidly become a global pandemic and a major priority has been placed on finding drugs that prevent or limit viral propagation and infection.coronaviruses share a large genome, around 30 kb, express large replicase genes encoding non-structural proteins involving approximately 20 kb of the genome, undergo early transcription of the replicase gene, contain a viral envelope, and utilize ribosomal frameshifting for non-structural gene expression [6] . the viral genome is composed of a 5′-cap structure with a leader sequence and untranslated region (utr) composed of multiple stem loop structures needed for rna replication [7] . the 3′-end contains an utr that has rna structures necessary for viral rna synthesis as well as a 3′-poly(a) tail that mimics mrna allowing translation of replicaseencoded non-structural proteins. transcriptional regulatory sequences (trss) are found at the 5′-end of most structural and accessory genes with most accessory genes being non-essential but modulating viral pathogenesis [8] . there are four main structural proteins, termed spike (s), membrane (m), envelope (e) and nucleocapsid (n). the s protein is about 150 kd and is responsible for the "spike" on the viral surface and trimeric s protein is used for viral attachment to cell entry receptors [9] .the life cycle of human coronaviruses begins with viral attachment via the s protein to cell entry receptors, typically peptidases. the sars-cov virus uses the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as the main cellular receptor with the membrane serine protease, tmprss2, acting as an accessory protein to stabilize cell entry and cleavage of the s protein following viral fusion with the cell membrane [10, 11] . the virus enters and replicates within the cytoplasm starting with translation of the replicase gene and assembly of a viral replicase complex [12] . the complex and non-structural genes act to inhibit host cell translation while promoting host mrna degradation and enhancing viral rna synthesis and replication [12] . the process results in genomic and subgenomic rna generated via negative-strand intermediates and the s, e, and m structural proteins enter the endoplasmic reticulum (er) and move into the er-golgi intermediate compartment where viral genomic progeny are encapsidated by the n protein [13] . after assembly virions are transported to the cell surface and released by exocytosis. in some coronaviruses excess s protein can mediate cell fusion with neighboring cells, a process that may allow rapid viral transmission without detection by the host humoral immune response [14] .to accelerate pharma r&d across targets and disease areas, immuneering developed disease cancelling technology (dct) to identify targets and drugs reversing disease gene expression and fluency, a computational platform for large scale high throughput in silico screening. dct quantifies similarity of genome-wide signatures of disease to signatures of drug induced gene expression changes using cosine similarity. uniquely relative to other methods, dct quantifies the per-gene contribution to overall disease amplification or cancellation and is not biased to any specific targets or pathways. fluency predicts quantitative binding affinity purely from sequence. unlike other methods, fluency is a single universal quantitative structure-activity relationship (qsar) model able to accept any molecule and protein sequence as input. when trained on the over 2 million ic50 values from chembl, fluency achieves near experimental level binding prediction accuracy as well generating predictions on the binding site. we applied these platforms to determine if repurposing of existing drugs may be helpful in covid-19 infection, by: (1) assessing established drugs for binding to ace2 and tmprss2, two proteins used by the virus to enter cells and (2) scanning fda approved compounds for transcriptomic disease cancellation of coronavirus associated gene expression changes.given that the covid-19 virus uses angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as the main cellular receptor to enter the cell, we ran two fluency models with ace2 as the target input. two different fluency models ("model a" and "model b") were run to predict binding of ace2 to all chemicals in the selleckchem fda approved drug library. initial ranking by performance in model a is shown in table 1 , which included multiple known ace inhibitors scoring well (enalaprilat, ramipril, lisinopril, monopril, captopril). out of these drugs, enalaprilat has the best binding score from model a. given reports of the possibility of ace2 induction being driven by ace1 inhibition [15] and multiple subsequent reports hinting at benefit from ace inhibition [16] [17] [18] [19] , we were interested to observe ace2 specificity in comparison to ace1. for top hits, the binding of ace2 and ace1 was compared by calculating the difference in predicted binding (ace2 binding minus ace1 binding) using two fluency models (table 1 ). according to model a, brigatinib, tirofiban hydrochloride, and aleuritic acid are top ranked by pbind, and brigatinib is also highest ranked by model a as specific for ace2 over ace1. glutathione was ranked in 7th place by model a for being more specific to ace2 over ace1. next, a consensus ranking using the results of both models a and b was used to select top ace2 binders (table 2) . enalaprilat, tirofiban hydrochloride, and sotagliflozin showed balanced performance in both models. in order to assess specificity, fluency was run on top hits in reverse (predicting binding of a small molecule to the human proteome). by this metric, ramipril, piperacillin sodium and captopril had high ranking for ace2 ( table 2 ). the worst score by far of top hits considered was r-406.to explore other potential covid-19 associated hits, we ran both fluency models with tmprss2 as the target on the selleckchem fda approved drug library, and ranked hits based on performance in model a. ombitasvir, elbasvir, and capecitabine are the top predicted binding hits for tmprss2, and cefotiam hexetil hydrochloride and bictegravir are top 10 predicted hits by both models (table 3) . interestingly, chloroquine diphosphate was predicted by model b to bind ace2 with a pbind of 7.8 (ranked 290 out of the fda approved drugs for predicted binding) and tmprss2 with a pbind of 7.5 (ranked 210), while hydroxychloroquine sulfate was predicted by model b to bind ace2 with a pbind of 7.9 (rank 261) and tmprss2 with a pbind of 7.22 (rank 307) (results not shown).in order to confirm or deny findings from fluency, we applied a disease cancelling technology approach, searching for fda approved drugs which reverse coronavirus associated gene expression changes. unlikefor each version of fluency run (models a and b), the predicted binding and rank is reported. a higher "pbind" signifies a higher binding affinity. the difference in pbind between ace2 and ace is reported in the last two columns, with larger values reflecting increased predicted binding specificity for ace2 over ace fluency, dct was applied in a target and pathway agnostic way, capturing the full gene expression change in a data driven way. publicly available gene expression data were downloaded from geo (gse68820). healthy mice (c57bl/6nj) were infected with ma15 (mouse version of sars-cov) [20] . lung tissue was collected for gene expression analysis. a robust differential expression signal was detected between infected and uninfected mice at day 2 (fig. 1a) (table 4 ). genes changing in the opposite direction between ma15 infection and glutamine treatment are plotted in fig. 1b . interestingly, glutamine is a precursor to glutathione, which was ranked highly in fluency results (table 1) . thus, two orthogonal approaches (neural networks and cosine distance) used on two different data types (binding prediction and gene expression) both arrived at the same potential hit (glutamine/glutathione).first, we utilized an unbiased ai-based systems algorithm to interrogate 2657 fda approved or repurposing drugs for binding to ace2, the main sars-cov-2 table 2 top ranked fluency hits for binding to ace2, based on a consensus ranking using the results of both modelsfor each version of fluency run (models a and b), the predicted binding and rank is reported. a higher "pbind" signifies a higher binding affinity. a lower "reverse fluency" rank signifies a higher predicted specificity to the intended target human cell entry receptor. the rapid analysis of repurposing approved drugs for new indications allows for immediate access to potential agents that could be used for urgent emerging diseases, such as covid-19. the ability to identify such drugs requires additional biologic validation through in vitro studies confirming receptor blockade and inhibition of sars-cov-2 cell entry and replication, and in vivo ideally through randomized, table 3 top ranked fluency hits from both models for binding to tmprss2the "rank" column indicates the ranked position for a given model by binding prediction controlled clinical trials. during a global pandemic, however, time may not allow for usual drug development processes and repurposing of commonly available drugs may be critical. indeed, anecdotal reports of hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin and anti-il6 therapies have received attention [21, 22] . while hydroxychloroquine was predicted to bind to ace2 by model b, supporting the anecdotal reports, we did not detect azithromycin or anti-il-6 agents as these would not be anticipated to mediate therapeutic activity through ace2 modulation. further validation will be needed to determine if unbiased ai-based systems approaches are superior to anecdotal observations. in the binding prediction analysis, multiple known drugs were identified as potential ace2 inhibitors (table 1) . not surprisingly, twelve were ace inhibitors. this adds some confirmation that the unbiased selection accurately identified drugs with high likelihood of receptor binding. ace inhibitors are agents commonly used for the treatment of hypertension and heart failure. this family of drugs are based on various peptide compositions and were initially selected for binding to ace1, which catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, thereby blocking the renin-angiotensin system (ras), lowering systemic blood pressure, increasing sodium excretion and increased renal water output. ace inhibitors are not known to bind to ace2, which lacks the carboxypeptidase activity of ace1, but does contain a zinc-binding domain, exhibits metallopeptidase activity and shares approximately 40% homology with ace1 [23, 24] . our model selected for preferential ace2 binding and agents with better predicted binding values were prioritized (see table 1 ). early studies largely used angiotensin catalysis as the major readout for inhibition and whether current ace inhibitors may block sars-cov-2 binding remains speculative [25] . in addition, due to the counter regulatory nature of ace1 and ace2 expression, it is possible that agents that downregulate ace1 receptors may increase ace2 receptor expression and could worsen coronavirus infection. thus, we scanned for binding of both ace1 and ace2 for top hits, and ranked by predicted difference in binding. by this metric, captopril, enalaprilat and monopril looked likely to inhibit both and potentially solicit this undesired feedback effect (table 1) . ramipril is a long-acting ace inhibitor prodrug that is converted to the active metabolite ramiprilat in the liver and may be associated with hepatic injury. likewise, monopril is a pro-drug that undergoes transformation in the liver to the active metabolite fosinoprilat. in contrast, lisinopril is an orally active ace inhibitor that does not undergo metabolic transformation and is excreted in the urine and does not bind to other serum proteins but may also be associated with hepatic toxicity and these drugs need to be used cautiously in patients with underlying liver disease. captopril is a sulfhydryl-containing proline analog with potent and specific activity in blocking ace peptidyl-dipeptidase activity. captopril may also have anti-tumor activity through inhibition of tumor angiogenesis and promotion of anti-tumor immunity [26] .the analysis also identified a drug involved in glucose homeostasis and used in patients with diabetes mellitus as anti-hyperglycemic agents. nateglinide (table 1) is a derivative of phenylalanine and acts on beta-islet pancreatic cells atp-sensitive potassium channels and stimulates insulin secretion [27] . the drug has been used for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. sotaglifozin (table 2) is an oral inhibitor of the sodium-glucose cotransporter subtype 1 (sglt1), expressed in the gastrointestinal (gi) tract and sglt2, expressed in the kidneys [28] . to our knowledge, this agent have not been previously known to bind to ace or ace2. glutathione is another interesting agent that was predicted by both binding ai and gene expression disease cancellation. it is an antioxidant demonstrating improved airway clearance and pulmonary function in cystic fibrosis [29] . glutathione has also been evaluated as an adjunct in patients receiving certain chemotherapy agents following lung transplantation, and for management of hiv and parkinson's disease with mixed results [30] .fostamatinib (r-406, table 2 ) is an oral inhibitor of the spleen tyrosine kinase (syk) that is converted to the active metabolite, tamatinib, and has been approved for the treatment of chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura and is being evaluated in other autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis [31] . r-406 may also mediate signal transduction downstream of classical immunoreceptors, including the b-cell receptor explaining why it may be useful in treating autoimmune diseases and b cell hematologic malignancies [32] . emricasan (table 2) , also called idn-6556, is a thiol protease that acts as a caspase-3 inhibitor that received orphan g status by the u.s. fda for treatment of liver disease, such as chronic hepatitis c, where it functions to protect against excessive hepatic cell apoptosis. emricasan has been shown to decrease hepatic aminotransferases in patients with hepatitis c and other viral-induced and non-viral liver diseases [33] . the drug has also shown activity against zika virus-mediated caspase 3 induction and blocked viral infection of neural cells in vitro [34] . the potential antiviral activity of emricasan was identified in a drug repurposing screen following the zika virus outbreak in 2016 [34] . fosamprenavir was identified ( table 2 ) and is a protease inhibitor prodrug of amprenavir, an anti-retroviral drug approved for the treatment of hiv disease. agents with known antiviral activity against rna viruses are especially interesting for evaluation against coronaviruses. orlistat (table 2 ) is a carboxyl ester and reversible inhibitor of gi lipases [35] . orlistat was initially isolated from streptomyces toxytricini, a gram-positive bacterium, and blocks hydrolysis and absorption of dietary fats and was approved in the u.s. and u.k. for the treatment of obesity. two of the drugs identified have activity as anticoagulants, tirofiban hydrochloride (table 1) and argatroban ( table 2) . tirofiban is a non-peptide tyrosine derivative and functions as an antagonist of the purinergic receptor, platelet glycoprotein-iib/iia [36] . the drug inhibits platelet aggregation and has been used for treating acute coronary syndrome and is being studied for management of ischemic stroke [37] . in contrast, argatroban is a small molecule that directly inhibits thrombin and is used for management of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia [38] . piperacillin (table 2) is a broad spectrum, semi-synthetic, beta-lactam, ureidopenicillin antibiotic derived from ampicillin. piperacillin is active against gram-negative bacteria and was initially used for treating pseudomonas aeruginosa infections and later as part of combination antibiotics for more complex infectious indications [39] . in contrast to macrolide antibiotics such as azithromycin which inhibit bacterial protein synthesis, piperacillin blocks bacterial wall synthesis. since these are commonly used agents in the management of patients with pneumonia, they both merit further studies to understand their role in ace2 modulation and potential role in management of covid-19 infection.to search for potential covid-19 therapeutic approaches in an orthogonal and unbiased way, we applied our disease cancellation technology to gene expression data from an animal model of sars-cov and ranked compounds by their ability to induce gene expression signals that counteract disease-associated signals. by this gene expression method, glutamine was a top hit for reversing coronavirus associated changes in gene expression. glutathione was highly ranked by fluency for ace2 binding and its precursor glutamine was highly ranked by gene expression dct, suggesting both deserve further testing to explore potential benefits against sars-cov-2. both glutamine and glutathione have previously demonstrated antiviral activity against herpes virus (hsv) infections [40] .in summary, we used a novel ai-based systems approach to identify potential drugs currently available that are predicted to bind to ace 2. these agents are readily available and could be rapidly assessed both in the laboratory and clinic for activity against sars-cov-2 infection and clinical course of covid-19 disease. further studies of these agents may provide new clinical strategies for patients with coronavirus diseases. under normal circumstances, we would conduct experimental validation prior to submitting this report for publication. given the current public health emergency, we are publishing this work now in the event that others are set up to more quickly validate, assess, and build upon these findings. although validation is still needed, this report highlights how ai-based systems may be utilized to rapidly identify drugs for repurposing against new and emerging human diseases.ace2 (uniprot id: q9byf1), ace1 (uniprot id: p12821), and tmprss2 (uniprot id: o15393) were run separately as the protein target of immuneering's fluency query. fluency is a single universal quantitative structure-activity relationship (qsar) deep learning model, which takes protein amino acid sequence and small molecule smiles as input. fluency was trained on experimental binding data from chembl 24 (model a) and chembl 25 (model b). fluency predictions have previously been experimentally validated for multiple targets. in this case, fluency was used to predict binding of the selleckchem fda approved drug library (https ://www.selle ckche m.com/scree ning/fda-appro ved-drug-libra ry.html) separately to ace2, ace1, and tmprss2. for top hits, fluency was run in reverse (predicting binding of a single small molecule to 20,206 human proteins) to score specificity. predicted binding scores for ace1 and ace2 were compared for top hits to assess predicted specificity for ace2 over ace1 in each model (as reflected in the "pbind_x_ace2-pbind_x_ace" columns). similarity to known binders (reported pchembl value greater than 7 in the chembl database) to ace2 was computed using tanimoto distance of molecular fingerprints from rdkit in python. top ranked fluency hits were filtered by evaluating individual rankings from model a and model b, as well as the average rank of predictions and the combined pbind scores of both models.gene expression data was downloaded from geo (gse68820). the processed data which was background corrected, quantile normalized, and summarized after outlier removal by the author was used [20] . for each of the time points, differential expression was calculated between the ma15 (sars-cov) virus infected wild type mice lung samples and the mock-inoculated wild type mice using the limma r-package version 3.40.6 [41] . immuneering leveraged its previously described [42] and validated [43, 44] dct, and ran the sars-cov disease signature against the lincs drug perturbation database [45] . results were filtered for adjusted p-value significance and maximal disease cancellation score. angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 two independent approaches converged in the discovery of ace2 or angiotensin-converting enzyme homologue (aceh) in 2000. ace2 was identified from screening a human genome database for novel zinc metallopeptidases, hence recognized as a close homolog of ace (see chapter 98), then cloned from a human lymphoma cdna library [1] . in parallel the same sequence was identified from a human heart failure cdna library [2] .despite high similarity in sequence to ace, particularly around the active site, ace2 functions as a carboxypeptidase, rather than a peptidyl dipeptidase, cleaving the c-terminal amino acid from susceptible substrates. the distinct binding specificity of ace2 was demonstrated by the failure of ace inhibitors to block its activity. given the overall similarity to ace, the first potential substrates to be examined were angiotensin peptides and bradykinin [1] . the decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i) is converted by ace2 to ang(1à9) but not further metabolized whereas the vasoconstrictor octapeptide, ang ii, is converted to the vasodilatory ang(1à7). subsequent detailed kinetic analysis revealed that ang ii was highly preferred as an ace2 substrate over ang i, being hydrolyzed 400fold more efficiently: ang ii (k m 2 μm, k cat 3.5 s 21 ), ang i (k m 6.9 μm, k cat 0.0034 s 21 ) [3] . bradykinin is not hydrolyzed by ace2 but des-arg9-bradykinin, the natural ligand for the bradykinin b 1 receptor, was a substrate. when screened against a panel of 126 biologically active peptides, only 11 were hydrolyzed by purified ace2, in all cases by single carboxypeptidase action. the three most efficiently hydrolyzed substrates were angiotensin ii, apelin-13 and dynorphin a-(1à13). only for ang ii as a substrate is a physiological role for ace2 established, its cleavage product being angiotensin-(1à7) (ang (1à7)), which acts on the mas receptor to oppose the actions of ang ii [4] . however, there is emerging evidence that ace2 may further control blood pressure by controlling the degradation of apelin-13, another vasoactive peptide [5, 6] . comparison of sequences around the cleavage site of susceptible substrates suggested a consensus sequence for carboxypeptidase action of pro-x((1à3 residues))-pro-hydrophobic/basic [7] . ace2 has an optimum ph of 6.5 and, as a zinc peptidase, is inhibited by metal chelating agents [1, 8] . several selective ace2 inhibitors have been developed since its discovery, the first such being mln-4760 [9] , which was designed exploiting the knowledge that ang i was an ace2 substrate. it is a non-peptide inhibitor with which the inhibitor-bound crystal structure was subsequently solved [10] . mln-4760 (also known as gl1001) was originally, but unsuccessfully, developed as a potential anti-obesity drug and more recently is being examined as an anti-inflammatory agent [11] . a peptide inhibitor of ace2, dx600, was identified from phage libraries and displayed a k i of 2.8 nm [12] . more recently a phosphinic-peptide inhibitor has been developed, which mimics the enzyme transition state. this pseudo-peptide inhibitor was designated 416f2 and has a k i of 0.4 nm [13] .the ace2 gene is located on chromosome xp22 and contains 18 exons, many of which resemble the corresponding exons in the ace gene. the complete cdna sequence of ace2 encodes a 805 amino acid protein, which resembles a chimera composed of a single acelike catalytic ectodomain fused to the transmembrane protein, collectrin, or tmem27 [14] , which plays a role in regulation of renal amino acid transport and has been implicated in insulin exocytosis and β-cell proliferation [14] . the homology of ace and ace2 is particularly striking around the hexxh zinc-binding motif which is identical (hemgh) in the two proteins. the crystal structure of ace2 was solved within 4 years of its discovery [10] . this established the structural basis for the unique catalytic activity of ace2 compared to ace, which is the result of subtle differences in their active sites. for example, the presence of an arginine at position 273 in ace2 compared with glutamine in ace removes the s2 0 pocket present in the active site of ace, thereby eliminating the peptidyl dipeptidase activity [10] . upon substrate or inhibitor binding the two catalytic subdomains of ace2 undergo a hinge-bending movement of 16 å towards each other, which closes the active site cleft to initiate substrate hydrolysis [10] .key active site residues of ace2 ( figure 100 .1) were identified by site-directed mutagenesis based on the structure of the single domain testicular form of ace [15] . the fidelity of this model was verified by the inhibitorbound crystal structure. the formation of a salt bridge by arg273 was found to be critical for substrate recognition since its mutation abolished enzymatic activity. like ace, a histidine in ace2 (his345) stabilizes the tetrahedral peptide intermediate by acting as the hydrogen bond donor/acceptor. mutation of his505 to alanine reduced ace2 activity by 300-fold and therefore also established his505 as a critical active site residue.the activities of both ace and ace2 are chloridedependent, which is due to the presence of cl1 and cl2 sites in ace and a comparable cl1 site in ace2. this chloride regulation is, however, substrate-dependent [7, 16] . the chloride dependency of the ace2 cl1 site is mediated by several critical residues: arg169, trp271 and lys481, which correspond to arg186, trp279 and arg489 in testicular ace. additionally, arg514 in ace2 was identified by mutagenesis as a residue important for substrate selectivity. effective inhibition of ace2 is also dependent on the presence of chloride, the ic 50 for mln-4760 being 10-fold lower in the presence of 500 mm nacl compared to its absence [16] .preparation ace2 protein has been expressed in functional form in mammalian cells (chinese hamster ovary) [1] and in a baculovirus-infected insect cell (sf9) expression system [8] . characterization of ace2 has involved the use of a truncated, secreted form of the protein which lacks the transmembrane and cytosolic domains [1, 2] . the baculovirus-expressed protein was purified to homogeneity by sequential chromatography on a qae anion exchanger, hydrophobic interaction chromatography, mono-q ion exchange and gel filtration. this form was subsequently used for the crystallization of the protein [10] .the main tissue sites of expression of ace2 were originally identified as testis, heart and kidney [1] , where it was shown to be localized on the apical membrane of polarized cells [17] . however, it has now been identified more widely, for example in liver, intestine and lung [18, 19] . more recently ace2 has been localized in the brain [20] , where it appears to act as a central regulator of cardiovascular function [21à24]. the major identified physiological function of ace2 is the conversion of the vasoconstrictor ang ii to ang(1à7), a vasodilator, antifibrotic and anti-inflammatory peptide [25, 26] . deletion of the ace2 gene in mice was shown to produce a major defect in cardiac contractility and an upregulation of hypoxia-inducible genes in the heart [27] . deletion of both ace and ace2 genes led to a rescue of the observed cardiac phenotype [27] . however, subsequent gene deletion studies of ace2 have produced mixed results with much less effect on baseline cardiac function [28] . overall, it appears that the actions of ace2 may primarily be relevant in pathological states such as hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy. for example, levels of ace2 have been shown to increase in the failing heart [29] and post-myocardial infarction (mi) in rat models [30, 31] , as well as in failing human heart tissue. viral over-expression of ace2 can attenuate heart hypertrophy and preserve cardiac function post-mi [32] . overall, therefore, ace2 does appear to play a role in cardiac homeostasis and these observations have led to the consensus view that ace2 plays a cardioprotective role acting as a counterbalance to the actions of ace [33, 34] . additionally, a decrease in ace2 expression is associated with diabetic nephropathy [35] and ace2 plays a major anti-fibrotic role in the liver [36] .unexpected roles for the ace2 protein independent of its catalytic activity have emerged. firstly, the cellular receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus, which causes severe acute lung failure, was identified as ace2 [37] . it also serves as a receptor for another coronavirus, nl63 [38] . binding of either virus causes downregulation of surface expression of ace2. the loss of surface ace2 on sars infection results in a diminished ability of the lung to respond to inflammatory lung cell damage due to an increased ratio in the levels of ang ii:ang(1à7). administration of recombinant human ace2 in vivo can protect from severe acute lung injury [39] .ace2 also functions as a chaperone for the small neutral amino acid transporter (b 0 at1) in the intestine, transporting it from intracellular sites of synthesis to the cell surface. this chaperone role is mediated by the collectrinlike domain of ace2, with collectrin serving as the main transporter of b 0 at1 in the kidney. in hartnup disorder, an inherited disease leading to severe aminoaciduria, a mutation in b 0 at1 reduces its affinity for ace2 and collectrin leading to its intracellular sequestration [40] .like ace, ace2 is found as a soluble, circulating form in plasma and is also detectable in urine as a result of renal excretion. the soluble form represents the ectodomain, which is shed from the membrane-bound form following proteolytic cleavage by adam17 [41] . at present it is unclear if the circulating form is physiologically active since its activity in plasma seems to be masked by an endogenous inhibitor. the retention of ace2 on the cell membrane is regulated by calmodulin binding and calmodulin inhibitors increase the cellular release of ace2 [42] .given the generally protective role of ace2 in cardiovascular, hepatic and lung pathologies, its upregulation would seem to have therapeutic potential. several strategies have been investigated to date to achieve these ends, including viral delivery and the administration of recombinant soluble ace2, in a range of in vivo disease models [43à45]. ace2 activators have also been developed using a rational drug design approach [46] . a molecular docking model based on the open (substrate-free) and closed conformations of ace2 led to the identification of xanthenone as a compound that binds at the hinge site on ace2 between subdomains 1 and 2. this compound increased ace2 activity by approximately 2-fold in vitro and was shown to reduce the blood pressure of spontaneously hypertensive rats [46] and attenuate thrombus formation in the same model of hypertension [47] .ace2 is a multifaceted enzyme with a broad range of biological functions. as discussed above, ace2 resembles ace in many structural aspects but differs from it in specificity since it acts as a carboxypeptidase. the cytoplasmic domains of ace and ace2 show no homology and have distinct functions. ace2 does not hydrolyze bradykinin or the synthetic ace substrate hip-his-leu. ace2 is not inhibited by inhibitors of ace or cp-a and specifically designed ace2 inhibitors such as mln-4760 do not inhibit ace.other metallocarboxypeptidases known to contain an hexxh zinc binding motif are bacterial in origin and include carboxypeptidase taq [48, 49] (chapter 279) and the cobalt-activated carboxypeptidase from the hyperthermophilic archaeon pyrococcus furiosus [50, 51] (chapter 286). ace2 shares some similarities in specificity with these carboxypeptidases but their characterization remains somewhat limited.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid -19) has been declared as a pandemic by word health organization on march 11, 2020, as soon as it satisfied the epidemiological criteria (infection in more than 100,000 people in 100 countries) [1] . as of march 27, 2020, world has witnessed more than half a million cases of covid-19 with more than 24,000 deaths [2] . this suggests the magnitude of its spread across the world, since it was first reported on december 31, 2019 from wuhan, hubei province in china. emerging data suggests that older covid-19 patients with other comorbid conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, cardiac and pulmonary disease are in particular more susceptible, compared to general populations and have higher mortality. therefore, it is necessary to re-look into these subgroups of covid-19 patients with associated comorbidities.in this review article, we have collated all the available evidence that has emerged so far on outcomes and comorbidities in patients with covid-19. here, we have focused on outcomes in patients of covid-19 with hypertension and analyzed the controversies surrounding the use of renin-angiotensin system blockers (rasb).we have systematically searched the pubmed medical database up till march 27, 2020 using mesh key words that include covid-19, coronavirus, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, angiotensin receptor blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. we have retrieved all the available literature published in english language on covid-19, that reported the outcomes in different co-morbidities.the association of hypertension and diabetes in patients with covid-19 is not unexpected, given the rising prevalence of both of these chronic diseases, globally. interestingly, in the pooled data from the ten chinese studies (n ¼ 2209) that have reported the characteristics of comorbidities in patients with covid-19; associations of hypertension, diabetes and presence of established cardiovascular disease (cvd) are larger, varying from 15 to 30% (average 21%), 5e20% (average 11%) and 2e40% (average 7%) respectively (table 1) . established cvd was also present in nearly 43% in italian study of 355 patients with covid-19. while consistent association of hypertension in patients with covid-19 across all these studies is unique, the concern which needs a serious attention is the increase in mortality. two chinese studies have worked in this direction to-date. in 191 patients with covid-19, zhou et al. found hypertension to have an odds ratio (or) of 3.05 (95% ci, 1.57 to 5.92; p < 0.006), diabetes with or of 2.85 (95% ci, 1.35 to 6.05; p < 0.001), whereas presence of coronary artery disease had an or of 21.40 (95% ci, 4.64 to 98.76; p < 0.0001) for in-hospital mortality, in an univariate analysis [8] . however, the association between these disorders and covid-19 mortality were no longer significant after a multivariate regression analysis. similarly, in an analysis of 201 patients with covid-19, wu et al. found hypertension to have a hazard ratio (hr) of 1.82 (95% ci, 1.13 to 2.95; p ¼ 0.01) for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and 1.70 (95% ci, 0.92 to 3.14, p ¼ 0.09) for death. the diabetic patients had a hr of 2.34 (95% ci, 1.35 to 4.05; p ¼ 0.002) for ards and hr of 1.58 (95% ci, 0.80 to 3.13, p ¼ 0.19) for death, in a bivariate cox regression analysis [11] . it should be noted however, that neither of these studies were adjusted for all confounding variables. nevertheless, a study of 187 patients with covid-19, guo et al. reported nearly a twice increase in mortality in patients with established cvd and raised troponin t (tnt), compared to patients without cvd and raised tnt (69.4% vs. 37.5% respectively) [14] .the chinese center for disease control and prevention in a summary report of covid-19, reported a case fatality rate (cfr) of 2.3% (1023 deaths among 44,672 confirmed cases). however, cfr was elevated to 6.0% for hypertension, 7.3% for diabetes, and 10.5% for presence of cvd [15] . unsurprisingly, based on the above findings, researchers have recently proposed that the course of treatment and prognosis of covid-19 should be stratified based on the absence or presence of co-morbidities in to type a, b and c. type a denotes covid-19 patients with pneumonia but without comorbidities, type b denotes covid-19 pneumonia and comorbidities, whereas, type c denotes covid-19 patients with multi-organ dysfunction [16] .nonetheless, it still remains unclear whether these increased association of hypertension with covid-19 and heightened risk of mortality is directly related to hypertension or other associated comorbidities, or, anti-hypertensive treatment. there has been a growing concern that this association with hypertension and or cvd may be confounded by the treatment with certain antihypertensive medications such as rasb. although a recent paper has proposed to stop rasb and suggested to replace it with the calcium channel blocker, while treating hypertension in patients with covid-19 [17] , this hypothesis has been questioned by several other colleagues [18e22].the entry of coronavirus into the cell is facilitated by the spike (s) protein. before attachment to the receptor on host cell, the s protein needs to be primed by a serine protease named tmprss2. the s proteins of different coronaviruses may utilise different receptors; mers utilises cd26 while sars cov and sars cov2 utilise angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) [23] . the efficiency of the interaction between s-protein and ace-2 may be a key determinant of the transmissibility of the virus, viral replication and the severity of disease. in theory, this efficiency could be influenced by changes or amino acid substitutions in either the viral s-protein or [24] . the major outbreak of sars cov occurred in 2002e2003 with a minor localised outbreak with mild symptoms in 2003e2004. it was observed that the s-protein of sars cov in the 2002e2003 outbreak bound to ace-2 receptor much more efficiently than that of sars cov in the 2003e2004 outbreak, consistent with the absence of human-to-human transmission during the latter outbreak. several molecular changes in the s-protein influence the binding with human ace-2; for example, the substitution of threonine by serine at position 487 in s protein reduces the binding [25] . similarly, asparagine at position 479 increased the binding affinity [26] . methylation at position 487 has also been shown to influence binding. recently, s-protein of sars cov2 has been shown to be similar to that of sars cov, barring a few gains of function mutations. the most important of these is a glutamine at position 493 at the receptor binding domain, which explains its increased transmissibility compared to sars cov [27] . b) changes in ace-2 receptor: with regard to mers-cov, which employs cd26 (dpp-4) as its receptor for cellular entry, there are naturally-occurring polymorphisms in dpp4 that impact cellular entry of mers-cov and might thus modulate mers development in infected patients [28] . there is a possibility that similar variations or polymorphisms in ace-2 could affect the viral entry and disease course. polymorphisms of ace-2 gene have been identified; however, there is no evidence that they affect susceptibility to or severity of sars cov2 infection [29] . a recent study found differential ace-2 gene expression in human lung tissue with no racial/gender differences, but a higher gene expression in lungs of smokers compared to non-smokers, which could explain the higher risk of infection in smokers [30] .the role of ace-2 on vascular bed is opposite to that of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace). ace converts angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, which is a vasoconstrictor. ace-2 converts angiotensin ii to angiotensin (1e7) which causes vasodilatation after binding to the mas receptor in the vascular bed [31] . downregulation of ace-2 was observed in animal models of lung injury induced by sars cov [32] . recombinant ace-2 improved pulmonary blood flow and oxygenation in animals with lung injury, indicating that ace-2 may be the main determinant of lung injury caused by sars cov [33] . however, there is lack of human data except a small study in 10 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome which showed that recombinant ace-2 was well tolerated and led to an increase in angiotensin (1e7) [34] .there has been considerable interest regarding the role of ras blockers in covid-19 infection. both benefit and harm have been postulated. figure 1 illustrates the interactions between the effect of rasb and covid-19. fig. 1 a) rationale and evidence for harm: there is evidence that ace-2 expression increases with the use of ace inhibitors and arb, especially in heart and kidney [35, 36] . this has raised a theoretical concern that by increasing ace-2 expression, aceis and arbs could facilitate the entry of virus into the host cell and increase the chances of infection or its severity [17] . also, there is increased ace-2 expression in elderly [37] .to what extent this predisposes the elderly to infection with sarscov2 is not known. in a study of 187 patients with covid-19, guo et al. reported an increased trend in mortality with those receiving rasb, compared to those not receiving. mortality was 36.8% (6 of 19) and 25.6% (43 of 168) in patients with or without rasb, respectively [14] . indeed, increased association and heightened mortality with covid-19 have been observed consistently across the studies in elderly, hypertensive, diabetics and known cvd; however, it is not exactly known whether it has any causal relation with the use of rasb or these subgroups are more on rasb due to these illness, compared to the rest of population. moreover, there is no solid evidence to back this concern either in covid-19 or in infection by other coronaviruses. b) rationale and evidence for benefit: as discussed above, increasing ace-2 levels in coronavirus infection could reduce lung injury. in an experimental study with mice, kuba et al. found that losartan showed significantly diminished lung injury and pulmonary edema after acid aspiration-induced acute lung injury (with addition of sars-cov spike protein) compared to placebo [32] . similarly, severe lung injury and pulmonary edema were prevented by both recombinant human ace-2 infusions or losartan in ace2-knockout mice [38] . mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan [39] . moreover, a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors [40] . treatment with arbs was reported to reduce mortality in ebola virus infection [41] . the exact mechanism of apparent benefit of these drugs in coronavirus infection is not yet clear. however, there could be several explanations [42] . i. increased ace-2 expression may not result in more viral entry into the cell because of the limited availability of the serine protease tmprss2. camostat mesylate, which is a tmprss2 inhibitor, has been shown to inhibit cellular entry of sars cov2 and could be a potential therapeutic option [43] . ii. increased ace-2 expression on the cell membrane may also lead to increased soluble ace-2 in blood, which may actually bind to most of sars cov2 and prevent its interaction with the membrane bound receptor. iii. ras blockers increase angiotensin ii, which is a substrate for ace-2. the interaction of ace-2 with angiotensin ii could induce a conformational change in the receptor binding domain of ace-2, limiting its ability to bind with sars cov2 [44] . iv. ace-2 receptors are present at a much higher density in lung tissue of children and young adults, compared to older individuals. thus, the upregulation of ace-2 receptors by the use of rasb over time in older people may emulate ace expression in young people. it is also possible that having more ace-2 receptors and increased ace-2 functions will likely produce more angiotensin (1e7) that might provide resilience against target-mediated destruction and development of pulmonary failure in patients with covid-19 [22] . this postulated positive effects on lung can be also protective during overwhelming infection with covid-19. v. indiscriminate discontinuation of rasb in patients with heart failure may also lead to readmission to hospital and increase in mortality [45] .collectively, relationship between ras activity and use of rasb in sars cov2 infection is very scarce. the only indirect evidence of ras activation in covid-19 is high incidence of hypokalaemia [46] . with regards to the use of rasb, a retrospective analysis of 112 covid-19 hospitalised patients with cardiovascular disease in wuhan, there was no significant difference in the proportion of acei/arb medication between non-survivors and survivors [47] . however, a study of 187 patient reported by guo et al., there was a trend of increase in mortality in patients with covid-19 receiving rasb (36.8%), compared to those not receiving (25.6%) [14] .covid-19 is increasingly associated with comorbidities that include hypertension and diabetes. special care is required in patients with covid-19 with associated comorbidities, given the heightened risk of in-hospital death.in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, and with bulk of the experimental evidence in favour of benefit, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by the european society of cardiology, hypertension canada, the canadian cardiovascular society, uk renal association, the international society of hypertension, and european society of hypertension and american heart association [48e50]. future studies reporting the outcome stratified on the basis of different anti-hypertensive agents in covid-19 may further enlighten us in this regard.we hereby declare that we have no conflict of interest related to this article.hypertension, a long-term medical condition known as high blood pressure, is a major risk factor for vision loss, stroke, heart failure and chronic kidney disease, and more than a quarter of the world's adult population in 2000 had hypertension [1] . therapeutic approaches have focused on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) which regulates blood pressure and electrolyte balance in humans [2] . in the raas, renin stimulates the generation of angiotensin i (angi), which is converted to vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii (angii) by angiotensin i converting enzyme (ace). two isoforms (somatic and testicular) of ace are transcribed by ace gene in a tissue-specific manner. the somatic form (sace) is a zinc dependent dicarboxypeptidase, which includes two homologous domains (n domain and c domain) with~60% sequence identity and the same zinc motif hexxh (x = any amino acid residue) [3, 4] . for the past decades, it has been reported that the c domain of human sace has the main angi converting site in controlling blood pressure and cardiovascular functions [5] . ace hydrolyzes decapeptide (asp-arg-val-tyr-ile-his-pro-phe-his-leu) angi by cleaving a dipeptide from the c-terminus to produce octapeptide (asp-arg-val-tyr-ile-his-pro-phe) angii, which causes blood vessels to narrow and stimulates the secretion of the hormone aldosterone, resulting in increased blood pressure [6, 7] . ace also affects blood pressure by inactivating the vasodilators bradykinin and angii, which causes blood vessels to narrow and stimulates the secretion of the hormone aldosterone, resulting in increased blood pressure [6, 7] . ace also affects blood pressure by inactivating the vasodilators bradykinin and kallidin [8] . therefore, ace has long been a major target for the treatment of hypertension and other cardiovascular ailments by the use of ace inhibitors [9] .common synthetic ace inhibitors such as captopril, enalapril, alacepril and lisinopril have been on the market for decades [10] . however, it has been reported for them to have diverse side effects including hyperkalemia and skin rashes [11] , impairment of renal function [12] , and development of angioedema [13] . therefore, peptides from natural sources were considered as alternative ace inhibitors and attracted researchers' interest [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . the structures of ace complexes with various ligands including synthetic inhibitors and peptides are available in the protein data bank (pdb).the crystal structures of ace have been determined with high resolution, which give us the overall insight of the structural molecular arrangement and their active sites [19] [20] [21] [22] . a crystal structure, which is a time and ensemble averaged snapshot, do not complete our understanding. proteins are not rigid. they are flexible and dynamic in solution, fluctuating among many conformational sub-states [23] . in addition to its structure, knowledge of the dynamics of an enzyme and understanding the mechanisms of activation and inhibition is crucial for the design of better drugs [24] . molecular dynamics (md) simulations are known as a powerful tool for molecular modeling and investigating dynamics of proteins and have been applied to various systems successfully [25] . recently, md simulations of ace with various ligands were reported for drug discovery and molecular modeling for interactions between the enzyme and potential inhibitors [14] [15] [16] 18, 26] .in order to explore the ligand binding effects on the dynamics and the mechanisms of activation and inhibition, all-atom md simulations of sace were carried out with and without ligands. the simulations focus on the c domain in which the angi is mainly converted [5] . in the ligand-free simulation (apo), we observed the mouth opening and closing motions of sace like the pac-man of an arcade game in 1980's [27] . this large hinge bending motion implies the existence of pre-existing backbone conformations. figure 1 shows the overall structure of the enzyme. the secondary structure of the sace is predominantly alpha helical ( figure 1 ). the structure has an elliptical shape with dimensions approximately 73 × 59 × 52 å 3 , and the cleft around the active site expands about 31 å (pdb id: 4aph). the cleft divides the sace into two subdomains, and the active site is located on the both of their inner surfaces. two subdomains of sace were defined as subdomain i including the n-terminus and the zinc ion (residues asp40-leu122, pro297-gly437, asp551-gly583) and subdomain ii including the c-terminus (residues glu123-ala296, gly438-cys550, gln584-ser625). two kinds of inhibitors, bppb (bradykinin potentiating peptide b, glu-gly-leu-pro-pro-arg-pro-lys-ile-pro-pro) [17] and spi (spirulina derived heptapeptide, thr-met-glu-pro-gly-lys-pro) [18] as competitive and mixed non-competitive, respectively, were used to investigate the difference in the inhibition mechanisms. mixed type non-competitive inhibition mode of spi was determined by lineweaver-burk plot, and a model of inhibition mechanism was studied by the previous study [18] . the ribbon representation of sace shows the secondary structure and the two lips (purple colored) of the mouth. n and c indicate the n-and c-terminus of the enzyme, respectively. zinc ion is shown as a gray sphere. the rightmost panel shows two subdomains that form two sides of the active site in the cleft, and the subdomain i (residues 40-122, 297-437, 551-583) and ii (residues 123-296, 438-550, 584-625) are colored by blue and red, respectively. the arrow indicates the active site near the zinc ion and the putative binding pathway of ligands. the first lip (residues 73-100, 297-304, 348-354, 370-379) belongs to subdomain i, and the second (109-131, 143-156, 267-276) belongs to subdomain ii.a simulation of ligand-free sace (apo) was initiated from the coordinates after removing the bound angii from the sace-angii complex (pdb id: 4aph) [19] . like all others, the structure of the complex was also in the closed state defined by the distance between two lips ( figure 1 ) shorter than 15 å (13.64 å). as simulation time went by the enzyme spontaneously opened its mouth, and the mouth gradually reclosed from the open state before returning back to the semi-open and open states.we defined the open state with a distance longer than 20 å and the semi-open state with distances longer than 15 å and shorter than 20 å. we observed multiple conversion between the open and closed states during 400 ns simulation ( figure 2 ). we believe that this is the first work that shows the spontaneous opening and closing motions of ace by md simulation (video s1). in 2019, yu et al. ran an md simulation with ligand-free ace only for 10 ns, but they did not report the opening and closing motions [14] .shown as a gray sphere. the rightmost panel shows two subdomains that form two sides of the active site in the cleft, and the subdomain i (residues 40-122, 297-437, 551-583) and ii (residues 123-296, 438-550, 584-625) are colored by blue and red, respectively. the arrow indicates the active site near the zinc ion and the putative binding pathway of ligands. the first lip (residues 73-100, 297-304, 348-354, 370-379) belongs to subdomain i, and the second (109-131, 143-156, 267-276) belongs to subdomain ii.a simulation of ligand-free sace (apo) was initiated from the coordinates after removing the bound angii from the sace-angii complex (pdb id: 4aph) [19] . like all others, the structure of the complex was also in the closed state defined by the distance between two lips ( figure 1 ) shorter than 15 å (13.64 å). as simulation time went by the enzyme spontaneously opened its mouth, and the mouth gradually reclosed from the open state before returning back to the semi-open and open states.we defined the open state with a distance longer than 20 å and the semi-open state with distances longer than 15 å and shorter than 20 å. we observed multiple conversion between the open and closed states during 400 ns simulation ( figure 2 ). we believe that this is the first work that shows the spontaneous opening and closing motions of ace by md simulation (video s1). in 2019, yu et al. ran an md simulation with ligand-free ace only for 10 ns, but they did not report the opening and closing motions [14] .distance between two lips of angii bound sace complex (green) and the apo form (blue) along the simulation time after discarding the equilibration stage. a conformation with a distance between two lips longer than 20 å is defined as the open state. with a distance shorter than 15 å, the conformation is defined as the closed state. if the distance is between 15 and 20 å, then the conformation is considered as the semi-open state. the snapshots of sace (orange, purple for lips) are shown by superimposing the subdomain ii to the crystal structure (cyan).in order to analyze the mouth opening and closing motion, we defined two lips and calculated the distance between the centers of each lip cα atoms throughout production stage of the simulations ( figure 2 ). two lips of the mouth were defined as lip i in the subdomain i composed of residues ile73-arg100, pro297-ala304, arg348-ala354, cys370-val379, and lip ii in the subdomain ii composed of figure 2 . distance between two lips of angii bound sace complex (green) and the apo form (blue) along the simulation time after discarding the equilibration stage. a conformation with a distance between two lips longer than 20 å is defined as the open state. with a distance shorter than 15 å, the conformation is defined as the closed state. if the distance is between 15 and 20 å, then the conformation is considered as the semi-open state. the snapshots of sace (orange, purple for lips) are shown by superimposing the subdomain ii to the crystal structure (cyan).in order to analyze the mouth opening and closing motion, we defined two lips and calculated the distance between the centers of each lip cα atoms throughout production stage of the simulations ( figure 2 ). two lips of the mouth were defined as lip i in the subdomain i composed of residues ile73-arg100, pro297-ala304, arg348-ala354, cys370-val379, and lip ii in the subdomain ii composed of residues pro128-thr150, gln160-arg173, ser284-phe293. angii bound sace was quite stable over the 400 ns simulation time, and no large backbone conformational change was observed unlike the apo form (in the absence of a ligand). the enzyme mainly stayed in the closed and the semi-open states throughout the entire simulation ( figure s1 ).in order to investigate the flexibility of the enzyme, root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of the apo form and the angii bound form were computed ( figure 3 ). as we expected the rmsd's showed the strong correlation with the distances between two lips. due to the mouth opening motions, the conformation of the apo form deviated far away from the initial structure, which is in the closed conformation, reaching nearly 5 å of the rmsd value. however, the rmsd values of angii bound form were fluctuated less than 3 å. as compared to the unbound form, the ligand bound form was relatively stable.molecules 2020, 25, x for peer review 4 of 12 residues pro128-thr150, gln160-arg173, ser284-phe293. angii bound sace was quite stable over the 400 ns simulation time, and no large backbone conformational change was observed unlike the apo form (in the absence of a ligand). the enzyme mainly stayed in the closed and the semi-open states throughout the entire simulation ( figure s1 ).in order to investigate the flexibility of the enzyme, root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of the apo form and the angii bound form were computed ( figure 3 ). as we expected the rmsd's showed the strong correlation with the distances between two lips. due to the mouth opening motions, the conformation of the apo form deviated far away from the initial structure, which is in the closed conformation, reaching nearly 5 å of the rmsd value. however, the rmsd values of angii bound form were fluctuated less than 3 å. as compared to the unbound form, the ligand bound form was relatively stable. cα root-mean-square fluctuation (rmsf) of each form was calculated using the production stage of the md simulation trajectories ( figure 3 ). the analysis indicates that the subdomain i is more flexible than subdomain ii for both simulations. interestingly, the overall flexibility of the subdomain ii didn't change much regardless of the presence of angii. the most significant difference between the two simulations was the large increment of flexibility on the subdomain i for the apo form. notice that the subdomain closure movement in proteins is regarded as a common mechanism for the rearrangement of critical groups around substrates and inhibitors [28] .there is no structural report for the open conformation of human ace yet. the angiotensin converting enzyme-related carboxypeptidase (ace2) is a homologue of the human sace. ace2 was also identified as the cellular receptor for the sars coronavirus and novel coronavirus in 2019 (covid-19) [29, 30] . the catalytic domains of ace2 and sace share 42% sequence identity [31] . the crystal structures of ace2 with and without its inhibitor were reported first in 2004 (pdb id: 1r4l, 1r42). the open conformation was observed in the absence of the inhibitor, while the inhibitor bound one showed the closed conformation. based on the two structures, the authors proposed a large hinge-bending motion is important for catalytic activity and inhibitor binding of ace too [32] .we superimposed the closed and the open conformations of ace and compared with those of ace2, and the comparison revealed tremendous similarity between two systems ( figure s2 ). in cα root-mean-square fluctuation (rmsf) of each form was calculated using the production stage of the md simulation trajectories ( figure 3 ). the analysis indicates that the subdomain i is more flexible than subdomain ii for both simulations. interestingly, the overall flexibility of the subdomain ii didn't change much regardless of the presence of angii. the most significant difference between the two simulations was the large increment of flexibility on the subdomain i for the apo form. notice that the subdomain closure movement in proteins is regarded as a common mechanism for the rearrangement of critical groups around substrates and inhibitors [28] .there is no structural report for the open conformation of human ace yet. the angiotensin converting enzyme-related carboxypeptidase (ace2) is a homologue of the human sace. ace2 was also identified as the cellular receptor for the sars coronavirus and novel coronavirus in 2019 (covid-19) [29, 30] . the catalytic domains of ace2 and sace share 42% sequence identity [31] . the crystal structures of ace2 with and without its inhibitor were reported first in 2004 (pdb id: 1r4l, 1r42). the open conformation was observed in the absence of the inhibitor, while the inhibitor bound one showed the closed conformation. based on the two structures, the authors proposed a large hinge-bending motion is important for catalytic activity and inhibitor binding of ace too [32] .we superimposed the closed and the open conformations of ace and compared with those of ace2, and the comparison revealed tremendous similarity between two systems ( figure s2 ). in addition, the distance between two lips was calculated for ace2. based on the sequence alignment of ace2 and sace, two lips of ace2 were identified as lip i composed of the residues 54-81, 289-296, 340-346, 361-370 of subdomain i and lip ii composed of the residues 109-131, 143-156, 267-276 of subdomain ii. the distances between lip i and lip ii were computed as 13.32 å and 20.64 å for the closed and open states, respectively. this result is consistent with the distance analysis of sace ( figure 2 ). in order to test robustness of definition of backbone conformational states we also calculated the mouth open angles, and the results showed the similar pattern as distances ( figure s3 ). based on our calculations the maximal hinge-bending movement was~18 • which is close to the value (~16 • ) measured in ace2 structures [32] .bppb is a competitive inhibitor isolated from snake venom [17] . a crystal structure shows the active site of sace occupied by the octapeptide bppb and the closed conformational state of the complex (pdb id: 4apj) [19] . we set up another system with bppb bound sace and carried out a 400 ns md simulation. angii is not only the product of catalytic function of ace but also considered as competitive inhibitor. before leaving the active site, another substrate angi cannot bind to the site for the next reaction.the bppb bound sace simulation showed the similar behavior with the angii bound one ( figure  s1 ). we analyzed the distance between two lips of the mouth, showing conformational changes from the closed to the semi-open states and back to the closed state again (figure 4a ). bppb bound ace was more flexible, and the angii bound one made the mouth closed more tightly. the number of hydrogen bonds between the ligands and the enzyme was calculated over the simulation time ( figure  s4 ). the average numbers were 6.52 ± 2.15 and 6.05 ± 1.64 for angii and bppb, respectively (table 1) . this indicated that the opening and closing motions were affected by the interactions between the ligand with the enzyme. addition, the distance between two lips was calculated for ace2. based on the sequence alignment of ace2 and sace, two lips of ace2 were identified as lip i composed of the residues 54-81, 289-296, 340-346, 361-370 of subdomain i and lip ii composed of the residues 109-131, 143-156, 267-276 of subdomain ii. the distances between lip i and lip ii were computed as 13.32 å and 20.64 å for the closed and open states, respectively. this result is consistent with the distance analysis of sace ( figure 2 ). in order to test robustness of definition of backbone conformational states we also calculated the mouth open angles, and the results showed the similar pattern as distances ( figure s3 ). based on our calculations the maximal hinge-bending movement was ~18° which is close to the value (~16°) measured in ace2 structures [32] .bppb is a competitive inhibitor isolated from snake venom [17] . a crystal structure shows the active site of sace occupied by the octapeptide bppb and the closed conformational state of the complex (pdb id: 4apj) [19] . we set up another system with bppb bound sace and carried out a 400 ns md simulation. angii is not only the product of catalytic function of ace but also considered as competitive inhibitor. before leaving the active site, another substrate angi cannot bind to the site for the next reaction.the bppb bound sace simulation showed the similar behavior with the angii bound one ( figure s1 ). we analyzed the distance between two lips of the mouth, showing conformational changes from the closed to the semi-open states and back to the closed state again (figure 4a ). bppb bound ace was more flexible, and the angii bound one made the mouth closed more tightly. the number of hydrogen bonds between the ligands and the enzyme was calculated over the simulation time ( figure s4 ). the average numbers were 6.52 ± 2.15 and 6.05 ± 1.64 for angii and bppb, respectively (table 1 ). this indicated that the opening and closing motions were affected by the interactions between the ligand with the enzyme. in addition to competitive inhibition, non-competitive inhibition is also a common inhibition mechanism. non-competitive inhibition includes pure and mixed noncompetitive inhibition. surprisingly for us, mechanism of mixed type non-competitive inhibition for ace has not been studied molecules 2020, 25, 1288 6 of 12 intensively so far. in the previous study, a heptapeptide (thr-met-glu-pro-gly-lys-pro) derived from a marine microalgae spirulina was identified as a mixed non-competitive inhibitor (spi) [18] . we investigated the interactions and dynamics of ace bound with the mixed non-competitive inhibitor further. md simulations were conducted for the spi bound to the apo form and the spi bound to the angii-sace complex form.the simulation of spi bound to sace was started with the structure after the removing angii from spi bound to angii-sace complex, which is the result of the spi docking simulation of the previous study [18] . the analysis of distance between two lips of the spi bound sace showed backbone conformational fluctuation between the closed and semi-open states, but we were not able to see the open conformational state (figure 4b) . in other words, the spontaneous conformational changes were limited, and only the closed and semi-open states were stabilized by spi (video s2). the peptide spi formed 5.86 ± 1.42 hydrogen bonds with sace averaged over the production stage of the whole simulation (table 1 ).in the simulation of spi bound to the angii-sace complex, the peptide bound in the n-terminal side of the mouth and next to the angii ( figure 5 ). binding of spi was stabilized by hydrogen bond interactions not only with sace but also with angii [18] . we investigated the presence of hydrogen bonds during the md simulations. in average, the spi formed 3.22 ± 1.08 and 3.47 ± 0.75 pairs of hydrogen bonds with sace and angii, respectively, and together 6.73 ± 1.57 pairs (table 1) . spi formed hydrogen bonds most frequently with sace (thr1-asp121, thr1-ser219, glu3-arg522, lys6-glu143, spi-sace residues in order) and with angii (glu3-arg2, pro7-arg2, pro2-val3, spi-angii residues in order) ( figure 5 , table s1 ). in addition to hydrogen bonds, binding of the spi was stabilized by van der waals interactions too. the sidechain of pro4 of the spi bound in the hydrophobic pocket formed by ile204, leu139 and trp220 of sace (not shown in figure 5 for clarity).molecules 2020, 25, x for peer review 6 of 12in addition to competitive inhibition, non-competitive inhibition is also a common inhibition mechanism. non-competitive inhibition includes pure and mixed noncompetitive inhibition. surprisingly for us, mechanism of mixed type non-competitive inhibition for ace has not been studied intensively so far. in the previous study, a heptapeptide (thr-met-glu-pro-gly-lys-pro) derived from a marine microalgae spirulina was identified as a mixed non-competitive inhibitor (spi) [18] . we investigated the interactions and dynamics of ace bound with the mixed non-competitive inhibitor further. md simulations were conducted for the spi bound to the apo form and the spi bound to the angii-sace complex form.the simulation of spi bound to sace was started with the structure after the removing angii from spi bound to angii-sace complex, which is the result of the spi docking simulation of the previous study [18] . the analysis of distance between two lips of the spi bound sace showed backbone conformational fluctuation between the closed and semi-open states, but we were not able to see the open conformational state (figure 4b) . in other words, the spontaneous conformational changes were limited, and only the closed and semi-open states were stabilized by spi (video s2). the peptide spi formed 5.86 ± 1.42 hydrogen bonds with sace averaged over the production stage of the whole simulation (table 1 ).in the simulation of spi bound to the angii-sace complex, the peptide bound in the n-terminal side of the mouth and next to the angii ( figure 5 ). binding of spi was stabilized by hydrogen bond interactions not only with sace but also with angii [18] . we investigated the presence of hydrogen bonds during the md simulations. in average, the spi formed 3.22 ± 1.08 and 3.47 ± 0.75 pairs of hydrogen bonds with sace and angii, respectively, and together 6.73 ± 1.57 pairs (table 1) . spi formed hydrogen bonds most frequently with sace (thr1-asp121, thr1-ser219, glu3-arg522, lys6-glu143, spi-sace residues in order) and with angii (glu3-arg2, pro7-arg2, pro2-val3, spi-angii residues in order) ( figure 5 , table s1 ). in addition to hydrogen bonds, binding of the spi was stabilized by van der waals interactions too. the sidechain of pro4 of the spi bound in the hydrophobic pocket formed by ile204, leu139 and trp220 of sace (not shown in figure 5 for clarity). distance analysis of spi bound sace-angii showed similar behavior to other ligand bound simulations (figure 4b) . interestingly, the spi bound sace-angii complex was stayed in the closed state most of the simulation time. this is understandable since both spi and angii are acting as inhibitors, and the number of hydrogen bonds between the ligand and the enzyme is largest among all complexes ( table 1 ). the closed state was stabilized not only by the interactions between angi and sace but also by the interactions between spi and sace. in addition, interactions between spi and angii stabilized the complex further in the closed state. analysis of all five rmsf's indicated that the most stable system was spi bound to sace-angii complex ( figure s5 ). we recognized that the binding of spi to sace-angii complex slightly twisted the subdomain i ( figure s6 ).the active sites and binding interactions have been well known for ace with various inhibitors, while the conformational dynamics and its role in activation mechanism have not been studied intensively. drug design might benefit from backbone conformations observed by md simulations, which have never reached by the x-ray crystallography with ligand bound forms. unlike the closed state, the open state of sace has not been detected in both experiments and simulations so far. surprisingly, over more than a decade since the first proposal [32] , no further study has been reported about the role of large hinge-bending motion for the activation of sace.in contrast to the lock-and-key model, many proteins can take a ligand only through the conformational changes. the putative binding pathway of sace might be too narrow to accommodate the substrate angi in the closed state ( figure 6 ), thus the enzyme needs to change its backbone conformation to take the substrate for its catalytic function. at least in the semi-open state, rearrangement of sidechain may allow the substrate to enter the active site ( figure s7 ). two models of enzyme mechanisms, induce-fit [33] and pre-existing equilibrium dynamics [34] represent the conformational changes and dynamics upon ligand binding. in the former, binding of a ligand induces conformational changes of a protein, while in the latter, a ligand binds to a certain pre-existing conformation already present and accessible by equilibrium dynamics.distance analysis of spi bound sace-angii showed similar behavior to other ligand bound simulations (figure 4b) . interestingly, the spi bound sace-angii complex was stayed in the closed state most of the simulation time. this is understandable since both spi and angii are acting as inhibitors, and the number of hydrogen bonds between the ligand and the enzyme is largest among all complexes ( table 1 ). the closed state was stabilized not only by the interactions between angi and sace but also by the interactions between spi and sace. in addition, interactions between spi and angii stabilized the complex further in the closed state. analysis of all five rmsf's indicated that the most stable system was spi bound to sace-angii complex ( figure s5 ). we recognized that the binding of spi to sace-angii complex slightly twisted the subdomain i ( figure s6 ).the active sites and binding interactions have been well known for ace with various inhibitors, while the conformational dynamics and its role in activation mechanism have not been studied intensively. drug design might benefit from backbone conformations observed by md simulations, which have never reached by the x-ray crystallography with ligand bound forms. unlike the closed state, the open state of sace has not been detected in both experiments and simulations so far. surprisingly, over more than a decade since the first proposal [32] , no further study has been reported about the role of large hinge-bending motion for the activation of sace.in contrast to the lock-and-key model, many proteins can take a ligand only through the conformational changes. the putative binding pathway of sace might be too narrow to accommodate the substrate angi in the closed state ( figure 6 ), thus the enzyme needs to change its backbone conformation to take the substrate for its catalytic function. at least in the semi-open state, rearrangement of sidechain may allow the substrate to enter the active site ( figure s7 ). two models of enzyme mechanisms, induce-fit [33] and pre-existing equilibrium dynamics [34] represent the conformational changes and dynamics upon ligand binding. in the former, binding of a ligand induces conformational changes of a protein, while in the latter, a ligand binds to a certain preexisting conformation already present and accessible by equilibrium dynamics. in the ligand-free (apo) md simulation, we were able to observe spontaneous conformational changes between the open and closed states of sace, implying that the open and closed backbone conformational states are already present and accessible regardless of the presence of a ligand. in addition, several times of conversions between the states for the 400-nanoseconds simulation indicate in addition, a previous study using normal mode analysis (nma) with testicular ace (tace, another isoform of ace) and ace2 showed the intrinsic flexibility and open and closed conformational models of ace [35] . the authors also proposed the hinge-bending mechanism for substrate entry into the active site.based on the results of our md simulations and available x-ray structures, we propose the following activation mechanism of sace ( figure 7) . regardless of presence of a ligand, sace could be in any of the open, semi-open and closed states in terms of backbone conformation. in the absence of a substrate, or angi, the open state might be more favored than the closed state (figure 2) , and the enzyme becomes ready to accept a substrate for its catalytic function. this equilibrium, however, is changed in the presence of angi, and the closed state becomes more stable than the open state due to the binding of the substrate. then the c-terminal dipeptide (his-leu) of angi is hydrolyzed. angii, the product of the enzyme activity, might be released when sace is in the semi-open state (figure 2 and figure s7 ). after the release of angii from sace, the equilibrium between conformational states goes back to the first stage again. notice that the semi-open conformation can be accessed under any condition.molecules 2020, 25, x for peer review 8 of 12 that the enzyme is very flexible and dynamic. indeed, all available ace structures are resolved in the closed conformation either in the presence ligands or with mutations. introducing mutations, ligands or chimera are common methods to enhance thermal stability and to crystalize a protein. in addition, the absence of the open conformation in a ligand-free ace imply the intrinsic flexibility of ace. again, only one available structure in the open conformation is resolved with ace2 [32] . in addition, a previous study using normal mode analysis (nma) with testicular ace (tace, another isoform of ace) and ace2 showed the intrinsic flexibility and open and closed conformational models of ace [35] . the authors also proposed the hinge-bending mechanism for substrate entry into the active site. based on the results of our md simulations and available x-ray structures, we propose the following activation mechanism of sace ( figure 7) . regardless of presence of a ligand, sace could be in any of the open, semi-open and closed states in terms of backbone conformation. in the absence of a substrate, or angi, the open state might be more favored than the closed state (figure 2) , and the enzyme becomes ready to accept a substrate for its catalytic function. this equilibrium, however, is changed in the presence of angi, and the closed state becomes more stable than the open state due to the binding of the substrate. then the c-terminal dipeptide (his-leu) of angi is hydrolyzed. angii, the product of the enzyme activity, might be released when sace is in the semi-open state (figure 2 and figure s7 ). after the release of angii from sace, the equilibrium between conformational states goes back to the first stage again. notice that the semi-open conformation can be accessed under any condition. similarly, we can derive a mechanism for a competitive inhibitor. now, if the ligand is a competitive inhibitor, then the bound complex becomes stable in the closed state. qualitatively, the equilibrium shift is the same way as the case of substrate binding. after release of the inhibitor, the equilibrium goes back to the first stage of the apo form. since angii occupies the same active site, until the release of angii sace cannot take any substrate. this is true for the substrate too. interestingly, spi the mixed non-competitive inhibitor makes use of this. the interactions of spi not only with sace but also with angii stabilized sace in the closed state further, resulting in a deadend complex by holding the product of enzyme angii in the active site [18] . since spi does not share the binding site with the substrate, it becomes non-competitive. even though spi is non-competitive, it binds next to the active site and interacts with the substrate, becoming a mixed type inhibitor [18] . the binding sites of various drugs and drug candidates were studied intensively, and along the various ligands, binding sites and their conformations are various too. this indicates the binding of a specific ligand induce a specific conformation of its binding site. therefore, the overall large backbone open and closed conformational state pre-exist, and the sidechain and minor backbone rearrangement may be induced upon ligand binding. similarly, we can derive a mechanism for a competitive inhibitor. now, if the ligand is a competitive inhibitor, then the bound complex becomes stable in the closed state. qualitatively, the equilibrium shift is the same way as the case of substrate binding. after release of the inhibitor, the equilibrium goes back to the first stage of the apo form. since angii occupies the same active site, until the release of angii sace cannot take any substrate. this is true for the substrate too. interestingly, spi the mixed non-competitive inhibitor makes use of this. the interactions of spi not only with sace but also with angii stabilized sace in the closed state further, resulting in a dead-end complex by holding the product of enzyme angii in the active site [18] . since spi does not share the binding site with the substrate, it becomes non-competitive. even though spi is non-competitive, it binds next to the active site and interacts with the substrate, becoming a mixed type inhibitor [18] . the binding sites of various drugs and drug candidates were studied intensively, and along the various ligands, binding sites and their conformations are various too. this indicates the binding of a specific ligand induce a specific conformation of its binding site. therefore, the overall large backbone open and closed conformational state pre-exist, and the sidechain and minor backbone rearrangement may be induced upon ligand binding.in apo simulation, we have removed the bound angii from the x-ray structure of sace-angii complex and started the md simulation. this removal of angii is an additional perturbation to the sace structure. we checked equilibration of the apo system by monitoring the thermodynamic parameters such as energy, temperature, volume and pressure ( figure s8 ). in addition, we monitored evolution of secondary structure along the simulation time and recognized that the overall secondary structure was well conserved and stable except for loop and turn regions ( figure s9 ). even though we observe multiple opening and closing motions, one can still consider the apo system is still under equilibration stage. if apo structure was still under equilibration stage and goes to a certain open conformation, then we would have an x-ray structure with open conformation like ace2. a calorimetric study showing that the drug binding is entropically driven also supports dynamics of ace [36] .in conclusion, using all-atom md simulations, the conversion between open and closed states of sace was observed in the absence of a ligand supporting that hinge-bending motion is essential in enzyme activation. the preferred states as well as the extent of flexibility were strongly dependent on the presence of a ligand. the transformation from the semi-open to the closed state in the bound forms was directly influenced by the interaction between the residues of binding sites of the substrate and the inhibitors. these interactions constrained the enzyme structure to remain in the semi-open and closed states. however, it would seem that the putative binding pathway is too narrow to accommodate the substrate and inhibitors. therefore, the semi-open conformation might be the state where the ligands can bind. our md simulation results and the mechanistic model of sace activation and inhibition portends not only drug design for hypotension treatment but also wide applications in molecular biophysics and beyond.potential binding sites of spi on sace were searched by docking simulations using the flexpepdock protocol of the rosetta program [37] . the crystal structure of human sace in complex with angii (pdb id: 4aph) was used for the target. since the spi peptide is a non-competitive inhibitor, angii was kept during the docking simulations to avoid overlapping between the binding site of the peptide and the active site. a structure with the lowest score of docking simulations was chosen for the molecular dynamics simulation in order to relax the structure further (table s2) . details of the docking simulations were described in the previous study [18] .total five molecular dynamics simulations were carried out: bppb bound sace, angii bound sace, apo (ligand-free), spi bound sace-angii complex, spi bound sace. two crystal structures of the sace co-crystallized with ligands in the active site were used to build the simulation systems, sace complex with the natural inhibitory peptide bppb (pdb id: 4apj) and sace complex with angii (pdb id: 4aph). in order to simulate the apo form, angii was removed from the active site of the crystal structure (4aph). the spi bound to the sace-angii complex with the lowest score from the docking simulations was chosen to run the fourth md simulation, and the last spi bound sace model was generated by removing the angii from this docking simulation result.charmm36 force field with explicit tip3p water molecules was used in all simulations [38] . crystallographic water molecules, chloride ions, and zinc ion were retained as they were found in the x-ray crystal structures. ligand chemical components in the original crystal structures including acetate ion, beta-d-mannose, n-acetyl-d-glucosamine were also retained and modeled with charmm general force field [39] . all five simulation systems were solvated in the truncated octahedral box with 23251, 23418, 23565, 23410 and 23374 tip3p water molecules, respectively. then these solvated systems were electrically neutralized by adding counter ions, and the final salt concentration became 0.15 m.all simulations were performed by namd under the periodic boundary condition [40] . after solvation, 1000 steps of energy minimization were performed to remove possible bad contacts. then, the md simulations were started by gradually heating the systems from 10 to 310 k for 60 ps under the constant volume condition. in order to equilibrate the density of the systems, the simulation was switched to constant pressure and temperature (npt) conditions and continued afterwards. the average pressure and the temperature were maintained at 1 bar and 310 k, respectively. all heavy atoms during the energy minimization, heating and the first 200 ps of npt simulation were restrained with harmonic potential with a force constant 1 kcal/mol·a 2 . after that, the harmonic position restraints were removed, allowing all atoms in the systems to relax. all bonds involving hydrogen atoms were constrained, allowing an integration time step of 2 fs. the non-bonded interactions were smoothly truncated from 10 å to 12 å cutoff, and the particle-mesh ewald method was used to treat long-range electrostatic interactions [41] . the equilibration stages of simulations were determined based on rmsd and system energy calculations. total simulation and equilibration times for bppb-sace, angii-sace, apo, spi-sace-angii, and spi-sace were 400 (32.26), 400 (28.26), 400 (24.36) , 360 (20.95), and 360 (13.26), respectively in nanoseconds. summary of all md simulations are provided in table s3 . the production stage after discarding the initial equilibration stage, was used for the post simulation analysis except for rmsd calculation. all post analyses and visualization were carried out by visual molecular dynamics (vmd) program [42] . formation of hydrogen bond was identified using 3.3 å (donor-acceptor distance) and 30 degrees (proton-donor-acceptor angle) criteria.the following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/25/6/1288/s1, figure s1 : conformational states of sace from md simulations, figure s2 table s1 : ratio of forming hydrogen bond pairs over the simulation time, s2: major docking score functions, table s3 : summary of md simulations, video s1: mouth opening of apo sace, video s2: spi bound sace. the authors declare no conflict of interest.at the end of december 2019, chinese public health officials announced to the world health organization (who) that a new and unknown virus caused a disease with symptoms similar to pneumonia in wuhan (khan & fahad, 2020) . they immediately recognized that the virus was from the coronavirus (cov) family and was rapidly spreading out of wuhan. the who is seeking to identify, track and restrict a new disease from the cov family called cov disease 2019 , which is still affecting many peoples in china and outbreaking to other countries. this type of cov is also spreading in other countries such as iran, italy and south korea (memberships & join, 2020) . with the number of covs currently increasing, the researchers are trying to figure out what is the main cause of the virus to spread easily and widely. some genetic and structural analyzes have identified the main characteristic of the virus, which could increase the efficiency and speed of virus transmission between human cells (belouzard et al., 2012; jaimes & whittaker, 2018) . also, some groups are investigating a receptor on cell membranes that introduces the fusion of new cov into human hcs (veljkovic et al., 2020; zheng & perlman, 2018) . both the cellular and protein receptors of the virus provide potential targets for development of drugs against pathogen (kaufmann et al., 2018; papadopoulos et al., 2017) . however, some welldeveloped experiments and promising data are required to ensure such a mechanism. indeed, exploring the transmission mechanism of the virus is important to prevent its future outbreaks. the covid-19 spreads much more easily than the sars virus and infecting easily the people have been already infected with sars lai et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020) .to infect a cell, viruses use spike protein (sp) to bind the cell membrane, a process activated by specific cellular enzymes such as trypsin, furin, and cathepsin l (jaimes & whittaker, 2018; millet & whittaker, 2015) .genomic analysis of the new cov has shown that its sp differs from that of other viruses (du et al., 2017; li, 2016) , indicating that the protein has a site activated by a hc enzyme called furin (millet & whittaker, 2015) (figure 1 ). this enzyme normally cleaves and activates a wide range of substrates in different organisms ( figure 2a ) (braun & sauter, 2019) . this enzyme is found in many human tissues, including the lungs, liver and small intestine, which means that the virus has the potential to invade different organs (belouzard et al., 2012; heald-sargent & gallagher, 2012; scamuffa et al., 2006) . the furin activation site (fas) makes the new cov much different in cell entry than sars, and probably affects the stability of the virus and, consequently, the transmission process (li et al., 2015; millet & whittaker, 2014; yamada & liu, 2009) . several other groups have also identified the site of activation to investigate how the virus spreads among humans (basak et al., 2007; kim et al., 2016; kleine-weber et al., 2018; porter et al., 2014) . they pointed out that other viruses including influenza family viruses contain these sites that are easily spread among people (huang et al., 2011; menachery et al., 2014; tang et al., 2020; vlasak et al., 1988 ) . but in these viruses, the site of activation is found on a protein called haemagglutinin, not on the sp (bernstein et al., 2020; koopman et al., 2019; lai et al., 2019) . however, some other researchers are more cautious about the significant role of the activation site in helping cov and facilitating its spread (amer et al., 2018; van doremalen et al., 2013) . other scientists are also skeptical of comparing the influenza viral activation sites with the new cov transmission channels (heymann & shindo, 2020; yang et al., 2005) . the haemagglutinin protein at the surface of influenza viruses is not the same as the sp in covs (yin et al., 2016; zmora et al., 2018) .in other hand, the influenza virus that has caused the deadliest recorded pandemic lacks even a fas (coutard et al., 2020) . therefore, some studies on cellular or animal models are required to assay the function of the activation site. indeed, covs are unpredictable and some experiments should be developed to assess how to modify the activation site. some other experiments have done to explain why the new covs successfully infects human cells (huang et al., 2020; letko & munster, 2020) . their experiments have shown that the sp binds to the human cell receptor (hulswit et al., 2019) . for example, a drug that blocks the receptor may make cov entry into cells difficult.interaction of furin and angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) with sp furin and furin-like proteases belong to the group of proprotein convertases. scientist have pointed out that among several targets, the sp as fusogenic envelope glycoprotein of sars cov, is a promising site for treatment of infectious diseases (li et al., 2018; licitra et al., 2013) . sps mediate cov fusion and the entry of the cov genetic material into the human cell (senathilake et al., 2020; struck et al., 2012) . afterwards, a sp-selective strategy, when used at the initial phase of cov infection is probably considered as a potential approach to mitigate infection inside the body. the furin induces the cleavage of sps at the rntr761#ev site (bergeron et al., 2005) and results in the production of two segments: s1 and s2 ( figure 2b ); each segment shows its own biological activity. the s1 segment known as the globular section of sp mediates attachment of cov to the receptor, ace-2 with dominance of a-helix structures (li et al., 2003) . a 193-resdiue fragment of sp has been determined as the protein-binding site (wong et al., 2004) . s2, known as the biomembrane-anchored stalk domain and leads to cov-human cell fusion (prabakaran et al., 2004) . some other experiments also exhibited that other biomembrane-anchored proprotein convertases (prcos), namely poco5b and poco7 cleave sps .in this regard, basak et al. (2007) employing intramolecularly quenched fluorogenic (iqf) proteins relied on sars-cov sp claimed that poco5b and poco7 beside furin may result in the cleavage of sps. kinetic studies showed that the cleavage of peptide occurred potentially by furin as well as recombinant poco5b, but with a limited amount by poco7. furthermore, they demonstrated that the cleavage activity could be inhibited by a poco-inhibitor, a1-pdx. circular dichroism intensities revealed that the content of b-sheet conformation in poco increases after cleavage by furin ( figure 2c ). 1h nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy displayed that this peptide has a turn motif at its c-terminal part, close to the cleavage site. coutard et al. (2020) revealed that the sp of the sars-cov-2 possesses a furin-like cleavage site absent in cov of the same clade. the genome sequence revealed that sars-cov-2 is included in lineage b of b-cov ( figure 3a ). chen et al. (2020) presented that sars-cov-2 as a newly detected cov shows a high level of similarity to sars-cov. the structural analysis of the receptor binding domain (rbd) of sp from the two viruses show 72% similarity in residue sequences ( figure 3b ). molecular modeling studies depicted that sars-cov-2 rbd provides a stronger attachment with ace-2. they found that a distinct phe residue plays a key role in the in the binding site due to its interaction with ace-2.several kinds of cov, from various genera, have at their s1/ s2 binding site a furin cleavage site (fcs) (belouzard et al., 2012 ). an important phase in the life cycle of the cov is the human cell entry and fusion derived from proteolytic activity of the relative fusion protein (fp) by respective proteases (jaimes & whittaker, 2018) . a conventional approach to explore the cov life cycle is to clone the fp gene into an appropriate vector, transfect the cells, incubate with the related protease, purify the protein and carry out the protein assays (cong et al., 2019; li et al., 2019) . this approach shows a number of drawbacks: the need of viral genome, expensive synthesizing process, availability of monoclonal antibodies, and time-consuming process. therefore, jaimes et al. (2019) reported the fluorogenic peptide cleavage analysis to assay the proteolytic activity of recombinant fp which can be applied in the case of cov sp in a less labor and time intensive way.in another study, xi et al. (2020) isolated one strain of sars-cov-2 (zj01) in mild covid-19 patient and reported the presence of more than 30 specific gene mutation. the theoretical analysis of fcs and the case alignment of cov family determined that fcs may be a crucial site of cov evolution. zj01 showed mutations close to fcs (f1-2), which led to alterations in the conformation and the charge distribution on the surface of the sp. they employed adaptive poisson-boltzmann solver (apbs) analysis and exhibited that the binding site of furin was covered with a number of negative residues (figure 4a ). the f1 site of sars-cov-2, namely zj01, wuhan-hu-1 and ratg13 were almost covered with positive moieties while sars was covered by both mixed negative and positive residues. f1 site of zj01 showed more positive charge distribution in its head and more negative residues in its basal site in comparison with wuhan-hu-1. (basak et al., 2007) . (c) cd signals of qsars-4 peptide after incubation with different concentrations of recombinant furin (basak et al., 2007) . reprinted with permission from refs. (basak et al., 2007; braun & sauter, 2019) .the f2 site of gz02 had negative charge distribution while f2 site of wuhan-hu-1 and ratg13 demonstrated a limited level of positive moieties. zj01 displayed more positive charge distribution in f2 site than the other species, most likely derived from gene deletion. gz02 presented a number of negative charge distribution in f3 site while limited negative charge distribution was observed in sars-cov-2-associated virus (figure 4a) . hence, they deduced that, the mutation close to fcs site lead to a significant change in the protein conformation and surface charges, which further affected its interaction with the ligands (xi et al., 2020) . hoffmann et al. (2020) depicted that sars-cov-2 cell entry relied on ace-2 and tmprss2 and is limited by a protease inhibitor. indeed, exploring the cellular factors employed by sars-cov-2 for entry might result in providing useful information about viral outbreak and a number of therapeutic approaches. hoffmann et al. (2020) exhibited that sars-cov-2 utilizes the sars-cov receptor ace-2 for specific cellular 2) (i), code alignment and residue sequences of the s-protein from cov-zxc21 and sars-cov-2 (2019-ncov) at the s1/s2 site (coutard et al., 2020) . (b) comparison of the structures sars-cov rbd and its interaction with ace-2 by the obtained molecular models of sars-cov-2 rbd . reprinted with permission from refs. coutard et al., 2020) .internalization and the tmprss2 as a serine protease for sp cleavage. a tmprss2 inhibitor can be developed in clinical application to block the cellular internalization and might result in the advancement of a therapeutic approach. in general, they demonstrated crucial similarities between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov infection and reported a promising target for development of anti-viral platforms (figure 4b ) (hoffmann et al., 2020) .the design of enzyme inhibitors as therapeutic platforms against cov require the control of multiple pharmacologic features beyond the interaction and ace-2-and furin-targeting drugs (baron et al., 2020; kong et al., 2020) . a number of these pharmacologic characteristics show their molecular underpinning in chemical pathways within the biological systems. examples of this include drug transport pathways, blood circulation of drug, drug metabolism, and side effects derived from the interactions of drug with a wide range of enzymes (zumla et al., 2016) . thus, some thermodynamic and kinetic data in the pharmacological development of drugs during preclinical studies are required.as we overviewed so far, reducing the levels of ace-2, might provide a great deal of interest in fighting the cov. in a point of fact, ace-2 can induce a protective impact against cov-stimulated lung damage by enhancing the formation of the vasodilator angiotensin . indeed, the attachment of the sp of the cov to the ace-2 triggers a reduction in the levels of ace-2 , most likely stimulating lung injury. xu et al. (2017) reported that vitamin d can be used as a potential candidate to mitigate lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung damage via control of the renin-angiotensin system. therefore, it could be suggested that vitamin d can control the outbreak of cov through inhibition of ace-2. gurwitz (2020) claimed that angiotensin receptor blockers can be used as promising sars-cov-2 therapeutics. also, it has been suggested that probable way of fighting the cov could be the injection of ace-2 which will result in the preventing the interaction of the cov to off-infected cells and replenishing ace-2 in infected cells . some other studies have indicated a close correlation between hypertension and heart disease and cov infection which may be associated with the prescription of ace-2 inhibitors (fang et al., 2020) . indeed, treatment of cov infection with ace-2 inhibitors leads to an upregulation of this receptor especially by epithelial cells of the lung followed by facilitation of infection with different kinds of sars-cov .based on these reports, some attention has been given to the development of furin inhibitors as potential therapeutics platform against sars-cov-2 infection. although, a great deal of research is required to exhibit experimentally this assertion, the inhibition of furin or furin-like enzymes may display a promising anti-viral platform. actually, it has been recently demonstrated that hcs infected by several kinds of viruses stimulate an interferon-based activity to block the enzymatic activity of furin-like enzymes (lodermeyer et al., 2013) . it was also revealed that virus infection triggers the upregulation of some receptors (braun & sauter, 2019; kim et al., 2015) that inhibit the furin trafficking in post-golgi compartments.also, based on the crystal structure of furin, some potent inhibitors like 2,5-dideoxystreptamine-mediated inhibitor (xi et al., 2020) . the similarity between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (hoffmann et al., 2020) . reprinted with permission from refs. (hoffmann et al., 2020; xi et al., 2020) .were developed to be used in clinical trials (dahms et al., 2017) . because, furin-like enzymes contributed in a several pathways, one crucial point would be to limit the systemic inhibition that may lead to some adverse effects. consequently, it is most likely that such small molecule or other active agents as promising drugs, probably administered by inhalation and presenting a strong interaction with furin to stimulate a prolonged inhibition, deserve to be quickly analyzed to examine their anti-viral impact against sars-cov-2 . in general, these details disclosed that inhibitors of furin or furin-like enzymes may play a key role in blocking virus outbreak.ongoing challenges and future perspective ace-2 exhibited the same primary structures patterns in vertebrates' lineages . structural investigations indicated that ace-2 from these systems can efficiently interact with rbd of sars-cov-2, inducing them all to serve as promising hosts for the virus infection (mathewson et al., 2008; poon & peiris, 2020) . furthermore, it can be deduced that small molecular and ligands inhibitors that can limit the interaction of ace-2 with rbd should be developed to combat the spreading cov epidemic senathilake et al., 2020) . isolating and cultivating cov in vitro may not usually be practical or demand particular facilities that are not accessible in every bioresearch laboratory. therefore, there is a necessity for developing some strategies to assay the human health response to spread of emerging cov that can be performed in normal laboratory systems. apart from viruses targeting humans, several animal viruses also have identical fps, hence, exhibiting the comparable features than their human sites. purifying these kinds of viruses can display some inevitable biological challenges, making the application of pioneering devices to examine them unavoidable.current drugs have limited efficacy in treating cov in different populations and species. given the high incidence of cov resistance, especially in immunocompromised patients, the design of new drugs that target specific activities of the virus and stop one or more stages of its infection cycle is essential (prajapat et al., 2020; yang et al., 2020; zhou & zhao, 2020) . in recent years, most research has focused on blocking virus transmission to the hc, rna polymerase activity of the virus, and hc-virus interactions (schaack & mehle, 2019) . genetic changes, reappearance and emergence of antigenic variants and transmission of cov to humans require extensive measures to control globalization. vaccination, drug follow-up, and immediate protection are important tools for dealing with viral infections (ahmed et al., 2020) .due to the possible genetic modification of cov, producing a suitable vaccine against this disease is difficult (kim et al., 2016) . any changes in the antigenic sites of surface proteins, especially sp, which is the most important surface antigen of the virus, give rise to appearance of new strains (du et al., 2017; kleine-weber et al., 2018) . ; changes in these regions affect the antibodies produced against the former strains, and therefore have no role in the immunity against this disease (stebbing et al., 2020) .the emergence of resistant strains under drug selective pressure and their limited availability in high-risk cases further exacerbates the need for new therapeutic strategies (zu et al., 2020) . in recent years, compounds affecting different stages of the virus's life cycle have been introduced and a wide range of anti-viral strategies have been proposed, including inhibiting the entry and stopping of viral replication or targeting intracellular signal transduction pathways (peeri et al., 2020) . in recent decades, targeting viral proteins inducing humoral and cellular immune responses have received a great deal of attention in development of antiviral compounds (zumla et al., 2016) . the ability of biomolecular systems such as cytokines, interleukins, and bacterial derivatives to improve immunogenicity and xenografts is being evaluated as a novel strategy, although immune system regulatory proteins have received more attention.covs are rna viruses replicating in the cytoplasm of hcs. to transfer their genetic materials into the human hcs, they are dependent on the interaction of their envelope with the human hc biomembrane. the sp mediates cov entry and conducts the interaction of cov with receptor (ace-2) on the hcs as well as mediating the fusion of hc biomembrane and viral envelope. also, sars-cov-2 furin substrate site can facilitate the cleavage of the sp. this review discussed an overview on the role of ace-2 and furin in the binding of cov with hc biomembrane mediated by sp. also, we surveyed the contribution of fcs on the cov outbreak. moreover, we considered the ability of small molecular inhibitors on the limiting the interaction of ace-2 and furin with sp to be used as promising antiviral drugs or vaccines. this paper may provide promising information about the development of useful strategies to combat the spreading cov epidemic.the authors declare that they have no competing interests.all authors read and approved the final manuscript.no potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).this research was made possible by the grants nprp10-120-170-211 from qatar national research fund (qnrf) under qatar foundation and gcc-2017-005 under the gcc collaborative research program from qatar university.http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5061-3142marty k.s. wong additional names/abbreviations: angiotensin converting enzyme, dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase i, peptidase p, kininase ii, angiotensin i-converting enzyme/ace; angiotensin converting enzyme 2, peptidyl-dipeptidase a, peptidyl-dipeptidase a/ace2 ace possesses dual actions to convert ang i to ang ii and degrade bradykinin. the development of ace inhibitor was the first effective drug for hypertension caused by high renin activity. ace2 was identified as the receptor for sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) coronavirus, which caused the outbreak of an epidemic in 2002à2003.ace was discovered in the mid-1950s by the observation that dialysis of plasma and kidney extract with water and saline before incubation had produced two separate pressor substances, ang i and ang ii respectively [1] . it was discovered for a second time in 1966 during the characterization of bradykinin (bk) degrading enzyme from kidney and this enzyme was named kininase ii; it later was found to be the same enzyme as ace. ace2 was discovered in 2000 when two independent research groups cloned homologous ace that could convert ang i to ang(1à9) and yet also is captopril-insensitive [2, 3] .two isozymes of ace are present in mammals: somatic ace and testis ace. somatic ace possesses two catalytic domains (n-and c-domains) and a c-terminal transmembrane segment (stalk) ( figure 29d .1). somatic and testis aces in humans contain 1,306 and 665 aa residues, respectively. testis ace only possesses one catalytic domain. both catalytic domains are zinc-metallopeptidase with the active motif hemgh where the two histidine residues coordinate the zinc ion. the stalk anchors the enzyme on the membrane and is susceptible to be cleaved by shedding enzymes, resulting in plasma ace activity ( figure 29d .1). ace2 is a chimaera protein with a single catalytic domain of ace, and a c-terminal highly resembling collectrin, which may act as a chaperone protein to deliver other proteins to the brush border membrane.gene and mrna ace and ace2 genes are located at chromosome 17q23 and xp22 in humans, respectively. testis ace is transcribed from the same gene with an alternative transcription starting site on the 13th intron of the ace gene, resulting in only c-domain and stalk segment with a unique additional 67 aa n-terminal sequence in humans. the two catalytic domains are the result of gene/domain duplication and the duplication occurred multiple times in evolution as the cnidarians, crustaceans, insects, and vertebrates possess ace-like enzymes with one or two catalytic domains. no expression studies so far have been performed for non-mammalian ace and ace2.somatic ace is expressed in various tissues including blood vessels, kidney, intestine, adrenal gland, liver, and uterus, and is especially abundant in highly vascular organs such as retina and lung. testis ace is expressed by postmeiotic male germ cells and high-level expression is found in round and elongated spermatids. ace2 is expressed in lung, liver, intestine, brain, testis, heart, and kidney.lung possesses the highest amount of ace and contributes to 0.1% of total protein. serum ace levels in humans ranged from 299.3 6 49 μg/l (dd) to 494.1 6 88.3 μg/l (ii) with heterozygous individuals 392.6 6 66.8 μg/l [4] . (id: see the section "pathophysiological implications" for the genotype definition.) several enzymatic assays have been developed for the measurement of ace activity in plasma and tissues and usually involve artificial substrates such as hippuryl-his-leu or n-[3-(2-furyl)acryloyl]l-phenylalanyl-glycyl-glycine (fapgg), in combination with captopril inhibition. these methods were developed in mammals but were also extended to other vertebrates including birds, amphibians, and fishes [5] . however, these enzymatic methods may be erroneous because the enzyme specificity on the artificial substrates could be different. lamprey ace activities in different tissues were measured but captopril failed to decrease the ace activities, indicating a possible nonspecific enzyme measurement. in amphibian, high captopril-sensitive ace activities were found in gonad, intestine, kidney, and lung, moderate activities were presented in liver, heart, and skin, and low or negligible activities were observed in plasma, muscle, and erythrocytes.expression of ace is affected by steroids and thyroid hormone, but the details of the regulation are not clear. ace is under promoter regulation by hypoxia-inducing factor 1α (hif-1α), which upregulates the ace expression under hypoxic conditions, resulting in an increase in ang ii concentration. under hypoxia, ace2 will be downregulated but it was shown that it is indirectly controlled by ang ii, but not hif-1α [6] . testis ace expression control is highly specific and regulated by a tissue-specific promoter located immediately 259 bp of the transcription start site, which is frequently used in testis-specific overexpression studies. hypoxia induced by high temperature decreased gill ace activity but had no effect on kidney in carp. promoters of ace2 from mammals, amphibians, and teleosts drive specific expression in the heart. cis-element search results discovered wgatar motifs in all putative ace2 promoters from different vertebrates, suggesting a possible role of gata family transcriptional factors in ace2 expression regulation.none.the first ace inhibitor was a peptide antagonist called sq 20,881 (gwprpeipp) discovered from snake venom but it was not orally active. the snake venom peptides were further studied to produce the first orally active form, captopril, that lowers the blood pressure of essential hypertensive patients [7] . the most common side effects of captopril are cough, skin rash, and loss of taste, and therefore derivatives such as enalapril, lisinopril, and ramipril were developed with fewer side effects. after the discovery of n-and c-domains of ace, specific domain inhibitors were developed to increase specificity. ang i is mainly hydrolyzed by the c-domain in vivo but bk is hydrolyzed by both domains. by developing a c-domain selective inhibitor (rxpa380) some degradation of bk by the n-domain would be permitted and this degradation could be enough to prevent accumulation of excess bk causing angioedema [8] .the well-known function of ace is the conversion of ang i to ang ii and degradation of bk, which all play an important role in controlling blood pressure. ace also acts on other natural substrates including encephalin, neurotensin, and substance p. besides being involved in blood pressure control, ace possesses widespread functions including renal development, male fertility, hematopoiesis, erythropoiesis, myelopoiesis, and immune responses [1] . ace2 can convert ang ii to ang(1à7), thereby reducing the concentration of ang ii and increasing that of ang(1à7). ace2 can also convert ang i to ang(1à9), which is subsequently converted into ang(1à7) by ace. the high expression of ace2 favors the balance of ang(1à7) over ang ii, which accounts for the cardioprotective role of ace2 via the ang(1à7)/mas signaling pathway [9] .ace-knockout mice display normal blood pressure under normal conditions, but are sensitive to changes in blood pressure such as exercise. ace-knockout also affects renal function, renal development, serum and urine electrolyte composition, haematocrit, and male reproductive capacity the stalk anchors the enzyme on the membrane and is suspectible to be cleaved by shedding enzymes, resulting in plasma ace activity. ace2 is a chimaera protein with a single catalytic domain of ace, and a c-terminal highly resemble collectrin, which may act as a chaperone protein to deliver other proteins to the brush border membrane. [10] . deficiency in testis ace affects male fertility but its exact role is still not clear. although mice with testis ace deficiency mate normally and their sperm quantity and motility are no different from those of wild-type mice, the survival of sperm in the oviduct and fertilization rate are highly reduced [1] . overexpression of ace2 in hypertensive models, but not in normotensive animals, reduced blood pressure. ace2knockout mice displayed progressive cardiac dysfunction resembling that of long-term hypoxia after coronary artery disease or bypass surgery in human, which could be reversed by concurrent ace-knockout. it was suggested that the cardioprotective function of ace2 is to counterbalance the effects of ace.clinical implications inclusion (ii) or deletion (dd) of 287 bp alu repeats in the 16th intron affects the human plasma ace levels and the dd genotype was more frequently found in patients with myocardial infarction but no convincing evidence was available on the association of the dd genotype with hypertension [4] . ace2 was identified as the receptor for sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) coronavirus. sars virus binding downregulates the cellular expression of ace2, and the binding induces clathrin-dependent internalization of virus/receptor (sars/ace2) complex. not only has ace2 facilitated the invasion of sars virus for rapid replication, but also ace2 is depleted from the cell membrane and therefore the damaging effects of ang ii are enhanced, resulting in acute deterioration of lung tissues.ace has been the target of hypertension control since the 1970s. ace inhibitors are prescribed as the sole or combinational treatment of high blood pressure, for the dual effects of lowering ang ii and slowing down bk degradation. in human hypertensive patients, ace2 levels are lower in both kidney and heart compared to normotensive volunteers.supplemental information e- figure 29d s u b c h a p t e r 2 9 d angiotensin converting enzymes e29d-2 e- figure 29d .4 phylogenetic tree of the angiotensin converting enzymes in vertebrates. the unrooted phylogenetic tree of the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) and angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) was constructed with the maximum likelihood method using fulllength sequences from representative vertebrate species. the numbers on the branches indicate the bootstrap values from 1,000 replicates. ace and ace2 form separate sub-clades. s u b c h a p t e r 2 9 d angiotensin converting enzymes e29d-4e29d-3 e-organisms that evolve rapidly have the selective advantage of quickly adapting to their host, or surroundings. for example, a few amino acid changes on the surface protein (hemagglutinin) of the influenza virus are sufficient to evade the host's antibody detection within the time span of a single season [1] . to effectively genotype and monitor the genome of a rapidly evolving and heterogeneous population, it is important to have the capability to amplify the nucleic acid sequences from samples taken from that population as the genotype is shifting. as the viral sequencing projects have increased at jcvi over the past few years, a high-throughput mechanism to rapidly select pcr primers with a high probability of success was necessary. in this paper, we describe the modifications made to our high-throughput primer design pipeline, previously developed for human re-sequencing [2] . we describe the results for 8 out of the 15 viruses that have had pcr primers designed for: measles virus, mumps virus, rubella virus, human parainfluenza virus 1 and 3, human respiratory syncytial virus a and b and human metapneumovirus. pcr primers for the remaining viruses were also successfully designed using the same degenerate primer design pipeline, but were not included in the results and discussion, because a few primers from the entire computationally designed set were modified to suit project specific laboratory pcr requirements. thus, the utilized primer pairs were not completely true to the algorithm's recommendations. the excluded viruses were human coronavirus, feline coronavirus, canine coronavirus, sars coronavirus, human adenovirus, human norwalk virus, and influenza viruses (human influenza a and b, and avian influenza a).the use of degenerate primers to selectively amplify a set of closely related sequences is periodically found in literature. previous work on computational tools have included, codehop [3] which designs degenerate primers based on conserved amino acid sequences and hyden [4] which tries to maximize the coverage of a degenerate primer pair with a minimal amount of degeneracy. for viral sequences, an amino acid based methodology of codehop would introduce a larger set of degenerate bases than would be necessary to successfully amplify a set of isolates, thus unnecessarily increasing the potential for non-specific priming and alternative products. hyden's objective focuses on a primer pair for a family of genes, rather than the whole genome sequencing of a potentially heterogeneous sample of same species viruses in a high-throughput environment.the goal of jcvi's degenerate primer design pipeline is to maximize the success rate of selected primer pairs, given a set of sequences that are assumed to represent the target population. it is not only important to decide which bases to make degenerate, but also how many and which combinations will lead to successful pcr. the high throughput features of the jcvi's degenerate primer design pipeline that have been inherited from the original non-degenerate version, include dynamic tiling, an overlapping non-fixed amplicon set across the entire target genome, as well as the capability to predict primer pairs that have very high success rates under one of either of two amplification protocols: "standard" or "high gc". dynamic tiling allows the selection of an amplicon set to be dependent on the landscape of features on the template. by parameterizing the minimum, maximum, and optimal amplicon overlap and amplicon sizes, the jcvi primer design pipeline crawls across a template based on the last amplicon selected, thus minimizing the number of successful amplicons necessary to cover the genome while only selecting amplicons predicted to be successful. this exhaustive search is not possible with fixed tiling.the necessity of designing highly successful primers for a high-throughput directed sequencing environment is a consequence of the prohibitively high labor costs required to manually reprocess failures by tuning pcr conditions. the work we present here utilizes two laboratory protocols based on our previous publication to achieve a comparable level of success.in this paper, the results of the degenerate primer design, the augmentation of the previously published, high-throughput pcr primer design software [2] , and the methodology used to construct the reference degenerate consensus sequence are described.the degenerate primer design pipeline was used to design primers for multiple viral projects across 15 different dna and rna viruses including both segmented and non-segmented viruses. the results for 8 different non-segmented viruses are presented here. the size of these genomes varied from 9kb to 15.6kb with various degrees of sampled genomic sequence variation and gc content. the summary statistics for the primers designed for the 8 different non-segmented viral genomes using the two different pcr protocols described as the "standard" and "high gc" protocols are presented in table 1 . the standard and high gc protocols are described briefly in the materials and methods section. table 1 contains the actual sequencing success rates for each targeted viral consensus sequence and the relevant information regarding each consensus sequence's construction. the median amplicon coverage for all viruses is approximately 3x, however in many cases the ends of the genomes had a lower minimum coverage, i. e.,1x or 2x, due to the inability to select primer beyond the end of the available sequence. dynamic tiling produced an even tiling of amplicon coverage across all genomes.primers designed using the standard protocol targeted organisms with less than 50% gc content. these included the human parainfluenza virus (hpiv-1 and hpiv-3), measles virus (mev), mumps virus (muv), human respiratory syncytial virus (hrsv-a and hrsv-b) and human metapneumovirus (hmpv-a and hmpv-b). for organisms with gc content exceeding 50%, e.g., rubella virus (rubv-1 and rubv-2), the high gc protocol was used.amplicons were designed to cover the entire genome for all viruses, so only full length complete sequences available from ncbi's viral genomes [5] were used to generate the consensus sequences. the number of sequences used to generate the consensus sequence and the percent of degenerate bases across the constructed consensus sequences are described in table 1 . the number of sequences collected to construct each consensus sequence ranged from 3 (for hrsv-a and hrsv-b) to 32 (for muv).for each viral type, a single consensus file was generated with a target of less than 10% degenerate bases. with two exceptions, the resultant percent ambiguity across the constructed consensus sequence ranged from 4.12% for hrsv-b to 9.28% for muv. if a single consensus could not be generated with less than 10% ambiguity, multiple consensus sequences were constructed based on sequence similarity-based clustering results. the two exceptions were measles virus (mev) and rubella virus (rubv-g2) which had percent ambiguities exceeding 10%.for measles virus, the allele frequencies for multiallelic positions were not filtered to remove the less dominant allele frequencies, even when the percentage of degenerate bases across the constructed consensus sequence exceeded 10%. even though the less dominant allele frequencies were below the expected threshold for sequencing error, because the percent degeneracy across the consensus sequence was very close to 10%, it was decided that stratifying the sequences and generating multiple consensus sequences may not be cost effective. the total success rate was not expected to be significantly impacted.for the rubella virus, the input sequences were stratified into two genotypes because the total percentage of degenerate bases in the initially constructed consensus sequence was 21% (see figure 1 ). after computational stratification, two sets of sequences were used as input to generate consensus sequences for genotype 1 (g1) and genotype 2 (g2), based on 11 and 5 sequences, respectively. this reduced the percent degeneracy across the consensus sequence to 6.07% and 13.13%, for g1 and g2, respectively. g2 contained many multi-allelic positions that were not filtered. at an allelic frequency of 20% (1 out of 5), it was not clear whether these should be attributed to sequencing error within the input sequences, so the variations were retained just to be conservative. degenerate primers were computed independently for the g1 and g2 consensus sequences, and then redundant primer pairs between the two computes were removed.for human respiratory syncytial virus (hrsv), separate sets of primers were designed for hrsv-a and hrsv-b since there was more than 20% sequence dissimilarity across the entire genome with 24% ambiguity (see figure 2 ). splitting the sequences into two subsets ensured that the sequences in each subset were less than 10% dissimilar. the sequences in the subset hrsv-a differed by 5.5% and those in hrsv-b differed by 4.5%, with a percent ambiguity of 6.8% for hrsv-a and 4.1% for hrsv-b.for human metapneumovirus (hmpv), there appeared to be two distinct clades, between which they were approximately 20% dissimilar. these initial sequences were split into two clades of hmpv-a, with 9.25% ambiguity and hmpv-b with 7.95% ambiguity. separate primers pairs were then designed for the two clades independently.for all viral genomes, amplicons were designed with an intended coverage depth of 2x or 3x; with the exception of hmpv-a and hmpv-b, which had a coverage depth of only 1x. multiple depths of coverage increase the likelihood of successfully amplifying the targeted region at least once because when a second pair of candidate primers is selected, the primer design pipeline ensures that the second primer pair will not overlap any of the previously selected primer pairs. in a high-throughput sequencing environment, all wells in a plate are processed, so additional amplicon coverage was generated if any empty wells remained. if the number of amplicons designed exceeded the number of wells on a plate, amplicons were computationally reduced to a smaller subset so that every targeted region was covered by at least one amplicon. projects also differed by their sequencing requirements, thus resulting in varying amplicon numbers and coverage depth, depending on each virus type.determining the success of degenerate primer design is a more complicated process than that of standard nondegenerate primer design. not only does the degenerate primer design algorithm need to accurately model and predict the outcome of pcr with a heterogeneous population of primer pairs, but the constructed degenerate consensus sequence needs to sufficiently represent the targeted genome's population. the latter can be detrimentally impacted by a lack of available sequence information, or the potential for heavily biased sequencing favouring strains specifically studied by a single, or few laboratories.the success rates provided in table 1 represent the average success rates for each virus type as a percentage of all sequencing reactions performed. however, since the effect of isolate is confounded inside of the average success rate, to gain a deeper understanding of the success rate of primer pairs across isolates, a graded approach was taken. this was necessary because if a primer pair was successful at a low percentage across all samples, then it was possible that the primers did not match the genotype of the isolate, rather than a poorly selected primer pair based on the primer design algorithm alone. for each primer pair and isolate, sequencing was performed in both the forward and reverse directions. if a sequence was recovered for an isolate and primer pair (under standard expectations of high quality values, length, etc.) then that sequencing direction was considered a success. success rates were tallied for forward, reverse, and then averaged between both sequencing directions. these per primer pair success rates were then graded at cutoffs of greater than 25, 50, 75, 85 and 90 percent of isolates. (see table 2 ) this cumulative and graded approach was necessary to distinguish between amplification failures that were either isolate or target region specific. note that these are actual, not predicted, success rates calculated based on laboratory experiments, not predicted success rates based on in silico computations. furthermore, because of the fairly uniform amplicon coverage across all genomes, e.g., figure 3 , the reported success rates should not be inflated by any redundant stacking of amplicons over easy-toamplify loci. table 2 contains the forward, reverse, and average success rates for each viral consensus sequence. for each directional set of statistics, the sequencing success rate was computed across all isolates. for example, for hrsv-a, 94% of all primers designed had greater than 75% of the isolates successfully sequenced.to separate pcr failure bias due to the gc content of the genome alone, the overall success rates of primer pairs were calculated for high gc and standard protocols, separately. for the standard protocol, the overall forward, reverse and averaged sequencing success rates of primer pairs were 83%, 82% and 82% respectively, for over 95% of the isolates. however at greater than 75% of the isolates, there was a consistent 95% primer pair success rate. for mumps virus, most of the primer failures were recorded in the v/p protein region which has rna editing (with the insertion of non-template g) and in the variable region of the sh gene. a consistent pattern in the plate location of the primer failures was also discovered, which could be an issue related to laboratory conditions and not due to the design of the primers.for the high gc protocol, the three sequencing success rates of primer pairs were lower than expected. for greater than 75% of isolates, success rates were 77%, 73% and 70% for the overall forward, reverse and total sequencing success rate, respectively. there did not appear to be a relationship between the percentages of ambiguity in the consensus sequence and the success rates of the designed primers (simple linear regression, adjusted r 2 = 0.167). this lack of correlation could be a result of the few sequences represented by the degenerate consensus sequence poorly representing the isolates very accurately. designed primer pair sequences and success rates are available as additional file 1.the high-throughput degenerate pcr primer design pipeline has been very successful in providing the basis for high-quality viral sequencing results and for minimizing costs associated with labor, reprocessing, and genome finishing. the modular architecture of the primer design software has made it possible to readily integrate new features into the pipeline. as a result, the augmented primer design software, when coupled with the rt-pcr modified, production-verified, prior pcr laboratory protocols, serves as a powerful tool for high-throughput degenerate primer design, thus enabling the quick and effective sequencing of diverse viral strains. the importance of proper degenerate consensus sequence construction, a key input into the process, is described and the success rate of the designed primers supports the effectiveness of these combined methodologies.the input into the degenerate primer design pipeline is a consensus reference sequence of the targeted genome. this consensus sequence is used as a reference for detecting alternative products and as a template from which primer pair candidates are selected. for segmented viruses, or if only a subset of the entire genome is targeted, a subset may be specified as the template, but the entire genome sequence is still required as a reference for detecting potential alternative amplification products.the generation of the consensus sequence with ambiguity codes may be established by first generating a multiple sequence alignment (msa) with a tool such as clustalw [6] or muscle [7] and then using a msa-toconsensus generator such as cons from emboss [8] , or one of the applications from andes [9] . if the sequence diversity of the targeted population or genomic region is significant, then it is recommended to use a tool, such as andes, to determine if it is necessary to stratify the population and also filter positions of potential variance by various means. this is described later in the material and methods subsection, "constructing the consensus sequence with andes".the output is a set of degenerate primer pairs and their theoretical amplicons based on the consensus reference sequence. a variety of supplemental design information is also generated. among them is a summary file of critique results including information such as primer and amplicon location on the reference, their melting temperatures and primer dimer calculations along with the sequences of the primers. an adobe portable document format (pdf) file, which contains a visualization of the tiling layout of the amplicons across the targeted genome, is also generated along with the summary file ( figure 3 ).the core architecture for primer design has remained unmodified from its original form . the coverage   336  904  1472  2040  2608  3176  3744  4312  4880  5448  6016  6584  7152  7720  8288  8856  9424 9992 10560 figure 3 dynamically tiled layout of the amplicons across the targeted genome. this is an example of the tiling output from a single primer design run performed on rubv-g1. each green rectangle represents an amplicon. the long black bar represents the targeted region and the red x's, above the targeted region, represent locations where 2x coverage could not be achieved. amplicon lengths for rubv-g1 and rubv-g2 using the high gc protocol were targeted to be between 300-350 bp.manager (cm) component determines a dynamic tiling path across the genome based on the results of the primer critiquor (pc) component's examination of candidate primer pairs. the pc component consists of a series of tests, or critiques, that determine whether a primer pair will be successful based on empirical evidence from previous sequencing experiments. the cm component utilizes primer3 [10] to generate a list of candidate primer pairs, however because primer3 will return an error message if ambiguity codes are found on the userspecified template, an extra step is performed to convert ambiguity codes into n's. after primer3 has generated a list of primer pair candidates with embedded n's, the cm remaps the n's back to their original ambiguity code and passes the degenerate primer pair candidates to the pc component for additional critiquing.the following critique modules, utilized by the pc component, were modified to assess the anticipated success of primer pair candidates with degenerate base positions.instead of using blast [11] , with a small word size, to search for primer binding sites on the reference consensus genome, dreg, from emboss, is utilized. dreg uses regular expressions, a highly flexible pattern recognition specification, for sequence matching. based on the conditions of the laboratory protocol utilized in the high-throughput sequencing laboratory, it was determined that the binding of the 11 base pairs of the 3' end were sufficient for the polymerase to initiate synthesis of the copy strand. for this reason, only the 11 base pairs of the three prime end of the degenerate primer sequence are specified in the regular expression pattern. detected primer binding sites are then analyzed to determine whether an alternative product will be formed, based on detected primer binding site orientation and pair-wise distances.for each degenerate sequence in a primer pair candidate, a list of disambiguated sequences is generated by enumerating all possible non-degenerate primer sequences that can be represented by each degenerate sequence. self and pair-wise primer dimer predictions are calculated within and between the disambiguated primer sequence lists, respectively. primer melting temperatures are computed by averaging the nearest neighbor thermodynamic calculations [12] of the melting temperatures of the disambiguated sequences derived from the degenerate sequence.the construction of the template and/or reference consensus sequence with ambiguous bases is a critical step prior to executing the degenerate primer design pipeline. unlike using standard, i.e. non-degenerate, primers where the analyst must assume that the primers are binding to conserved regions surrounding the target, the necessity of degenerate primers presumes that the target population is sufficiently heterogeneous such that there are insufficient conserved regions to allow standard primers to successfully bind and amplify all samples from the population. degenerate primer design allows for a mixed population of primer pairs to be simultaneously available during the pcr reaction, thus increasing the likelihood of successfully targeting an unknown sample from a heterogeneous population. a properly designed consensus sequence, or set of consensus sequences, will represent this heterogeneous population, maximizing the likelihood of attaining pcr products for all samples, while at the same time, minimizing the potential for alternative products. the number of alternative products may exhibit a quadratic relationship with the number of unique primer sequences involved in the pcr. thus, it is a goal to minimize the number of degenerate bases in each primer sequence, while maximizing the proportion of the target population the primers specifically bind to. the end effect is to limit the number of degenerate bases per primer to no more than 4, but preferably less than 3 bases.andes tools provide the analyst with two key methodologies to support minimizing the number of degenerate bases utilized, while maximizing the proportion of the population targeted: abundance filtering and sample stratification. ultimately, the targeted percent of degenerate bases in the consensus sequence should be no more than 10%, but ideally less than 8%.abundance filtering in andes can be performed using several techniques to reduce the number of degenerate bases introduced into the consensus sequence. when filtering is applied, the analyst assumes that not all point mutations represented in the set of sequences acquired from the population are equally important. some polymorphisms may be due to sequencing error, while others may only represent an insignificant subpopulation. given a msa constructed from a set of sequences determined to be a reasonable representation of the population, andes computes the distribution of nucleotides for each position. a nominal filter or percentage filter can be applied to remove the presence of alleles that are not represented at or above a userspecified frequency or percentage threshold, respectively. for example, the degenerate base w is required if both the alleles a and t exist in the population for a specific position. however if 2% of the samples are a's, and 98% are t's, applying a 4% percentage filter would change the w to the non-degenerate base, t, if the analyst believes that this polymorphism was actually due to sequencing error. alternatively, a statistical filter, combining both frequency and percentage, may be applied. this utilizes the binomial distribution to determine whether an allele would be detected upon resampling to the same depth based on a user-specified confidence, i.e. alpha. lastly, an optimization-based filter is also available, in which the analyst specifies the maximum percentage of degenerate bases to be allowed in the consensus sequences, and the algorithm iteratively removes alleles starting with the ones with the lowest proportion across the samples, until the maximum percentage of degenerate bases have been achieved. if these filtering techniques either remove alleles that need to be targeted, or do not reduce the number of degenerate bases in the constructed consensus sequence sufficiently, then sample stratification will be necessary.the goal of sample stratification is to reduce the total variation in a combined population by placing individuals into clusters which contain less intra-cluster variance than the entire population. the more a difference between clusters can be used to separate the clusters, the less variation will exist within each of the formed clusters with respect to the entire population. this stratification, i.e. clustering, can be performed with andes. given a msa, andes can be used to compute a distance matrix and dendrogram, based on sequence similarity, which can then be used to generate clusters given a user-specified cutoff. the maximum intra-cluster percent dissimilarity cutoff that works well is approximately 10%. when the percent similarity within a cluster (or undivided set of sequences) falls below 90%, the number of degenerate bases that must be introduced into the consensus sequence becomes too high. for each cluster that is created to reduce the amount of intracluster dissimilarity, a separate consensus sequence is subsequently generated to represent that subpopulation.when determining an appropriate threshold for any of these methodologies, it is important to keep in mind the number of sequences included, since the confidence of real polymorphisms existing in the population can only be attained with sufficient sample size. a general landscape of variation can be ascertained with a plot of normalized entropy versus location. with sufficient conserved regions flanking highly variable regions, and a sufficiently large amplicon size, regions with localized high rates of variation do not generally introduce difficulty in primer pair selection due to the primer designer's dynamic tiling capabilities.the jcvi primer design pipeline automatically detects sub-regions of the targeted genome sequence that may use the standard protocol, or must use the high gc protocol. once the sub-regions have been separated, the proper primer design parameters are utilized for the design and selection of primer pairs. key parameters shared between the standard and high gc protocols include: optimal/minimum amplicon dynamic tiling overlap of 100/100 bp, and optimal/minimum/maximum primer lengths of 20/18/25 bp, low complexity filter of 80%, primer binding site hairpin detection at >14 stem hydrogen bonds and <11 bp loop circumference size, maximum internal primer dimer of 8 bp and maximum end primer dimer of 3 bp.key parameters where the two protocols differed include: minimum/maximum amplicon melting temperatures of 68°/81.5°c (standard) and 85°/95°c (high gc), optimal/minimum/maximum amplicon sizes of 650/600/700 bp (standard) and 325/300/350 bp (high gc), and maximum amplicon dynamic tiling overlap of 550 bp (standard) and 300 bp (high gc). (mev was the only exception. its primer design utilized a project specific optimal/minimum/maximum amplicon size of 750/550/800 bp to reduce the number of amplicons necessary.)amplicon sizes were selected to be shorter than sequencing read length to achieve full bi-directional coverage, increasing the accuracy of downstream computational variation detection and decreasing the necessity for manual review for indeterminate base calls.for both the standard and the high gc protocols, reverse transcription pcr (rt-pcr) was performed using qiagen one step rt-pcr kit (cat# 210212). each viral sample underwent rt-pcr reactions with 96 pairs of designed primers in a 96-well format. qiagen one step rt-pcr was set up in 10μl reactions containing 0.6μl water, 1.6μl buffer (qiagen), 1.6μl q solution (qiagen), 0.3μl dntp (qiagen), 0.3μl enzyme (qiagen), 0.4μl rna-seout (invitrogen), 2.2μl undiluted rna, and 3μl primers (1.6μm, forward and reverse mixed). an additional 1.6μl of q solution was added to each rubv-g1 and rubv-g2 reactions due to the high gc content of the genome, while for the other genomes, an additional 1.6μl of water was added to each reaction. amplification was done in 96-well format on an mj research dna engine tetrad 2 thermal cycler with the following cycling conditions: 1 cycle of 50°c (30 min); 1 cycle of 95°c (5 min); 35 cycles of 94°c (30 sec), 55°c (30 sec), and 72°c (1 min); 1 cycle of 72°c (10 min); hold at 4°c.after amplification, 2μl of each reaction was run on a 1% agarose gel for 1 hour to visualize bands and confirm amplification. unincorporated dntps were dephosphorylated and excess primers were removed from products using a sap/exo i reaction containing 0.5 units of shrimp alkaline phosphatase (usb corporation), 1.0 unit of exonuclease i (usb corporation) and molecular biology grade water. the cycling program was: 1 cycle of 37°c (60 min) and 1 cycle of 72°c (15 min).sanger sequencing reactions were performed on each rt-pcr product on a standard high-throughput sequencing system using big dye terminator v3.1 (applied biosystems) with m13 sequencing primers (forward primer: tgtaaaacgacggccagt; reverse primer: caggaaacagctatgacc). dye terminators were removed by ethanol precipitation and sequences were obtained with a 3730xl dna analyzer (applied biosystems).raw sequence data was computationally trimmed to remove any primer-derived sequence, as well as low quality sequence. genome sequences were assembled using jcvi's internally developed assembly software named "flap" (unpublished) that is based on minimus, which is a component of the open-source amos project [13] (http://amos.sourceforge.net). all sequencing data was released to genbank with annotation and can be found using the bioproject id as provided in table 1 .project name: jcvi primer designer. project home page: http://sourceforge.net/projects/ primerdesigner/. operating system: tested and in production on linux. programming language: perl. license: gnu gpl. any restrictions to use by non-academics: none.additional file 1: this tab-separated values text file contains the amplicon name, forward and reverse primer pair sequences, estimated melting temperatures, sequencing success rates, and number of pcr attempts (isolates). the amplicon name includes the virus name and start and stop positions on the template. pcr primer sequences were 5'-tailed with the forward and reverse m13 sequences, tgtaaaacgacggccagt and caggaaacagctatgacc, respectively.authors and not necessarily those of the nhs, the nihr or the department of health and social care. a complete list of the investigators and contributors to the interval trial has previously been provided (1) . the academic coordinating centre would like to thank blood donor centre staff and blood donors for participating in the interval trial. the genotype-tissue expression (gtex) project was supported by the common fund of the office of the director of the national institutes of health (nih). additional funds from the national cancer institute; national human genome research institute (nhgri); national heart, lung, and blood institute; national institute on drug abuse; national institute of mental health; and national institute of neurological disorders and stroke. donors were enrolled at biospecimen source sites funded by leidos biomedical, inc. (leidos) subcontracts to the national disease research interchange (10xs170) and roswell park cancer institute (10xs171). the laboratory, data analysis and coordinating center (ldacc) was funded through a contract (hhsn268201000029c) to the broad institute, inc. biorepository operations were funded through a leidos subcontract to van andel institute (10st1035). additional data repository and project management provided by leidos (hhsn261200800001e). the authors would like to thank the staff at the iucpq biobank of the quebec respiratory heath research network for their valuable assistance with the lung eqtl dataset at laval university.what is already known on this topic  severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is responsible for the current coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic.  serine protease tmprss2 is involved in priming the sars-cov-2 spike protein for cellular entry through the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor.  expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in the lung epithelium might have implications for risk of sars-cov-2 infection and severity of what this study adds  we used human genetic variants that proxy ace inhibitor drug effects and cardiometabolic risk factors to provide insight into how these exposures affect lung ace2 and tmprss2 expression and circulating ace2 levels.  our findings do not support the hypothesis that ace inhibitors have effects on ace2 expression.  we found some support for an association of genetic liability to type 2 diabetes mellitus with higher lung ace2 expression and plasma ace2 levels, but evidence was inconsistent across studies.objectives: to use human genetic variants that proxy angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitor drug effects and cardiovascular risk factors to provide insight into how these exposures affect lung ace2 and tmprss2 gene expression and circulating ace2 levels.design: two-sample mendelian randomization (mr) analysis.setting: summary-level genetic association data.participants: participants were predominantly of european ancestry. variants that proxy ace inhibitor drug effects and cardiometabolic risk factors (body mass index, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lifetime smoking index, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, systolic blood pressure and type 2 diabetes mellitus) were selected from publicly available genome-wide association study data (sample sizes ranging from 188,577 to 898,130 participants). genetic association estimates for lung expression of ace2 and tmprss2 were obtained from the gene-tissue expression (gtex) project (515 participants) and the lung eqtl consortium (1,038 participants). genetic association estimates for circulating plasma ace2 levels were obtained from the interval study (4,947 participants).main outcomes and measures: lung ace2 and tmprss2 expression and plasma ace2 levels.results: there were no association of genetically proxied ace inhibition with any of the outcomes considered here. there was evidence of a positive association of genetic liability to type 2 diabetes mellitus with lung ace2 gene expression in gtex (p = 4x10 -4 ) and with circulating plasma ace2 levels in interval (p = 0.03), but not with lung ace2 expression in the lung eqtl consortium study (p = 0.68). there were no associations between genetically predicted levels of the other cardiometabolic traits with the outcomes.conclusions: this study does not provide evidence to support that ace inhibitor antihypertensive drugs affect lung ace2 and tmprss2 expression or plasma ace2 levels. in the current covid-19 pandemic, our findings do not support a change in ace inhibitor medication use without clinical justification.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is responsible for the current coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic (2) . serine protease tmprss2 is involved in priming the sars-cov-2 spike protein for cellular entry through the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor (3) (4) (5) (6) . covid-19 patients most frequently present with respiratory tract infection symptoms and respiratory failure is the main cause of death (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) . it follows that expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in the lung epithelium might have implications for risk of sars-cov-2 infection and severity of covid-19 (3, 13, 14) .emerging evidence suggests that patients with underlying cardiometabolic risk factors and airway disease are more likely to suffer with severe covid-19 (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) . it has been speculated that the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (acei) and angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) classes of antihypertensive medication that are more commonly prescribed in patients with cardiometabolic risk factors might affect expression of ace2, and thus affect susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection and severity of consequent covid-19 (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) . although ace and ace2 are both dipeptidyl carboxydipeptidases, they have distinct physiological effects. ace cleaves angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, which consequently activates the angiotensin ii receptor type 1 pathway resulting in vasoconstriction and inflammation. in contrast, ace2 degrades angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7 and angiotensin i to angiotensin 1-9. angiotensin 1-9 activates the mas receptor to have vasodilatory and anti-inflammatory effects. animal studies have supported effects of acei and arb drugs on ace2 expression and activity (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) , with mixed findings for associations of acei and arb drug use with ace2 activity and levels in human tissues also reported (30) (31) (32) . it is important that any causal effects of these medications and cardiometabolic traits on ace2 expression be further investigated.identification of a mechanistic basis by which such exposures affect risk and severity of covid-19 could provide useful insight for disease prevention and treatment. this could be used to inform optimal medication use and strategies for shielding vulnerable individuals, as well as improving the evidence base for public health campaigns.the mendelian randomization approach uses genetic variants related to an exposure as instrumental variables for investigating the effect of that exposure on an outcome (33) . genetic variants are treated analogously to treatment allocation in a randomized controlled trial. typically, molecular measurements such as gene expression or circulating protein levels are regarded in mendelian randomization investigations as exposure variables. here, following the work of rao, lau and so (34), we treat these molecular measurements as the outcomes in our investigation. the aim of this study was to apply mendelian randomization to investigate whether ace2 and tmprss2 gene expression in the lung and circulating levels of ace2 in the plasma are associated with 1) genetic variants in the ace gene region that can be considered as proxies for the effect of acei drugs, and 2) genetic variants related to cardiometabolic risk factors.genetic associations with exposure variables two different genetic instruments that proxy acei drug effects were considered. first, we selected 17 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) in the ace locus that were associated with serum ace concentration in the outcome reduction with initial glargine intervention (origin) trial and did not have strong pairwise correlation (r 2 < 0.1) (35) . accounting for correlation, these variants explain 29.2% of the variance in serum ace concentration. secondly, we selected a single snp, rs4291, located at the ace locus that was associated with systolic blood pressure (sbp) at p = 9x10 -20 in a study of 757,601 european-ancestry individuals (36, 37) . each blood pressure lowering allele of this snp was associated with a 0.28mmhg reduction in sbp (36) . there were no other snps at this locus that were associated with sbp at a genome-wide level of significance (p < 5x10 -8 ) and did not have strong pairwise correlation (r 2 < 0.1) with the index variant (36) .we further considered six cardiometabolic traits as exposure variables: body mass index (bmi), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), lifetime smoking index, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ldl-c), sbp and type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2dm). these traits were chosen as they have been associated with prognosis of covid-19 (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) . genetic association estimates for these exposures were obtained from the publicly available genome-wide association study (gwas) summary data sources listed in table 1 . genetic variants selected as instruments were snps associated with the corresponding trait at a genome-wide level of statistical significance (p < 5x10 -8 ) and were uncorrelated (r 2 < 0.001). clumping of correlated variants was performed using the twosamplemr package in r (38) .genetic associations with the expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in lung tissue were obtained from two sources: 1) the gene-tissue expression (gtex) project (39) , and 2) the lung eqtl (expression quantitative trait loci) consortium (40) .gtex genetic association estimates were obtained in 515 individuals of predominantly european (85%) ancestry. whole genome sequencing was performed by the broad institute's genomics platform and only common variants (minor allele frequency > 0.05) were retained. genome-wide eqtl analysis was performed for the expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in primary tissue samples taken from the lung. genetic associations with imputed variants across the autosomal chromosomes were adjusted for five principal components from the genotype data, 60 probabilistic estimation of expression residuals factors (41), sequencing platform (illumina hiseq 2000 or hiseq x), sequencing protocol (polymerase chain reaction-based or free), and sex. for each gene, expression values between samples were normalized using the trimmed means of m-values method in edger (42) . expression values were normalized across samples using an inverse normal transformation.lung eqtl consortium genetic association estimates were obtained in 1,038 individuals of european ancestry (40) . tissue samples were obtained at three different institutions: university of british columbia, laval university, and university of groningen. genome-wide eqtl analysis was performed for the expression for ace2 using probe set 100134205_tgi_at and two probe sets for tmprss2, 100130004_tgi_at and 100157336_tgi_at (subsequently referred to as 1 and 2). all participants were genotyped using the illumina human 1m duo beadchip and the genotypes were imputed using the haplotype reference consortium reference panel. expression values were first standardized for age, sex, and smoking status using robust linear regression. genetic associations were estimated in each cohort separately using a linear additive genetic model. the estimates were combined across cohorts using an inverse-variance weighted model with fixed-effects.genetic association estimates with circulating plasma ace2 levels were obtained in a subcohort of 4,998 blood donors enrolled in the interval bioresource (1). plasma ace2 levels were measured using a multiplex proximity extension immunoassay (cardiovascular 2 panel, olink bioscience, uppsala, sweden). a total of 4,947 samples passed quality control. the data were pre-processed using standard olink workflows including applying median centring normalization across plates, where the median is centred to the overall median for all plates, followed by log2 transformation to provide normalized protein levels (npx). npx values were regressed on age, sex, plate, time from blood draw to processing (in days), and season. the residuals were then rank-inverse normalized. genotype data was processed as described previously (43) . genome-wide pqtl analysis was performed by linear regression of the rank-inverse normalized residuals on genotype in snptest (44) , with the first three components of multi-dimensional scaling as covariates to adjust for ancestry.for the analysis investigating genetically proxied acei drug effects using the rs4291 variant, we report the genetic associations with lung ace2 and tmprss2 expression and plasma ace2 levels per blood pressure-lowering allele.for all other mendelian randomization analyses, estimates were obtained from the inverse-variance weighted method under a random-effects model (45) . for the polygenic analyses based on the ace gene locus, we accounted for correlation between variants (46) . heterogeneity between mendelian randomization estimates from different genetic variants for the same exposure trait was expressed using the i 2 statistic (47) . for any identified associations at p< 0.05, the weighted median (48), mr-egger (49) and contamination-mixture methods (50) , which are more robust to the inclusion of pleiotropic variants, were performed as sensitivity analyses.mendelian randomization estimates represent the change in the outcome per one standard deviation increase in genetically predicted levels of the exposure for continuous exposure traits and per unit increase in the loge odds of the exposure for binary traits. all outcome measures were rankbased inverse-normal transformed, and so changes in the outcome measures are in standard deviation units.the data used in this work are obtained from published studies that obtained relevant participant consent and ethical approval. all variants used as instruments and their genetic association estimates were selected from publicly available data sources, and are provided in supplementary  tables 1 (51) . the study protocol and details were not pre-registered.there was no patient or public involvement in the design or reporting of this study.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20059121 doi: medrxiv preprintresults for the analyses investigating genetically proxied acei drug effects are displayed in figure 1 . there was no evidence of associations with any of the outcome measures in the analyses considering the variants associated with serum ace (figure 1a) , or the variant associated with sbp ( figure 1b) .the main inverse-variance weighted method mendelian randomization results for the cardiometabolic risk factors are displayed in figure 2 for lung ace2 expression and plasma ace2 concentrations, and in figure 3 for lung tmprss2 expression. there was evidence of a positive association of genetic liability to t2dm with lung ace2 gene expression in gtex (p = 4x10 -4 ), and with circulating plasma ace2 levels in interval (p = 0.03) (supplementary figure 1) . similar point estimates were obtained when performing the weighted median, mr-egger and contaminationmixture mendelian randomization sensitivity analyses that are more robust to the presence of pleiotropic variants, although the confidence intervals were wider (supplementary table 9 ). the mr-egger method did not identify any evidence of directional pleiotropy biasing the analysis (supplementary table 9 ). there was no evidence of an association of genetic liability to t2dm with lung ace2 gene expression in the lung eqtl consortium (p = 0.68). there was no evidence of an association between genetically predicted levels of any of the other cardiometabolic traits with ace2 or tmprss2 gene expression in gtex or the lung eqtl consortium, or with circulating plasma ace2 levels in interval.in the current covid-19 pandemic, there is an urgent need to elucidate mechanisms underlying risk and severity of covid-19, with a view to informing preventative and therapeutic strategies. in this study, we used human genetic variants that proxy acei drug effects and cardiometabolic risk factors to provide insight into how these exposures affect lung ace2 and tmprss2 expression, and circulating ace2 levels.we did not find an association of genetically proxied ace inhibition with lung ace2 and tmprss2 expression or with circulating plasma levels of ace2. these results therefore do not provide evidence to support that acei antihypertensive drugs affect risk or severity of covid-19 through effects on ace2 expression, as previously hypothesised (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) . previously identified changes in ace2 expression in human tissues following acei treatment may not be applicable to the lung or circulating plasma levels (30, 31) . our findings support the stance of professional bodies for supporting continuation of acei and arb antihypertensive drugs in patients with covid-19 unless there is a clinical justification for stopping (52, 53) . indeed, appropriate use of these medications is of proven benefit (54, 55) , and their abrupt interruption can also do considerable harm (56, 57) . while there has also been speculation that acei and arb antihypertensive drugs might reduce severity of covid-19 (20, (58) (59) (60) , with clinical trials to explore this currently planned (52), our findings are also consistent with guidance that patients should not start taking these drug classes unless clinically indicated (52) .our results identified inconsistent support for an effect of liability to t2dm on lung ace2 expression and plasma ace2 levels. an association of genetic liability to t2dm with lung ace2 expression in the gtex project has previously been described (34) . however, we identified no association of genetic liability to t2dm with lung ace2 expression in the lung eqtl consortium. this discrepancy may be attributable to the different populations considered in the gtex project and the lung eqtl consortium (39, 40) . while the lung eqtl consortium considered lung tissue from patients requiring resectional surgery, all samples in the gtex project were taken from healthy tissue in deceased donors (39, 40) . taken together, our results do not provide consistent support for an effect of cardiometabolic traits on lung ace2 or tmprss2 expression or plasma ace2 levels. while the association between cardiometabolic traits and severity of covid-19 could be attributable to alternative mechanisms (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) , these risk factors can still be used to stratify patients in terms of their vulnerability. similarly, while our current findings do not support a causal effect of copd or smoking on lung ace2 expression, these factors may still be used to inform risk models for severe covid-19 (61) .our study has a number of strengths. we used genetic variants as instrumental variables for studying the effect of acei drugs and cardiometabolic risk factors, and were therefore able to investigate their causal effects on ace2 and tmprss2 expression in the lung, and ace levels in the plasma (33) . for acei drugs effects, we used two complementary instrument selection strategies based on associations of variants at the ace locus with circulating serum ace levels and sbp respectively, and the consistent findings with both approaches add strength to our conclusions. our mendelian randomization approach is better able to overcome the confounding and reverse causation bias that can limit causal inferences from conventional epidemiological approaches (30, 62) . considering independent cohorts to assess lung expression of ace2 and tmprss2 (39, 40) , and plasma levels of ace2 (43), we were able to explore consistency in our results and our conclusions are therefore less vulnerable to false positive findings.our study also has limitations. we only investigated ace2 and tmprss2 expression in the lung and circulating levels of ace2 in the plasma, and it may be that expression in other tissues is more relevant to risk and severity of covid-19. similarly, cellular ace2 may have very different biological effects to circulating plasma ace2. the gwas analyses for lung ace2 expression and plasma ace2 levels were all performed according to different protocols (39, 40, 43) , and may therefore not be directly comparable. there was no available genetic instrument for the arb antihypertensive drug class (36) , and so we were not able to investigate this. the precision of our analyses was also limited, most notably for the lifetime smoking index results, which had widest confidence intervals. it may therefore be that our study was not sufficiently powered to exclude a clinically relevant effect for some exposures. the genetic variants that we used as instrumental variables may have pleiotropic effects where they affect the outcome through pathways independent of the exposure that they are proxying, and so bias the consequent mendelian randomization estimates. while it is not possible to exclude this possibility, the relatively low heterogeneity detected between mendelian randomization estimates produced by different variants, along with the consistency observed when performing analysis methods that are more robust to pleiotropy, suggests that this is unlikely to be a major source of bias (47) .in summary, this mendelian randomization study does not identify consistent evidence to support that acei antihypertensive drugs or cardiometabolic traits affect lung expression of ace2 and tmprss2, or plasma ace2 levels. these findings therefore do not support deviation from existing expert consensus guidelines for the management of hypertension in the face of the current covid-19 pandemic (52) . efforts should be made by scientists and the news media to ensure that speculative stories with little evidential support are not propagated (63) . while cardiometabolic risk factors can be used to stratify patients in terms of their vulnerability to covid-19, our data do not provide consistent support that expression of ace2 or tmprss2 represents causal mechanisms underlying these associations. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.(which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . figure 1 . genetic associations with ace2 and tmprss2 gene expression in the lung (gtex and lung consortium) and circulating ace2 protein levels in the plasma (interval): a) per one standard deviation increased ace concentration conferred through variants at the ace gene, and b) per blood pressure-lowering allele for the rs4291 variant in the ace gene (bottom panel). the two sets of results for tmprss2 expression in the lung eqtl consortium refer to two separate probe sets for estimating gene expression. a.b.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.(which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.(which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . figure 3 . mendelian randomization estimates for the change in tmprss2 gene expression in the lung per unit increase in genetically predicted levels of the exposure. the two sets of results for the lung eqtl consortium refer to two separate probe sets for estimating gene expression.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.(which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20059121 doi: medrxiv preprintthe disease burden of coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2) has been increasing continuously with more than a million confirmed patients and more than 45 thousand deaths globally [1] . with a high prevalence of diabetes, it is important to understand the special aspects of covid-19 infection in people with diabetes. this becomes even more important, as most parts of the world are seeing restrictions on mobility of patients in order to contain the pandemic. recently our group has published an article highlighting special considerations in the management of diabetes in today's times with covid-19 pandemic [2] . much more data from various parts of world has accumulated since then about the association between diabetes and covid-19, management of diabetes in those with covid-19 infection, and innovative strategies for medical consultation in view of limited access to healthcare facilities for patients with chronic diseases.this review aims to collate currently available data about diabetes and covid-19 infection. it specifically looks at the relation between diabetes and covid-19 in terms of epidemiology, pathophysiology and therapeutics. the review is updated till the time of writing; however, the data is evolving, and the conclusions made here might change later.we searched pubmed database and google scholar using the key terms 'covid-19', 'sars-cov-2, 'diabetes', 'antidiabetic therapy' up to april 2, 2020 . full texts of the retrieved articles were accessed.diabetes and associated complications can increase the risk of morbidity and mortality during acute infections due to suppressed innate and humoral immune functions. the levels of glycated hemoglobin (hba1c) > 9% have been linked to a 60% increased risk of hospitalization and pneumonia-related severity during bacterial infection [3] . past viral pandemics have witnessed the association of diabetes to increased morbidity and mortality. diabetes was considered as independent risk factor for complications and death during 2002e2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov-1) [4] . similarly, the presence of diabetes tripled the risk of hospitalization and quadrupled the risk of intensive care unit (icu) admission during influenza a (h1n1) infection outbreak in 2009 [5] . during the 2012 outbreak of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), diabetes was prevalent in nearly 50% of population and the odds ratio (or) for severe or critical mers-cov ranged from 7.2 to 15.7 in diabetic cohort [6] as compared to overall population. mortality rate in patients with mers who had diabetes was 35% [7, 8] .emerging data suggests that covid-19 is common in patients with diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease (cvd), although the prevalence rate varied in different studies as well in country-wise data. in the pooled data from the 10 chinese studies (n ¼ 2209) on characteristics of comorbidities in patients with covid-19, singh et al. [9] have reported a prevalence of hypertension, diabetes and cvd in 21%, 11%, and 7% patients, respectively. similarly, in a meta-analysis of 8 trials that included 46,248 covid-19 patients, yang et al. [10] reported a prevalence of 17%, 8%, and 5% for hypertension, diabetes and cvd respectively, in patients with covid-19. epidemiology working group of chinese center for disease control and prevention that investigated 20, 982 patients of covid-19 have shown that hypertension, diabetes and cvd were associated in nearly 13%, 5% and 4% of patients respectively [11] . in contrast, an italian study by onder et al. found diabetes in nearly 36%, while cvd was associated in nearly 43% of 355 patients admitted with covid-19 [12] . similarly, in a small study of 24 patients from united states, bhatraju et al. [13] reported diabetes to be associated with 58.0% patient with covid-19. while the study from the covid-19 surveillance group of italy (n ¼ 481) has shown that 34% patients with covid-19 had diabetes who died, the covid-19 response team from centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), usa reported a prevalence of 11% from the data of 7162 covid-19 patients [14, 15] . table 1 summarizes the prevalence of  these comorbidities in all available studies to-date in patients with  covid-19 [11e27] .it should be noted here that these findings could be a mere reflection of the high prevalence of diabetes across the globe including china (being the diabetes capital of the world), and thus causality cannot be inferred from the observed elevated proportions.evolving data also suggest that patients of covid-19 with diabetes are more often associated with severe or critical disease varying from 14 to 32% in different studies [15e18, 20, 22, 24] . wang et al. [20] in a study of 138 patients reported that 72% patients of covid-19 with comorbidities including diabetes required admission in icu, compared to 37% of patients without comorbidities. in an analysis of 201 patients with covid-19, wu et al. [24] table 2 summarizes the prevalence of non-severe (mild to moderate) to severe or critical disease in patients with diabetes with covid-19. fig. 1 illustrates the graphical representation of non-severe and severe covid-19 in patients with diabetes.interestingly, the prevalence of non-survivors was also higher in diabetic subjects with covid-19 and it varied from 22 to 31% in different studies [17, 21, 23, 24, 27] . table 3 summarizes the prevalence of survivors and non-survivors among patients with diabetes and covid-19. fig. 2 depicts the graphical representation of these data. in a univariate analysis of 191 patients with covid-19, zhou et al. [21] found diabetes to have an or of 2.85 (95% ci, 1.35 to 6.05; p < 0.001) for in-hospital mortality. however, this association of . however, the cfr was as high as 10.5% in patients with cvd, 7.3% in diabetes and 6.0% in hypertension [29] . based on these findings and acknowledging the higher morbidities and mortality associated with comorbidities, researchers have recently proposed that the course of treatment and prognosis of covid-19 should be stratified based on the absence or presence of co-morbidities in to type a, b and c. while type a represents covid-19 patients with pneumonia with no comorbidities, type b denotes covid-19 pneumonia with comorbidities; and type c denotes covid-19 pneumonia with multi-organ dysfunction [30] .7. special aspects of pathophysiology of diabetes and relationship of anti-diabetic drugs in the context of covid-19 sars cov-2, like sars cov-1 utilises ace-2 as receptor for entry into cell [31] . ace-2 is expressed not only in the type i and ii alveolar epithelial cells in the lungs and upper respiratory tract, but also several other locations like heart, endothelium, renal tubular epithelium, intestinal epithelium, and pancreas. s-glycoprotein on the surface of sars cov-2 binds to ace-2 and causes a conformational change in the s-glycoprotein. this allows proteolytic digestion by host cell proteases (tmprss2 and furin) ultimately leading to internalization of the virion [32] . cellular entry of the virus triggers inflammatory response with recruitment of t helper cells which produce interferon g. this leads of recruitment of other inflammatory cells leading to a 'cytokine storm' which could lead to organ damage and multi-organ failure seen in severe disease. as discussed, diabetes is associated with poorer outcomes in covid-19. a study in 161 patients with covid-19 in wuhan found increased time for viral clearance in patients with diabetes [33] . apart from the usual mechanisms (impaired neutrophil chemotaxis and phagocytosis) by which diabetes predisposes to infections in general, there are several specific factors responsible for increased risk and severity of infection with sars cov2 in diabetes. a) increased ace-2 expression: diabetic mice have been found to have increased expression of ace-2 in renal cortex, liver and pancreas, but not in lungs [34] . recently, a phenome-wide mendelian randomization study found diabetes to be causally related to ace-2 expression [35] . though the significance of these observations is not clear at present, increased ace-2 expression might predispose people with diabetes to infection with sars cov2. b) increased furin: diabetes is associated with an increase in furin, which is a type-1 membrane-bound protease, belonging to the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin family (pcsk). it is involved in the entry of coronaviruses into the cell and increased furin has been reported in diabetes, which might facilitate viral replication [36] . c) impaired t-cell function: alterations in cd4 lymphocytes have been reported in animal models with mers [37] . lymphocytopenia has been observed in patients with covid-19 and correlated with prognosis [17] . d) increased interleukin-6 (il-6): several cytokines are increased in covid-19 infection. amongst these, il-6 is increased in diabetes and may play a more deleterious role in covid-19infection [38] . monoclonal antibody against il-6 receptor (tocilizumab) is being tested in a trial in covid-19 [39] .ace-2 receptors are expressed in pancreatic islets and infection with sars cov-1 has been seen to cause hyperglycaemia in people without pre-existing diabetes. hyperglycaemia was seen to persist for 3 years after recovery from sars indicating a transient damage to beta cells [40] . though the similar effect has not been reported in covid-19, it may be important to monitor blood glucose levels in acute stage and during follow up.there is no data on the differential effects of oral antidiabetic drugs on the disease course in covid-19. metformin has antiproliferative and immunomodulatory effects by virtue of inhibition of amp activated protein kinase and has shown protective role in pneumonia in mouse models [41] . in one study in patients with tuberculosis, patients treated with metformin had better survival than those who did not receive metformin [42] . in a median 6.2 years of follow up of 5266 patients with diabetes, mendy et al. [43] showed that metformin was significantly associated with a decreased risk of mortality in patients with chronic lower respiratory diseases (hr: 0.30, 95% ci, 0.10 to 0.93), even after the adjustment for multiple confounding factors. in a study of 4321 patients with a follow up of 2-year period, ho et al. [44] showed metformin users had a significantly lower risk of death (hr, 0.46; 95% ci, 0.23 to 0.92), compared with non-metformin users, in patients with coexistent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and diabetes. thiazolidinediones (tzd) seen to increase the risk of pneumonia in a study when compared to sulfonylureas [45] . experimental studies suggest that pioglitazone reduces steatohepatitis by increasing the ace-2 expression in liver tissues [46] . this purported increase in ace-2 expression and its relation to covid-19 has led some researchers to propose avoiding tzd in patients with diabetes and covid-19. experimental studies also suggest that liraglutide, a glp-1 receptor agonist increases the ace-2 expression in lungs in type 1 diabetic rat and improves right ventricular hypertrophy [47] . implications of these findings in the current context of covid-19 and its relation to anti-diabetic drugs is not yet fully clear.dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) are tissue oligopeptides involved in multiple biological processes that include control of the activity of growth factors, chemokines and bioactive peptides and t-cell activation beside regulating glucose metabolism [48] . the relationship of coronavirus to this cellular type-ii transmembrane protein dpp4 (cd26) has generated a great interest recently. dpp4 serves as the receptor for mers-cov, in the same way as ace-2 is the receptor for sars cov and sars cov2 [49, 50] . experimental studies have suggested that certain polymorphisms of dpp-4 are associated with reduced chance of mers-cov infection [51] . this finding might explain the perplexing absence of mers-cov cases in africa, despite the presence of virus in camels, presumably because of frequent presence of protective polymorphisms of dpp-4 in africans [51] . moreover, this has generated an immense interest whether use of dpp4 inhibitors (dpp4i) can reduce the viral entry of mers-cov. in one in vitro study, sitagliptin, vildagliptin and saxagliptin could not block the coronavirus viral entry into cells [52] .though ace-2 is recognized as the main receptor for sars cov-2, a recent modeling study did not rule out its interaction with cd26 or dpp4 [53] . moreover, a possible interaction of dpp4 and renin-angiotensin system (ras) pathways seems to be plausible, although not completely studied. interestingly, dipeptidyl aminopeptidase i-iii cleaves the angiotensin ii (1e8) to angiotensin iii (2e8) and iv (3e8) which has cascading favorable effect through angiotensin-4 (at-4) receptors. similarly, various endo-and oligopeptidase cleaves angiotensin i (1-10) directly to angiotensin (1e7) which has a very favorable cascading effect. this suggest that a plausible interaction of non-specific dpp-4i with ace-2 is theoretically possible, and therefore, this area needs a future research.in this regard, some of the studies found that co-administration of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ace-i) with dpp4 inhibitors led to an increased sympathetic tone and a consequent adverse hemodynamic effect [54e56]. there has been an interaction observed between ace-i and vildagliptin where a 4-to 5-folds increased risk of angioedema was noted, possibly due to the diminished degradation of bradykinin or substance p [57] . in contrast, in the experimental study, sitagliptin was shown to inhibit ace which could partially explain the purported beneficial cv effects [58] .dpp4 inhibitors have been associated with an increased risk of upper respiratory infections, however these agents have not been shown to lead to increased risk of pneumonia [45] . at present, there is insufficient evidence either for or against the use of dpp-4i in patients with diabetes and covid-19 [59] .glycemic control is important in any patient who has covid-19. though there is limited data about the association of blood glucose levels with disease course in covid-19 at present, data from other infections like sars and influenza h1n1 has shown that patients with poor glycemic control have increased risk of complications and death [60, 61] . most patients with mild infection and with normal oral intake can continue the usual antihyperglycemic medications. however, it is advisable to discontinue sglt-2 inhibitors because of the risk of dehydration and euglycemic ketosis. metformin may also need to be stopped if there is vomiting or poor oral intake. doses of other antihyperglycemic drugs like sulfonylureas and insulin may have to be altered depending upon the blood glucose levels.most hospitalised patient with covid-19, especially those with respiratory distress, would require insulin. ideally, patients with very poor oral intake or those on mechanical ventilation would require intravenous insulin infusion with frequent monitoring of blood glucose (every hour or every 2 h, see next section). however, the adjustment of infusion rates would necessitate visit to the patient and increase exposure to the medical personnel. there is a need to explore alternate insulin administration strategies. one of these is use of subcutaneous short acting insulin analogues, an approach which has been used successfully in mild to moderate diabetic ketoacidosis; however, its safety in critically ill patients is less clear [62, 63] . secondly, single dose of basal insulin has been attempted in critically ill patients as in one study from thailand. this could be an attractive option as it would reduce contact with the patient considerably [64] but needs more research especially in critically sick patients. finally, insulin pump or continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (csii) could be an option and some models have the advantage of altering the insulin rates remotely via bluetooth [65] . fully automated closed-loop glucose control has been tried in critical illness and if feasible, could be useful in treating patients with covid-19 [66] .blood glucose monitoring poses a special challenge as it necessitates frequent visits to patient's bedside, especially if the patient is critically ill and receiving intravenous insulin. however, attempts could be made to minimize exposure. if the patient is not critically ill, he/she may be given a glucose testing device and selfmonitoring may be taught. blood glucose readings can then be communicated on phone and necessary action taken. continuous glucose monitoring (cgm) could be of help, especially the systems where the data can be remotely accessed without visiting the patient. though, there is some evidence of cgm interference with commonly prescribed medications like acetaminophen, atenolol and lisinopril, it has been shown to be useful and reliable in critically ill patients [67, 68] .treatment with ace inhibitors and arb has the potential to cause up regulation of ace-2 [69] . mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with an angiotensin receptor blocker, losartan [70] . a retrospective analysis showed reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors [71] . however, a contrary view is that increased expression of ace-2 could theoretically increase the risk of infection with sars cov-2. this could be a concern in people with diabetes who are at already elevated risk of infections because of many other factors. however, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis currently. in a retrospective analysis of 112 covid-19 hospitalised patients with cardiovascular disease in wuhan, there was no significant difference in the proportion of acei/arb medication between nonsurvivors and survivors [72] . in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by european society of cardiology council on hypertension, european society of hypertension and american heart association [73e75].there are several studies about the protective effect of statins in pneumonia [76] . statins are known to increase ace-2 levels and may protect against viral entry of sars cov-2 [77] . however, this increase in ace-2 could be counterintuitive in the current context. nevertheless, statins are known to inhibit nuclear factor kappa b (nfkb) activation and might help in blunting the cytokine storm [78] .calcium channel blockers (ccb) have been shown to reduce severity of disease and mortality in patients with pneumonia, presumably by inhibiting calcium influx into the cell [79] . the precise role of these agents in covid-19 has not been studied, however it seems safe to continue these drugs for control of blood pressure in hypertensive patients. since ccb has no effect on ace2 expression, some researchers have proposed its preferable use in patients with covid-19 and hypertension [80] .though aspirin has anti-inflammatory properties, it may not be advisable to continue it in patients with sepsis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. however, in patients with underlying coronary artery disease, it needs to be continued as anticoagulant unless otherwise contraindicated.treatment of diabetes poses challenge in the current times when the world is going through an unprecedented pandemic. there are 'lockdowns" in most places with people confined at home. opportunities for exercise are limited and regular walks and visits to gyms or swimming pools are not possible. there is also considerable mental stress because of the unpredictability of the disease as well as social immobility. alterations in the daily routine affect the dietary intake as well. stress could lead to inappropriate eating. access to fresh fruits and vegetables could be limited and there may be a tendency to eat packaged foods high in calories, saturated fat and trans-fat. patients may find it difficult to procure medicines, insulin, needles and glucose strips etc. because of partial or complete lockdowns. the problem becomes more pronounced with elderly who are living alone. all these factors could cause glucose dysregulation and could predispose the patients to complications like infections, hyperosmolar coma, ketoacidosis and even acute cardiac events. care should be taken not to vary the calorie intake markedly. healthy balanced diet with good amount of protein, fiber and limitation of saturated fats is important to maintain a good glycemic control. 2. exercise should be continued. home based exercise like cycling, treadmill, stationary jogging and resistance exercise with small weights are beneficial. 3. regular intake of antidiabetic drugs and insulin is important and should be emphasized. 4. telemedicine can be very helpful in these times. patients can consult their physician via telemedicine and appropriate advice about treatment can be given [81] . an article dealing with telemedicine is under publication in the special issue. 5. care of feet should be emphasized in order to avoid foot related complications. there are telemedicine temperature mats which can screen for inflammation without having to visit the clinic. the patients who show inflammation can then be called to the clinic [82] . 6 . patients need to be educated about the need to visit the hospital urgently in emergency situations like vomiting, drowsiness, shortness of breath, chest pain, weakness of limbs, altered sensorium etc.diabetes is associated with increased incidence and severity of covid-19. there is experimental evidence of the effect of diabetes on viral entry into cell and inflammatory response to the infection. it is important to control blood glucose in patients who are infected with covid-19. treating diabetes at present with restrictions on movement is challenging; however, innovations like telemedicine can be useful in these trying times.we hereby declare that we have no conflict of interest related to this article.the coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) pandemic has affected over 3 million people and caused more than 2 lac deaths in over 200 countries over a duration of four months. there is no medicine or vaccine to date for treatment and symptomatic management is the present treatment plan. severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in the past and now covid-19 are recurring epidemic threats to humans. this review has been undertaken to search probable modes that can be explored to find a drug treatment that can be used to treat covid-19 or any similar illness involving mainly the respiratory system. the relatively benign coronavirus causing the common cold has taken a novel form, utilizing newer pathways to enter the host and causing severe disease in some cases. the coronaviruses contain a single-stranded 5' capped positive-stranded ribonucleic acid (rna) molecule that ranges from 26 to 32 kb. the viral membrane contains the membrane (m) glycoprotein, the spike (s) glycoprotein, the envelop (e) glycoprotein, and the nucleocapsid (n) protein. a member of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) protein has been reported to be the entry-point receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and novel sars-cov2 causing covid-19. the viral s protein interacts with the human ace2, which is present as a transmembrane protein to gain entry into the host [1] [2] [3] .the two enzymes of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) and ace2 serve contrasting functions. ace converts angiotensin i (agi) into angiotensin ii (agii) and agii has vasoconstrictor and pro-inflammatory properties via its type1 receptor (at1r). ace inhibitors, e.g. lisinopril, and at1r inhibitors, commonly known as angiotensin receptor blockers (arb) like losartan, are very commonly used drugs for cardiovascular diseases like hypertension and cardiac failure. the involvement of ras in the evolution and pathogenesis of lung diseases has received attention in recent years [4] .the histopathological reports of post-mortem studies of covid-19 deaths show diffuse alveolar damage, hyaline membrane deposition, fibrin exudates, and consolidation by fibroblastic proliferation with the extracellular matrix and fibrin-forming clusters in air spaces [5] [6] . post-mortem findings of sars deaths showed features of diffuse alveolar damage (dad) with pronounced pulmonary edema and hyaline membrane formation. in some areas, there was interstitial thickening, with mild to moderate fibrosis. [7] [8] the ace homolog ace2, which is the entry receptor for the virus, is expressed abundantly in type ii alveolar cells and may have been a base for the rapid expansion of sars-cov and a vicious circle of local alveolar wall destruction, resulting in rapidly progressive severe diffuse alveolar damage [9] . considering the post-mortem findings of the lung, the same may be true in covid-19. as opposed to ace, soluble ace 2 has been shown to protect against lung injury. the less spoken about angiotensin ii receptor type 2 (at2r) has anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects in lung tissue and may be of significance in light of the lung pathology presentation in covid-19. it is imperative to assess the role of ace2 and at2r as the natural but forgotten protectors of the alveolar environment, along with arbs, in severe acute lung disease by the novel coronavirus.angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) is a dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase expressed predominantly in the lung capillary endothelium, and it converts the decapeptide angiotensin i (agi) to the octapeptide angiotensin ii (agii). agii has two main receptors, at1r and at2r. angiotensin ii via its at1r receptor causes vasoconstriction along with many other effects on the kidneys and brain to regulate the body fluid volume and blood pressure. it also has proinflammatory properties. a study suggested that the activation of the pulmonary ras influences the pathogenesis of acute lung injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and sars, as they are attenuated by blocking the renin-angiotensin pathway [10] . thus, the inhibition of the ace/agii/atr1 axis may be beneficial in the setting of its enhanced activity. both ace inhibitors and arbs are used clinically to block the effects of agii but the arbs may have a much greater potential to block the renin-angiotensin system than ace inhibition because an estimated 40% of ag ii is formed via non-ace pathways (e.g. chymase) in humans [11] [12] .in the year 2000, a new homolog of ace was identified separately by two groups and was named ace2 [13] [14] . ace2 is a zinc metalloprotease with a 40% identity and a 61% similarity to ace [13] . ace2 converts agi to ag (1-9) and agii to ag (1-7) by removing one amino acid from each. ace2 is not inhibited by classical ace inhibitors like captopril, enalapril, and lisinopril [14] . both the authors reported that ace2 is expressed mainly in the heart, kidney, and testis [13] [14] . later, in a study using immunolocalization of the ace2 protein, it was found that ace2 is expressed in many tissues, including type i and type ii alveolar pneumocytes, nasal, oral and nasopharyngeal mucosa, enterocytes of the small intestine, endothelial cells and smooth muscles of blood vessels of all the tissues studied, and weakly in bronchial epithelial cells [9] .numerous animal studies have been conducted to study ace2 after the discovery that sars-cov used it as a portal for entry. these studies may be projected to covid-19, as its virus also gains entry through the same receptor. the picture in severe cases in both sars and covid-19 is that of acute respiratory distress. it was demonstrated in mice that ace2 was required for the effective replication of sars-cov in vivo as ace2 knockout mice showed a very low quantity of virus when they were infected with sars-cov [15] . on one hand, where ace2 was proved to be the entry receptor for novel cov, on the other hand, ace2 knockout mice showed very severe acute lung injury in aspiration, endotoxin, and peritoneal sepsis-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) models. loss of ace2 expression in mutant mice resulted in enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, neutrophil accumulation, and worsened lung function [10] . thus, ace2 protects murine lungs from ards in ace2 knockout mice. this protective effect of ace2 is probably by reducing agii by breaking it to ag (1-7) [10] . hence, there is a protective effect of ace2 in acute lung injury with agii being the probable target. in another study on mice, downregulation of ace2 expression by sars-cov infections and its spike protein was reported. a study also reported that treatment with exogenous recombinant ace2 protein improved symptoms of acute lung injury in wild type mice as well as ace2 knockout mice [16] . thus, ace2 has a dual role, one, to support virus entry into the host and, two, to protect against severe lung injury.in relation to ace2, the findings of studies comparing viruses nl63 and sars-cov are intriguing. nl63 is another human coronavirus that uses the same ace2 for entry as does sars-cov but causes mild respiratory disease. its interaction with ace2 is weaker than the sars-cov s protein interaction with ace2. nl63-cov and sars-cov have no structural homology in the receptor-binding domain (rbd), yet the two viruses recognize common ace2 regions [17] . whether it is lower-affinity interaction with ace-2 or the difference in ace-2 signaling following sars-cov and nl63 s protein binding or it is the s protein itself that accounts for the differential pathogenicity of human coronavirus nl63 and sars-cov remains to be determined [17] [18] . recently, it has been demonstrated that the covid-19 cov binds with ace2 as avidly as sars-cov [19] . in a study comparing the two viruses, it was reported that the sars-cov binds more efficiently to ace2 than nl63 and correlates with ace2 shedding [20] . but working ahead on these findings, with a revised experimental setup, another study found that the ace2 shedding with nl63 was robust and depended on the fold increase in viral replication and occurred during the early phase of replication [21] . with these observations, it appears that the severity of the disease depends on the efficiency of the binding of the spike protein with ace2, as both sars-cov and cov2 have greater affinity than nl63. secondly, the shedding and downregulation of ace2 expression does not seem to determine the potential severity of lung disease but is associated with higher viral replication. a study in 2004 found that the soluble ace2 ectodomain specifically blocked infection by sars-cov s-bearing pseudotypes, and this finding may be a breakthrough for covid-19 also [22] . thus, recombinant ace2 may be beneficial in blocking virus entry and in reducing lung injury in covid-19 via some missing link. thus the double-edged sword ace2 must be explored to be used appropriately for conquering covid-19 by strategic administration through its considered inclusion in the predefined and agreed-on treatment protocol of covid-19. agii, the major effector peptide of the ras, promotes vasoconstriction, proliferation, inflammation, and fibrosis within the pulmonary vasculature and lung parenchyma via stimulation of at1 receptors. the use of losartan to block the at1 receptor improved lung injury in this mouse model. the aforementioned detrimental effects of agii may be counterbalanced by the activation of at2 receptors [23] .at2r has not been given much attention after its discovery, as most of the functions of agii were operated via at1r and the significance of at1r in cardiovascular and renal pathologies became well-known. the expression of at2r in healthy adults is often low and is mainly identified in the renal, cardiovascular, adrenal medulla, brain tissues, myometrium, and ovaries [24] [25] in contrast, in fetal tissues, at2r is the dominant receptor subtype [26] . in the adult, at2rs are re-expressed or upregulated under certain pathophysiological conditions, such as mechanical injury or ischemia like myocardial infarction, vascular injury, brain ischemia, and renal failure [24, 27] . at2r exerts vasodilator, anti-fibrotic, and anti-inflammatory effects in a variety of disease models, as well as natriuretic and antihypertensive effects in renal disease [28] . the at2r-specific agonist may effectively dampen the pro-inflammatory and aggressive behavior in rheumatoid synovitis [29] . thus, at2r has proven anti-inflammatory effects in a variety of tissues. the activation of at2r is thought to counter-regulate the pathophysiological effects of angiotensin ii (agii) induced by at1r [24] .at2r research gained momentum when the first nonpeptide at2r agonist, compound 21 (c-21) was introduced in 2004 [24] . a study investigated the effect of the at2r agonist c-21 in the bleomycin model of pulmonary fibrosis and reported the beneficial effects of c-21, which were associated with decreased infiltration of macrophages in the lungs, reduced lung inflammation, and diminished pulmonary collagen accumulation [30] . in the monocrotaline (mct)-induced pulmonary hypertension rat model, c-21 treatment reversed both interstitial and perivascular fibrosis. furthermore, a decrease in ace2 messenger rna (mrna) levels was observed in mctinduced pulmonary hypertension animals, which was reversed by c-21 therapy with a two-fold increase in ace2 levels and a concomitant decrease in ace expression [23] . the protective effect of ace2 has already been emphasized. furthermore, c-21 treatment normalized the at1/at2 receptor ratio to restore the lung ras balance. c-21 treatment prevented, as well as attenuated, the progression of lung fibrosis and the accompanying pulmonary hypertension. thus, in view of the above inferences, the acute inflammatory lung pathology being observed in covid-19 may be ameliorated by the at2r agonist.three classes of drugs affecting ras may be candidates to ameliorate the acute lung pathology in covid-19. with the possibility of agii overexpression as the trigger in covid-19 lung pathology, its inhibition may be of benefit. here, arbs like losartan may be more beneficial than ace inhibitors for the fact that sufficient agii is formed by ace non-dependent mechanisms. cov2 uses ace2 to gain entry into the host, and after gaining entry, it causes the shedding and downregulation of ace2 to sabotage its anti-inflammatory and protective effect. this, along with the observation that the soluble ace2 ectodomain specifically blocked infection by sars-cov s-bearing pseudotypes, shows that the use of soluble recombinant ace2 may be helpful in reducing lung injury in covid-19. our speculation is that at2r may be reexpressed in covid-related lung injury and hence the use of at2r agonists may also be explored to elicit their anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects. bacterial communicable diseases were a menace and created havoc prior to the antibiotic era. however, during the last few decades, public health focus has largely been on non-communicable diseases and related lifestyle interventions. the sudden spurt of covid-19 and its global spread demands innovative approaches using forgotten enzymatic pathways, as suggested in this study, for magnanimous improvements in the clinical outcome among the covid-19 cases. the herein suggested interventions with ace2 and at2 receptors agonist, along with arbs, may bethe world is facing a major public health crisis due to the pandemic caused by a recently-described coronavirus, named sars-cov-2 (1) (2) (3) . reaching proportions that far surpass those of sars and mers, the sars-cov-2 epidemic started in wuhan, china in december 2019, but has now spread to more than 130 countries worldwide and has infected approximately 142,000 people, with more than 5,000 deaths being attributed to it (who, march 13 th 2020) (4) . sequencing analysis of the viral genome has revealed mutations in the spike protein-which is essential for sars-cov-2 attachment and invasion into host cells-may have favored the spill over from bats to humans (1) . most patients infected with coronaviruses develop a mild flu-like disease, in which the most common symptoms are fever and cough. however, in a study of 1,099 patients from 552 hospitals from 30 provinces of china in 2020, guan w et al. (5) , revealed that 15.7% of the patients who develop severe disease have increased difficulty in breathing because of pneumonia. radiological imaging of the lungs revealed opacity in 56.4% of the patients. approximately 2.7% of the patients needed assisted ventilation, and 1.4% died (1) .however, coronavirus disease (covid-19) may rapidly develop into severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in elderly subjects (460 yr), especially in those with comorbidities, such as hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary diseases (1, 4, 6) . what is intriguing is that, unlike in the case of influenza (7), children are not included in the risk group, as very few cases of severe covid-19 in children have been reported, and there have been no reports of death in children under the age of 9. this raises questions regarding the cellular and molecular mechanisms associated with the severity of covid-19. understanding and elucidating such mechanisms may greatly improve our knowledge of the pathogenesis of the disease, and thus guide health professionals as to how to better treat the elderly population.toward this, we raise two main points of discussion, i) the increased angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) expression in pulmonary and heart tissues of hypertensive patients with chronic use of at1r blockers and ii) antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) after previous exposure to other circulating coronaviruses.after entering the host-usually through aerosolized viral particles or contact with contaminated surfaces-the virus needs to undergo its biological cycle. spike proteins-that are coded by the s gene in one of the open reading frames of the viral genome-need to interact with viral receptors on the surface of host cells. sars-cov-2 spike proteins bind to angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2), which is expressed in the epithelial cells of the lungs (8, 9) . this is the main reason why coronaviruses often cause respiratory disease. notably, ace-2 may also be highly expressed in intestinal tissues (9) , leading to diarrhea, as observed in 60% of the patients during the sars-cov epidemic in 2002. only a few patients with sars-cov-2 infection had diarrhea, although viral particles may be detected in the stool (10) . after attaching to the ace-2 through the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the s1 and s2 domains of the spike protein, the viral envelope fuses with the host cell membrane and is further internalized. genetic material, a positive rna strand of approximately 20-32 kb, is released into the cytoplasm for replication (1) . thus, the importance of ace-2 expression dynamics for viral infectivity, tropism, and pathogenicity is evident. ace-2, or ace-related carboxypeptidase, is an 805 amino acid transmembrane protein which is an important member of the renin-angiotensin system that plays a pivotal role in the regulation of blood pressure (11) . ace converts angiotensin i (ang i) into angiotensin ii (ang ii), whereas ace-2 converts ang ii into angiotensin 1-7 (ang 1-7) or angiotensin 1-9 (ang 1-9) (12). ang ii and ang 1-7 have antagonizing effects, as ang ii binds to angiotensin 1 receptor (at1r), inducing vasoconstriction and increase in blood pressure, whereas ang 1-7 binds to at2r, leading to vasodilatation and decrease in blood pressure (11, 12) .as the renin-angiotensin system affects blood pressure and kidney function, ace inhibitors and at1r blockers are widely used in hypertensive and cardiac patients (13) . in this context, the chronic use of ace inhibitors or at1r antagonists may be of particular relevance for patients infected with sars-cov-2, as they may alter the dynamics of ace-2 expression and thus increase susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection.it has already been demonstrated by using hypertensive rat models that at1r blockade elevates ace-2 expression. treatment with losartan and lisinopril, either alone or in combination, significantly increases ace-2 mrna in cardiomyocytes of rats. this is associated with higher ang 1-7 plasma concentrations (14) . this was corroborated by analyzing the heart tissue from rats with myocardial infarction that were treated with losartan (15) . concordantly, olmesartan, a more effective at1r antagonist, significantly increased both cardiac and renal expression of ace-2 in wistar-kyoto rats (16) . this is in agreement with the use of perindopril, an ace inhibitor, in rats (17) .another interesting feature of the dynamics of ace-2 expression in tissues is its ability to be cleaved from the cell surface by a metalloproteinase called adam17 (tace) (18) . the ace-2 ectodomain gets cleaved, releasing soluble ace-2 (sace-2), whose role has not been fully elucidated. however, it has been shown that a higher concentration of sace-2 in the plasma correlates with a poorer prognosis after heart failure (19) . notably, sace-2 may also be detected at higher concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid in hypertensive patients. this has been corroborated in nefh cre x at1ar flox/flox mice, indicating that ace-2 and sace-2 levels in the brain are associated with the etiology of neurogenic hypertension (20) .further, it was demonstrated that ace-2 may be cleaved by other mechanisms. for instance, the sars spike protein may modulate adam17 expression, which in turn cleaves ace-2 into its soluble form. this was found to be dependent on the cytoplasmic domain of ace-2, as sirna against adam17 or ace-2 lacking intracellular domains abrogated this phenomenon (21) . interestingly, increased shedding of ace-2 correlates with worsening of the disease, probably because of an increase in ang ii instead of ang 1-7. this leads to increased vascular permeability and local inflammation. interestingly, ace-2 cleavage from the cell surface may also occur in lung epithelial cells (22) . thus, cleavage of ace-2 into sace-2 would compromise the effect of ang 1-7 on at2r, thereby reducing pulmonary hypertension and inflammation.altogether, as depicted in figure 1 , these data show that modulating the renin-angiotensin axis alters ace-2 expression in several tissues, especially in the lung and heart tissues. the use of ace inhibitors and at1r antagonists seems to upregulate ace-2 expression, facilitating viral attachment and entry. the further presence of the virus itself or some cytokines, including tnf-a, leads to ace-2 release from the cell membrane, abrogating its function to counteract ang ii.altogether, ace-2 overexpression may facilitate viral replication in lung tissue and promote lung vascular permeability, a common feature of severe sars-cov-2 infection. in summary, this may greatly impact the outcome of sars-cov-2 infection in elderly and hypertensive patients, as ace-2 is the putative attachment and invasion receptor for coronaviruses (8, 23) . in fact, the use of tace inhibitors as sars antiviral agents has already been proposed in experimental models (2, 3, 24) .' antibody-dependent enhancement ade is a phenomenon by which viruses use preexisting non-neutralizing antibodies from previous exposure to invade host cells through fc receptor-mediated internalization. this is most commonly observed during secondary dengue virus (denv) infection, causing severe hemorrhagic disease (25) . notably, the possibility of ade between zika virus (zikv), the causative agent of zikv congenital syndrome (26) , and denv has been intensely debated recently (27) (28) (29) . moreover, ade has been the focus of debate for ebola (30) and hiv (31) infections.during ade, preexisting antibodies elicited during a previous viral exposure are not able to neutralize viral particles during a secondary infection with any antigenicrelated virus. instead, igg-opsonized viral particles then target fcgr expressed on endothelial and immune cells, facilitating viral internalization into host cells. further, after intense viral replication, endothelial cells may respond by increasing vascular permeability and allowing exudate extravasation and bleeding. however, monocytes become highly activated and may initiate a cytokine storm (32) .in the context of sars-cov-2, it is plausible to think that ade occurs. as mentioned in the introduction section, elderly (460 yr) patients are more susceptible to infection for unknown reasons. as coronaviruses in general are highly prevalent in the global population, causing mild infection and flu-like symptoms, seroconversion into previous circulating coronaviruses is probably widespread. thus, it is reasonable to infer that elderly patients, for obvious reasons, have been exposed to previous infections more times than younger subjects. this would imply a vaster repertoire of antibodies against coronavirus epitopes produced by longliving plasma cells, which in fact has recently been shown to expand during sars-cov-2 infection.however, whether these antibodies are either neutralizers or enhancers must be further addressed. it is worth mentioning that, concerning the new sars-cov-2, sequencing analysis of the viral genome isolated in wuhan, china indicated that mutations mainly occurred within the coding sequence of the spike protein, which has less than 40% sequence identity with that of previously circulated coronaviruses (1). these mutations may be responsible not only for the spill over from bats to humans, but also for inducing ade, as changes in spike epitopes may result in interactions with non-neutralizing antibodies. corroborating this, a novel epitope, which was lacking in previous isolates, was mapped (33) .as covid-19 is not a hemorrhagic disease, it is probable that ade, if present, is not mediated by endothelial cells. however, it has already been shown that lung epithelial cells express high levels of fcgriia (34) . moreover, immune cells, including monocytes and dendritic cells, highly express this receptor. these populations, especially monocytes, greatly account for the inflammatory infiltrate in the lungs during pneumonia, which is consistent with the transient lymphopenia observed in patients as circulating cells may migrate to the lungs. conversely, lung imaging of patients with severe covid-19 shows a great degree of lung opacity, which is consistent with edema and cellular infiltrate (5) . thus, it is feasible that lung-infiltrating monocytes expressing fcgr greatly favor sars-cov-2 replication in the lung tissue, accounting for the greater susceptibility of the elderly patients.corroborating this hypothesis, young individuals and children do not represent the risk group for severe disease, which greatly differs from the case of influenza (7), for instance. in the context of ade, it is plausible to think that children-as they had less or no exposure to previous circulating coronaviruses-carry a very restricted repertoire of igg-or only low-affinity igm-which is not capable of inducing ade. in this context, mapping complementarity determining regions (cdrs) in iggs from young and elderly individuals would be of great importance not only to find neutralizing antibodies but also to address this hypothesis.additionally, previous studies on mers and sars have already highlighted the possibility of ade. a recent report published by wan y et al. elucidated the mechanism by which monoclonal antibodies (mabs) induce ade in human cells. interestingly, mabs that target the rbd of sars and mers spike proteins induced conformational changes in the protein that favors an interaction with dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4), the receptor for mers (38) . moreover, immunocomplexes also promoted viral entry. however, increasing concentrations of antibodies block viral invasion, as rbds become inaccessible. this is consistent with previous findings by wang q et al. (39) who infected the promonocytic cell line hl-cz-that expresses both ace-2 and fcgr-with sars-cov-2 in the presence of increasing concentrations of anti-sera. their data demonstrated that high concentrations of antibodies neutralized the virus, whereas lower concentrations induced ade. more interestingly, the anti-sera also recognized spike protein-related antigens.another study on sars-cov-2 using rhesus monkeys showed that immunization with full-length spike glycoprotein led to increased disease severity, mostly to because of an increase in neutralizing antibodies (nab) (35) . the study demonstrated that nabs switched the phenotype of lunginfiltrating macrophages to a pro-inflammatory m1 profile, instead of the tissue-healing profile m2. this aggravated lung injury and greatly contributed to its pathology. conversely, previous studies using samples from deceased patients suffering from sars-cov infection indicated that nab titers reached higher levels earlier in these patients, compared to that in patients who survived (36) . this may indicate that ade and the role of preexisting antibodies are in fact very relevant to the overall outcome of the infection.thus, as indicated in figure 2 , circulating antibodies, instead of neutralizing the current circulating sars-cov-2, may bind to viral particles and thus promote fc-mediated internalization by lung epithelial cells and infiltrating monocytes, contributing to the worsening of covid-19. these are the most recent and mechanistic studies on ade of coronaviruses thus far. although the data are consistent, whether the phenomenon of ade is observed in patients with severe covid-19 is yet to be determined. noteworthy, however, is the fact that immune complexes of low-avidity antibodies at sub-optimal concentrations were also responsible for the worsening of the pulmonary disease caused by h1n1 during the 2009 epidemic (37) .' conclusions sars-cov-2 is the newest threat to human health and needs emergency action from governments and public health agencies worldwide, especially because of its pandemic potential as recently declared by the world health organization (who). in this context, it is essential to rapidly and deeply address all the possibilities concerning the severity of infection, especially in the elderly population that accounts for approximately 10-12% of the mortality rate. here, we present several relevant aspects that may contribute to the increased susceptibility of the aforementioned population to covid-19. we believe that i) increased expression of ace-2 in hypertensive patients being treated with ace inhibitors and at1r blockers and ii) previous exposure to circulating coronaviruses with low neutralizing capacity to sars-cov-2 may greatly contribute to the increased susceptibility of the elderly patients to covid-19. to determine whether these hypotheses are correct, further investigations are needed, not only to better understand the etiology of the current sars-cov-2 infection, but also to be better prepared for future epidemics. ' author contributions peron jps conceived and wrote the manuscript. nakaya h helped editing the manuscript.dear editor, we recently published an article highlighting the special concerns while managing patients with diabetes in the times of covid-19 pandemic i . there have been some concerns about the use of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which were not clarified in our publication ii . we are summarising the current evidence in this regard and will try to arrive at a reasonable conclusion.in the absence of a vaccine and an antiviral drug for the covid-19 infection, several therapeutic approaches are being studied. one such approach is the use of inhibitors of the renin angiotensin system, namely ace inhibitors and arbs. on the other hand, some concern has been raised about the fact that patients on these agents might be at an increased risk of infection by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2).angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) is the receptor for sars cov-2 as well as other coronaviruses and is expressed in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells and endothelium. the sglycoprotein on the surface of coronavirus binds to ace2. this leads to a conformational change in the s-glycoprotein and allows proteolytic digestion by host cell proteases (tmprss2) ultimately leading to internalization of the virion iii . viral s-glycoprotein, tmprss2 and ace-2 inhibition are potential targets of therapy and possibly vaccine development.as ace-2 is essential to coronavirus infection, its blockade is thought to be beneficial in preventing/treating this infection. a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors iv . mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan v . as far as cvid-19 infection is concerned, the data on ras activation or the effect of its blockade is limited at present. hypokalaemia could be a marker of ras activation and high incidence of hypokalaemia has been reported in patients with covid-19 infection vi .despite these small studies suggesting the benefit of drugs acting on ras, there is some data, albeit scarce, from animal models and human studies that treatment with ace inhibitors and arb could cause up regulation of ace2 vii . ibuprofen and thiazolidinediones have also been shown to do the same viii,ix . increased expression of ace2 could theoretically increase the risk of infection with sars cov-2. this could be a concern in people with diabetes who are at already elevated risk of infections because of many other factors. however, currently, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by european society of cardiology council on hypertension and european society of hypertension. x,xi .fortis cdoc hospital for diabetes and allied sciences, chirag enclave, new delhi, india correspondence to: riteshgupta72@gmail.comsevere acute respiratory syndrome virus 2 (sars-cov-2) causes a respiratory disease that led to the fatal coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic. in late 2019, the sars-cov-2 outbreak was first reported in wuhan, china that later led to a true crisis worldwide . coronaviruses (covs) are large enveloped non-segmented positive-sense rna viruses. they generally cause mild enteric and respiratory diseases in animals and humans (glass et al., 2004) . most human covs, such as hcov-229e, oc43, nl63, and hku1 usually cause only mild respiratory diseases (fouchier et al., 2004) . sars-cov-2 causes acute, highly lethal pneumonia with clinical symptoms similar to those reported for sars-cov and mers-cov-2 (fouchier et al., 2004) . in contrast to sars-cov, sars-cov-2-infected patients rarely show prominent upper respiratory tract signs and symptoms. on presentation, most infected individuals exhibit dry cough (83-99%), and dyspnea (59.4-82%) with findings of bilateral ground-glass opacities on radiographic images huang et al., 2020) . in most severe cases the characteristic symptom is respiratory distress (∼55%) grasselli et al. the reported mortality varies based on race, sex, age, and comorbid conditions (baud et al.; porcheddu et al., 2020) . currently the true mortality still is not well-established, as the mortality may occur up to 30 days post infection. based on current literature, most severe sars-cov-2 cases progressed within 14-21 days after disease onset. various laboratory abnormalities have been observed even preceding the significant respiratory dysfunction (lu et al., 2020) . mortality related to sars-cov-2 in china as reported by the who is about 3.4% sohrabi et al., 2020) . the most severe cases have been predominantly reported in elderly or subjects with preexisting conditions, predominantly cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and congestive heart failure . interestingly, these risk factors are similar to the reported risk factors (diabetes, hypertension, obesity) associated with mers-cov related mortality, although mers-cov respiratory disease occurred in younger individuals (assiri et al., 2013; world health organization, 2013) . these clinical and epidemiological observations may provide some direction on the mechanism of disease. recent reports indicate that a significant portion of sars-cov-2 related hospitalization in the usa are below the age of 50 years. given the fact of a higher prevalence of metabolic diseases, including obesity, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases and diabetes in the us population (moore et al., 2017) , this infection may cause higher mortality. the virus gains entrance into its host cell via the ace2 receptor. how the known epidemiological and clinical manifestation of sars-cov-2 infection may be explained by perturbations of physiological functions of the ace2 receptor due to receptor virus interaction will be discussed in this manuscript.sars-cov-2 is single-stranded positive-sense rna virus, containing ∼26-32 kilobase (kb) genome. the viral envelope consists of a lipid bilayer, where the viral membrane (m), envelope (e), and spike (s) structural proteins are anchored. unlike other corona viruses, sars-cov-2 does not use aminopeptidase n (apn) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) as a receptor (raj et al., 2013) . similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 utilizes a novel metallocarboxyl peptidase angiotensin receptor (ace) 2 to gain entry into human cells (donoghue et al., 2000; turner et al., 2002; li et al., 2003) . similar to other cov, during viral entry into the host cell, the spike proteins (s) on the envelope of sars-cov-2 are cleaved into s1 and s2 subunits (kirchdoerfer et al., 2016) . s2 does not interact with the receptor but it harbors the functional elements required for membrane fusion of the virion. the s1 protein/receptor interaction is the pivotal determinant for sars-cov-2 to infect a host species. s1 contains the receptor binding domain (rbd) and directly binds to the peptidase domain (pd) of ace 2 to gain entry into host cells (turner et al., 2002; li et al., 2003; yan et al., 2020) . despite high similarity between the rbd of sars-cov and sars-cov-2, several amino acid variations are observed in the middle of the binding domain of sars-cov-2, which provide an increased affinity to bind to ace2 more effectively (wang q. et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020) . peptidase activity of ace2 is critical for the virion to gain access into the host cytosol. similar to sars-cov, proteolytic cleavage of s1 containing the receptor binding domain (rbd) at the c-terminus of s1 protein of sars-cov-2 is required to initiate interaction with pd of the ace2 receptor (li et al., 2005; yan et al., 2020) . cleavage of s1 protein is achieved by acid-dependent proteolytic cleavage by one or several host proteases, including cathepsins, transmembrane protease serine protease (tmprss)2, tmprss4, or human airway trypsin-like protease (hoffmann et al., 2020) . the exact protease has not been identified. proteolytic cleavage is followed by fusion of the viral and cellular membranes. furthermore, it has been shown that s protein cleavage occurs at two different sites within the s2 portion of the protein, with the first cleavage important for separating the rbd and fusion domains of the s protein and the second for exposing the fusion peptide (cleavage at s2 ′ ) (belouzard et al., 2009) . binding of s1 to the ace2 receptor triggers the cleavage of ace2 by a disintegrin and metallopeptidase domain 17 (adam17)/tumor necrosis factor-converting enzyme (tace) at the ectodomain sites (lambert et al., 2005; heurich et al., 2014; oarhe et al., 2015) . additionally, tmprss2 cleaves ace2 at the intracellular c-terminal domain (heurich et al., 2014; hoffmann et al., 2020) . both cleavages (ectodomain and endodomain) by adam17 and tmprss2 facilitate effective cellular viral entry. it appears that this process leads to shedding of host ace2 receptor (belouzard et al., 2009 ) that may contribute to the loss of ace2 function and systemic release of s1/ace2 complex.generally fusion with the host plasma membrane occurs within acidified endosomes that requires cleavage at s2 ′ exposing a fusion peptide that inserts into the membrane. the potential beneficial effect of chloroquine on sars-cov-2 is due to its effect on the endosomal uptake and acidification. the process of fusion with the host membrane is followed by the formation of a funnel like structure built by two heptad repeats in the s2 protein in an antiparallel six-helix bundle facilitating the fusion and release of the viral genome into the cytoplasm. the viral replication genome of covs contains a variable number (world health organization, 2013; lu et al., 2020; porcheddu et al., 2020; sohrabi et al., 2020; zhou et al., 2020; baud et al.) of open reading frames (orfs). two-thirds of viral rna, mainly located in the first orf (orf1a/b) translates two polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab, and this encodes 16 non-structural proteins (nsp), while the remaining orfs encode accessory and structural proteins (fehr and perlman, 2015) . the rest of the virus genome encodes four essential structural proteins, including spike (s) glycoprotein, small envelope (e) protein, matrix (m) protein, and nucleocapsid (n) protein (fehr and perlman, 2015) . after replication and subgenomic rna synthesis, the viral structural proteins, s, e, and m are translated and inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum (er), followed by movement along the secretory pathway into the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate (krijnse-locker et al., 1994; fehr and perlman, 2015) . the m protein directs most protein-protein interactions. for assembly of virus, the interaction of m protein with e protein is required to form virus-like particles (vlps), suggesting these two proteins function together to produce coronavirus envelopes.because of the central role of ace2 receptor as the viral entry point, the understanding of the functional role of ace/angiotensin receptor (at) and ace2/mas receptor is critical for the understanding of the pathophysiological changes due to sars-cov-2 infection. understanding of the molecular downstream effects of angiotensin (ang) on cellular signaling may explain the observed clinical picture of severe respiratory distress, myocardial injury, renal failure, and increased mortality due to sars-cov-2 infection among the aging population and subjects with cardiovascular and metabolic diseases zhu et al., 2020) .sequence analysis suggests that ace and ace2 exhibit 42% amino acid homology and ace2 has evolved through gene duplication (donoghue et al., 2000) . ace2 maps to chromosome xp22, spans 39.98 kb of genomic dna, and contains 20 introns and 18 exons (turner et al., 2002) . the ace2 gene encodes a type i membrane-bound glycoprotein composed of 805 amino acids (marian, 2013) . functional domains include a cterminal transmembrane anchoring region (carboxy-terminal domain), n-terminal signal peptide region and an hexxh zinc binding metalloprotease motif (catalytic domain) (li et al., 2003; cerdà-costa and xavier gomis-rüth, 2014) . ace receptors are expressed in almost all tissues, while ace2 is expressed on alveolar epithelial cells and capillary endothelial cells. ace2 is highly expressed in capillary rich organs such as lungs and kidneys but also in the gut and brain (hamming et al., 2004; tikellis and thomas, 2012; roca-ho et al., 2017) . genetic polymorphisms of ace and ace2 are associated with hypertension, cardiovascular disease, stroke, and diabetes (crackower et al., 2002; ramachandran et al., 2008; jang and kim, 2012; fehr and perlman, 2015) . despite the structural homology between ace and ace2, they have divergent physiological function. ace regulates the renin angiotensin aldesterone system (ras). ace2 counterbalances the deleterious effect of the ace/ras pathway through its downstream ace2/angiotensin (1-7)/mas axis. the critical role of ras has been shown in the pathogenesis of metabolic inflammatory diseases (de kloet et al., 2010) . classical activation of angiotensin ii depends on renin and ace activity. prorenin (a 46kd protein) is the inactive precursor of renin. upon activation of the juxtaglomerular apparatus (jg) of the afferent arterioles of the kidneys, specialized proteases cleave prorenin to renin. once renin is released into the blood, it cleaves angiotensinogen into angiotensin (ang) i. ang i is physiologically inactive, but acts as a precursor of ang ii. the conversion of ang i to ang ii is catalyzed by ace. ace is expressed primarily in the vascular endothelium of the lungs and kidneys (wakahara et al., 2007) , but also on the epithelium of the lungs and upper respiratory system. after ang i is converted to ang ii, it binds to angiotensin ii type i (at) and type ii receptors in the kidney, adrenal cortex, arterioles, and the brain ( figure 1a) . ang ii acts on the adrenal cortex to stimulate the release of aldosterone , leading to sodium and water retention. while the effects of ang ii are rapid, the effects of aldosterone are retarted due to slower effects on downstream targeted gene transcription. the overall physiological net effects of ras activation is an increase in total body sodium, total body water, and increased vascular tone. furthermore, the binding of ang ii to at receptors results in vasoconstriction (gustafsson and holstein-rathlou, 1999) , endothelial injury (watanabe et al., 2005) , endovascular thrombosis (tay and lip, 2008) and increase blood volume. increased ang ii is associated with hypertension and accelerated thrombosis in arterioles by activating the coagulation cascade (both thrombin and platelets) (senchenkova et al., 2010; singh and karnik, 2016) . interestingly, the thrombogenic effects of angii on the platelets was not reversible by application of aspirin (jagroop and mikhailidis, 2000) . at the cellular level, angiotensin ii induces various signaling pathways, including serine/threonine kinase, erk, jnk/mapk as well as pkc (malhotra et al., 2001) . studies have shown that ang ii effectively induces il-6 and tnfα, possibly through serine tyrosine kinases, erk/jnk mapk activation, g protein coupled receptor activation or through interaction with mineralocorticoid receptors (funakoshi et al., 1999; han et al., 1999; ruiz-ortega et al., 2002; luther et al., 2006) . ang ii is a potent activator of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (nadph) oxidase and hence an inducer of reactive oxygen species (ros) production (garrido and griendling, 2009 ). furthermore, ang ii activates neutrophils and macrophages flux to the affected tissues and inhibits the production of nitric oxide and hence promotes vascular injury (kato et al., 1996; nabah et al., 2004) . these considerations provide new visions to develop targeted therapies, as ang ii functions as a pluripotent mediator to enhance cytokines (il-6, tnfα, and others), oxidative injury by ros, endothelial injury by inhibiting no synthesis and vasoconstriction. therefore, inhibition of only one of its targets for instance il-6 may not provide significant therapeutic benefit in these patients. currently, there is an ongoing clinical trial to study the effect of monoclonal antibodies against il-6 receptor (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04317092).it is very important to note, especially in the context of sars-cov-2 infection, that besides the classical ras/ace mediated ang ii formation, formation of ang ii can occur through alternative pathways by various proteases. these include tryptensin, cathepsin g, tonin, kallikrein, neutral endopeptidase, and chymase ( figure 1a) . these proteases can cleave ang i to form ang ii (kramkowski et al., 2006; lorenz, 2010; becari et al., 2011; uehara et al., 2013) . most of these proteases are localized in specific tissues (lungs, myocardium, arterioles, kidney, or brain) and are not sensitive to ace inhibitors. interestingly, targeted inhibition of ace using ace inhibitors, only decreased ang ii levels for a short period of time, and ang ii levels return to baseline 1 week after treatment with ace inhibitors (mento and wilkes, 1987) . furthermore, it has been shown that application of ace and ang ii receptor blocker (arb) inhibitors in animal models leads to an increase in the expression of ace2 (ishiyama et al., 2004) . part of protective function of ace and arbs is considered to be due to upregulation of ace2. therefore, it is figure 1 | dysregulation of ang ii and ang (1-7) by loss of protective function of ace2 receptor. (a) under physiological condition there is a balance in ace and ace2 receptor activity. ace regulates the renin angiotensin aldosterone system (ras) and cleaves ang i to produce ang ii. ang ii is a potent vasoconstrictor and detrimental for endothelial and epithelial function through activating at1 and at2 receptors. the counterbalance of the ras/ang ii output is regulated by ace2 and mas/g protein coupled receptor activity. ace2 cleaves ang i and ang ii into ang-1-9 and ang1-7, respectively, thereby it activates mas/g protein coupled receptor that protect cell death. (b) sars-cov-2 binds to ace2 to gain entry to epithelial cells of the lungs. cleavage of spike proteins by a protease such as trypsin/cathepsin g and or adam17 on ectodomain and tmprss2 of endodomain sites facilitate viral entry into the cells. this process leads to shedding of host ace2 receptors and loss of its protective function. loss of function of ace2 activity prevents production of ang 1-9 and ang1-7. lack of ang1-7 diminishes the activity of mas/g receptor, leading to the loss of its protective functions including vasodilatation, cell protection both at the epithelial and endothelial sites. loss of ace2 function leads to an imbalance and unchecked effects of ang ii and upregulation of ras/ang ii pathway. upregulation of ang ii leads to vasoconstriction, thrombophilia, microthrombosis, alveolar epithelial injury and respiratory failure. therefore, inhibiting the proteolytic function of trypsin/cathepsin and adam17 or tmprss2 and or direct activation of mas/g receptor by enhancing ang-(1-7) can overcome the loss of function ace2 and are viable targets to prevent tissue damage to the host.possible that upregulation of ace2 may provide more available receptors for viral entry and hence a higher viral load associated with poor prognosis (chu et al., 2004) . this also suggests that in subjects, who are on ace inhibitors, the activation of alternative pathways may play a significant role in the formation of ang ii (diaz, 2020) . currently, a clinical trial is ongoing to assess the effect of ace/arb inhibitors (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04330300) on sars-cov-2 infection. if the alternative pathways in the formation of ang ii are important, it is highly unlikely that the ace/arb inhibitors play a role on the clinical course of sars-cov-2 infection.ace2 acts as a ligand through its recently identified mas1 receptor, which is a g-protein-coupled receptor (donoghue et al., 2000; santos et al., 2003) . ace2 is a monocarboxypeptidase, which cleaves ang i into a non-apeptide, ang 1-9 and ang ii into a heptapeptide, ang 1-7 (santos et al., 2003; marian, 2013) . both peptides have vasodilatory and antiproliferative and protective functions by activating the mas/g receptor. the ace2/ang 1-7/mas1 axis provides an endogenous counter-regulatory mechanism within the renin-angiotensin system (ras) that balances the deleterious effects of the ace/ang ii/at1 receptor axis (santos et al., 2003) . mice deficient in mas1 or ace2 receptors exhibit cardiac systolic dysfunction, increased blood pressure, myocardial interstitial fibrosis, endothelial dysfunction, and exhibit increased susceptibility to intravascular thrombosis, chronic kidney disease, metabolic abnormalities, and various other biological abnormalities that regulate the cardiovascular system (yamamoto et al., 2006; tikellis and thomas, 2012) . ace2 activation prevents the deleterious effects of ang ii on the cells and organisms, such as cell death, fibrosis, angiogenesis, and thrombosis formation (fraga-silva et al., 2010; tikellis and thomas, 2012) . recent autopsy results on sars-cov-2 infected humans showed diffuse alveolar damage with massive capillary congestion accompanied by microthrombi in vascular beds but a paucity of inflammatory infiltrates (menter et al., 2020) . however, pathological examination on autopsies have not investigated if sars-cov-2 infection leads to total destruction of ace2 receptors on the alveolar epithelial and endothelial cells. interestingly, in an animal model of sars-cov, oudit et al. found a marked decreased ace2 expression in the heart of infected mice (oudit et al., 2009) . the key product of ace2 activity is ang- (1-7) , which is considered a biologically active member of the ras. by binding to mas, it induces many beneficial actions, such as vasodilation, inhibition of cell growth, and protection from alveolar epithelial cell injury. in addition, it has antifibrotic, anti-thrombotic, and antiarrhythmogenic effects (le tran and forster, 1997; schindler et al., 2007; li et al., 2008) . it has been shown that the ace2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis has a protective effect on the brain and prevents ischemic stroke (jiang et al., 2013) .in addition to its protective role in the cardiovascular system, ace2 has a direct protective role in alveolar epithelial cells. in the lungs ace2 has numerous physiological functions, most of which are protective against lung injury. similar to the endothelial site, ace2 degrades the octapeptide ang ii by removing a single amino acid from the c-terminal end of the peptide to generate the heptapeptide ang1-7. our laboratory and others have shown that ace2 protects against lung injury by: (a) degrading ang ii, which is vasoconstrictive and proapoptotic for lung epithelial cells (wang et al., 1999) and profibrotic (li et al., 2008; uhal et al., 2011) , and (b) by producing the peptide ang1-7, which inhibits the actions of ang ii through binding to the mas receptor (gopallawa and uhal, 2014) . in support of this protective role for ace2, pharmaceutical preparations of recombinant ace2, when administered to experimental animals, protect against lung cell death, inhibit acute lung injury and prevent lung fibrosis after chronic injury to the lungs (li et al., 2008; rey-parra et al., 2012) . as further evidence, the application of a specific competitive inhibitor of ace2, dx600, to primary cultures of isolated aces increases the level of ang ii released into the serum-free culture medium by autocrine mechanisms, reduces the amount of released ang1-7 and, importantly, induces apoptosis inhibitable by the at1 receptor blocker (menter et al., 2020) . thus, functional ace2 normally expressed by alveolar epithelial cells can be viewed as a critical survival factor for these lung cells. in addition, the enzymatic product of ace2, the ang1-7, itself protects against lung cells death by antagonizing that actions of ang ii (le tran and forster, 1997). if ang1-7 is applied to cultures of lung epithelial cells, it can prevent lung cell death in response to either ang ii or the er stress inducer mg132 (nguyen and uhal, 2016) . the ang1-7 receptor mas and the jnk-selective phosphatase mkp-2 appear to be critical in this protective action of ang1-7 response, becauses irnas or antisense knockdowns of mas or mkp-2 can eliminate the ability of ang1-7 to prevent lung cell death (gopallawa and uhal, 2016) . indeed, ang1-7 itself and congeners of the peptide, such as cyclic ang1-7 (gopallawa and uhal, 2016) , have already been shown to protect the lungs in preclinical models of acute lung injury (simoes e silva et al., 2013; gopallawa and uhal, 2014) .currently, there are no targeted drugs specifically against sars-cov-2. recent efforts have been put forward of drug repurposing by screening of various available antiviral agents with the aim to identify possible treatments. among those, lopinavir, originally used for treatment of human immunodeficiency virus, was identified to have potential antiviral activity against sars-cov-2. unfortunately, a randomized-controlled, openlabel trial involving hospitalized adult patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection showed no benefit of lopanavir . other studies suggested that remdesivir (gs5734) an inhibitor of rna polymerase, originally developed to treat ebola infections, has in vitro activity against multiple rna viruses, including sars-cov-2 (mulangu et al., 2019) . experimental data suggested that at micromolar concentration of remdesivir and chloroquine potentially blocked virus infection . current clinical trials are ongoing to assess the efficacy of remdesivir treatment alone or in conjunction with chloroquine in sars-cov-2 infection. because hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are considered inhibitors of endosomal trafficking of sars-cov-2, these drugs are used as potential therapeutics. both drugs are antimalarial drugs that are also used as antiinflammatory drugs in various autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, lupus erythematosus, and respiratory diseases such as sarcoidosis (martin et al., 2009; talreja et al., 2019) . despite the high media coverage, currently, there are no randomized clinical trials to support their efficacy against sars-cov-2 infection. however, it is conceivable that their efficacy may vary in different stages of virion life cycle and virus interaction with the host. these drugs may be beneficial in early stages of the infection, when the virus requires endosomal uptake. in fact, during the preparation of this manuscript, several non-randomized clinical trials have suggested a lack of significant efficacy of antimalarial drugs in the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection (magagnoli et al., 2020) .corticosteroids are the most conventional immunosuppressant drugs used to suppress inflammatory responses (cinatl et al., 2005) . although the who cautions of their use, they have been widely used despite lack of scientific data. furthermore, because of the high incidence of arterial hypertension, diabetes, and congestive heart failure in subjects with covid-19, corticosteroids should be used with caution. it is well-described that corticosteroids potentiate the effect of ang ii and ras (ullian et al., 1996) , hence it is less likely that corticosteroids provide any significant clinical benefit in this clinical scenario.considering the significant sars-cov-2 related risk factors for hospitalization and mortality among patients with metabolic diseases, including obesity, arterial hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, and diabetes that may reflect overall activation of the ras system, modulation of ras activation through the ace2/(ang1-7)/mas pathway should be considered for treatment of this disease. furthermore, our clinical observation and published clinical data suggest a unique clinical presentation of sars-cov-2 patients: most patients present with relatively preserved hemodynamics and lack of lactic acidosis. but they have respiratory distress, appear to be in a hypercoagulable state menter et al., 2020) , exhibit progressive renal failure , have stroke like features and myocardial injury . clinical observational studies indicate that in most cases the respiratory distress occurs many days (in general about 14 days) after the infection, suggesting that this may not be a direct effect of the initial viral infection but rather the hosts reaction to the loss of function of ace2 and dysregulation of ang ii/ace2 pathways as well activation of host proteases. our central hypothesis is that the binding of the coronavirus spike protein to ace2 leads to shedding of ace2 receptors by various proteases, which in turn leads to the loss of protective function of the ace2/mas axis in the lungs and other organs ( figure 1b) . in addition to the loss of protective function of ace2/mas, activation of classical pathway (ace/ras/ang ii) and alternative pathways through tissue specific proteases, including cathepsins, chymase-like proteases, leads to an excessive production of ang ii at the tissue level. this process may further shift the balance of protective ang (1-7)/mas and ace2 function to the detrimental effects of increased ang ii contributing to lung epithelial and endovascular injury. therefore, induction of the downstream pathway of ace2, by activating the ace2/ang1-7/mas axis may prove a useful strategy in preventing lung and cardiovascular damage associated with sars-cov-2 infections. because decreased ace2/mas activity augments the ang ii/at1r activity and its hazardous consequence on increased pulmonary vascular endothelial/epithelial injury and lung pathology. inhibiting the activity of proteases necessary for cleavage of viral spike proteins: for instance inhibition of enzymatic activity of adam17 and tmprss2 could serve as other novel therapeutic targets. this could potentially block viral interaction with the receptor and its entry into the cells. identification of specific proteases and development of inhibitors targeting proteases necessary for cleavage of spike proteins may prove to be viable. in addition, exploiting the protective effect of ang1-7 or its analogs, such as ave0991 ave0991 (pinheiro et al., 2004) against deleterious effect of increased ang ii is feasible and might be effective for the symptomatic treatment of these patients.based on the importance of ace2 as a counterbalance to the deleterious effects of ang ii, the loss of ace2 and ang(1-7) may be detrimental to the organism. surprisingly, little is known about the effect of sars-cov-2 virus binding to ace2 and how the viral binding on this receptor may modulate the ace2 enzymatic activity impact its role as a "survival factor." critical questions that are yet to be answered include: (1) what effect does sars-cov-2 binding to ace2 have on its enzymatic activity, and on its protective actions toward lung epithelial cells and lung injury? (2) what effect(s) does sars-cov-2 infection of lung epithelial cells/endothelial cells have on ace2 expression in the lungs and other organs? (3) do known inhibitors or activators of ace2 have any effect(s) on the binding of sars-cov-2 to the ace2 receptor and/or infection of lung epithelial cells? regardless, these are questions of fundamental importance to our understanding of sars-cov-2 biology that need to be answered soon.the original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors.the infectious disease caused by the new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus‐2 (sars‐cov‐2), covid‐19, broke out in wuhan, china, and spread to almost every country in the world. millions of people have been infected, many have died, and everyday life has changed completely. the disease is accompanied by range of different symptoms (figure 1). rapidly accumulating data show that prognosis for patients with covid‐19 is good in those with mild disease, but severe cases show relatively asymptomatic early progression followed by rapid worsening after symptom onset, culminating in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and significant disease manifestations (figure 2). the presence of sars‐cov‐2 has been detected in multiple organs on autopsy, including the pharynx, lungs, heart, liver, brain and kidneys, highlighting the multiorgan tropism of this virus. 1  early clinical experience suggested that older age and the presence of a number of comorbidities, including hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus and chronic respiratory disease increased the risk of death in patients with covid‐19. 2 ,  3  in addition, the renin‐angiotensin aldosterone (ras) system (specifically the angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 [ace2] protein) has been identified as playing an important role in facilitating entry of coronaviruses, including sars‐cov‐2, into target cells, especially in the lungs. 4 ,  5  therefore, it has been suggested that angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) and ace inhibitors, which affect ace2 expression, may influence the susceptibility to and severity of infection with sars‐cov‐2. 6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  11  hypertension is very common, affecting an estimated 1.39 billion individuals worldwide, 12  and the prevalence of hypertension increases with age (affecting approximately 70% of older adults). 13  in addition, ras inhibitors such as ace inhibitors and arbs are recommended and widely used for the treatment of hypertension. 14 ,  15 ,  16  however, hypertension is not a single clinical entity, but it instead manifests as a number of different phenotypes. in asians, the disease is characterized by salt sensitivity, high rates of masked hypertension, exaggerated morning bp surge, and nocturnal hypertension. 17  nearly half of all patients with hypertension worldwide (44%) live in south or east asia. 18  the hope asia network was established in 2016 and is a member of the world hypertension league. 19 ,  20  the mission of the hope asia network is to improve the management of hypertension and organ protection toward achieving “zero” cardiovascular events in asia. 19 ,  20  this has become even more relevant in the current pandemic, with high rates of infection in several asian countries.this guidance from the hope asia network summarizes the latest findings on covid‐19 and hypertension, including evidence‐based recommendations for the management of hypertension during the current pandemic.on march 20, 2020, the italian institute of health announced that there had been 3200 covid‐19 deaths in italy. 21  the patients who died had an average age of 78.5 years (median 80 years, range 31‐103 years) and 98.7% had at least one comorbidity. 21  hypertension was a common comorbidity in italian cases, affecting 73.8% of patients, 52% of whom were taking arbs or ace inhibitors. 21  however, there are number of factors that could potentially confound a possible relationship between hypertension and severe covid‐19 (table 1). 22 ,  23 ,  24 ,  25 ,  26 ,  27  the first is age: both severe covid‐19 and hypertension are common in the elderly. in addition, the identified risk factors (table 1) are generally associated with aging and/or vascular disorders, both of which are common in patients with hypertension. therefore, the risk of developing severe covid‐19 is more likely to be due to underlying vascular endothelial dysfunction and/or organ damage than high blood pressure (bp) per se. ace2 receptors are expressed by endothelial cells, 28  and post‐mortem examinations have detected the presence of viral infection in endothelial cells. 29  the spike protein on the surface of sars‐cov‐2 binds to the extracellular domain of transmembrane ace2, with s protein priming by transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2), to gain entry to host cells (figure 3). 4 ,  5 ,  30  ace2 plays a regulatory role in the ras, converting angiotensin i (ang i) into angiotensin 1‐9 (ang 1‐9) or angiotensin ii (ang ii) into angiotensin 1‐7 (ang 1‐7). 31 ,  32  currently, available data reflect a possible role for ace2 in heart failure, myocardial infarction, hypertension, and the cardiovascular complications of diabetes mellitus, and preclinical investigations suggest that activation of ace2 might have the potential to protect against hypertension and cardiovascular disease. 31 ,  33 ,  34 ,  35  in addition, angiotensin 1‐7 appears to counteract the negative effects of ang ii, attenuating inflammation, suppressing vascular permeability and having vasorelaxant effects. 36 ,  37 ,  38  furthermore, ace2 in the lungs and the renin‐angiotensin system has been shown to play a role in the pulmonary manifestations of coronavirus infection. 39  interaction of ang ii with angiotensin type 1 receptors (at1r) activates a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17) on the cell membrane via phosphorylation. 40  in turn, adam17 cleaves the precursors of tumor necrosis factor‐α (tnfα) and interleukin (il)‐6 receptor‐α (il‐6rα) in the cell membrane to release tnfα and soluble il‐6rα. 41  tnfα activates the nuclear transcription factor system nf‐κb to induce the production of various inflammatory cytokines, including il‐6 (figure 4). 42  this represents a potential mechanism for the cytokine storm seen in some patients with covid‐19 and highlights the potential for agents blocking cytokine pathways (especially the il‐6‐stat3 axis) in managing covid‐19‐related cytokine storm. 43  the fact that the sars‐cov‐2 virus uses ace2 as a mechanism to enter and infect cells meant that there was concern that cells with high ace2 expression would be most susceptible to infection with sars‐cov‐2. given that arb and ace inhibitors have been shown experimentally to increase expression of ace2 on cell membranes, 28 ,  44  there was much discussion about the potential for higher infection rates and more severe disease in patients being treated with these agents.despite the theoretical possibility that use of ras inhibitors increases the risk of infection with sars‐cov‐2 and the severity of covid‐19 illness, analyses including patients from the current pandemic indicate that this does not seem to be the case (table 2).the effect of hypertension or therapy with ace inhibitors or arbs has been evaluated in at least three published studies to date (table 2). 45 ,  46 ,  47  reynolds et al looked at history of antihypertensive usage in 12 594 patients undergoing covid‐19 testing in new york, usa. 47  they did not find any association between the use of ace inhibitors, arbs, beta‐blockers, calcium channel blockers or thiazide diuretics and the likelihood of a positive or negative result on covid‐19 testing. 47  also in the united states, mehta and colleagues failed to find any significant association between the use of ace inhibitors or arbs and covid‐19 test positivity. 46  similar findings were reported in a population case‐control study from italy. 45  data from four studies published by early may 2020 also failed to find a significant association between ras inhibitor use and worse outcomes in patients with covid‐19 (table 2). 48 ,  49 ,  50  in one retrospective case series, the proportion of patients using ace inhibitors or arbs did not differ significantly between those with severe vs non‐severe covid‐19, or between survivors and non‐survivors. 48  however, the in‐hospital covid‐19 mortality rate was higher in patients with vs without hypertension (21% vs 11%). 48  in the other studies, death rates for patients taking ace inhibitors and/or arbs were actually lower than those in patients not receiving these antihypertensive therapies. 49 ,  50  one of the studies from china reported that levels of the inflammatory markers high sensitivity c‐reactive protein and procalcitonin were significantly lower in patients with hypertension who were vs were not receiving ace inhibitors or arbs. 49  there are two possible mechanisms of cardiovascular damage in covid‐19. the first is direct viral infection of myocardial and vascular cells, and the other is a systemic inflammatory reaction (or cytokine storm) (figure 5). myocardial injury at the time of admission or due to disease progression is a strong indicator of poor prognosis in patients with covid‐19. troponin is a highly sensitive and well‐known marker of myocardial injury.a systematic review and meta‐analysis of data published between 1 december 2019 and 27 march 2020 including 4189 patients from 28 studies showed a significant trend for higher levels of cardiac biomarkers in patients with more severe covid‐19. 51  on meta‐regression analysis, the only factor significantly associated with higher levels of cardiac injury biomarkers was the presence of hypertension (p = .03). in addition, more severe covid‐19 markedly increased the risk of acute cardiac injury (risk ratio vs mild disease 5.99, 95% confidence interval [ci] 3.04‐11.80; p < .001). in turn, the risk of covid‐19‐related death was significantly increased in the presence of acute cardiac injury (risk ratio 3.85, 95% ci 2.13‐6.96). 51  another analysis also reported that patients with severe covid‐19 had significantly higher levels of troponin than those without severe disease (standardized mean difference 25.6 ng/l, 95% ci 6.8‐44.5 ng/l). 52  early data from wuhan, china, showed that 12% of patients admitted to hospital with covid‐19 had acute cardiac injury. 53  subsequent analyses investigated associations between underlying cardiovascular disease or myocardial injury and mortality in hospitalized patients with covid‐19 (n = 187). 23  patients with vs without myocardial injury (defined as elevated troponin levels) were significantly older (74 vs 60 years; p < .001) and more likely to have hypertension (59.8% vs 23.4%; p < .001). 23 ,  25  during hospitalization, those with myocardial injury had higher rates of ards (58.5% vs 14.7%; p < .001), acute renal injury (8.5% vs 0.3%; p < .001) and death (51.2% vs 4.5%; p < .001). the appearance of myocardial injury increased the risk of death by 4.26‐fold compared to patients without myocardial damage, independent of cardiac function based on ecg and echocardiography findings (figure 6). 23 ,  25  d‐dimer is a biomarker that reflects activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis. 54  d‐dimer levels of >2 µg/ml were an independent predictor of in‐hospital death in patients hospitalized with covid‐19 in wuhan, china (hazard ratio 51.5, 95% ci 12.9‐206.7; p < .001). 55  the 2 µg/ml cutoff had 92% sensitivity and 83% specificity for predicting in‐hospital mortality and therefore might be a useful biomarker for predicting outcome and informing treatment decisions in patients with covid‐19. the cumulative rate of thromboembolic events in patients admitted to hospital in milan, italy with covid‐19 (n = 388) was 21% (28% of those in intensive care and 7% for those not in intensive care) despite use of thromboprophylaxis in all patients admitted to the intensive care unit and three‐quarters of those treated on a general ward. 56  about half of all thromboembolic events occurred within 24 hours of hospitalization, and 2% of patients developed dic. 56  a consensus statement on the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism‐associated covid‐19 infection has been published. 57  this recommends that patients with covid‐19 undergo assessment for the risk of venous thromboembolism and bleeding and are monitored regularly to facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of venous thromboembolism, and the use of strategies (pharmacologic and/or mechanical) to prevent venous thromboembolism. 57  key points regarding the clinical management of covid‐19, particularly in patients with hypertension, based on evidence published before may 5, 2020, are shown in table 4.data that have been rapidly compiled during the pandemic to date indicate that there are a number of factors and biomarkers that can be used to identify patients with covid‐19 who are at high risk of more severe disease and adverse outcomes, including death. age seems to be the most important risk factor, especially for covid‐19‐related death, and hypertension is the most common comorbidity in covid‐19‐positive deceased patients. 21  other comorbidities such as cardiovascular diseases, smoking, chronic lung disease, chronic kidney disease, and a suppressed immune system also increase the risks associated with covid‐19 infection, especially when multiple comorbidities exist in the same patient. 21  thorough history taking and baseline assessments are therefore important. another important screening tool is oxygen saturation, which indicates severe disease if ≤94% on admission. 3 ,  58  the relevance of ability to tolerate hypoxia was highlighted in an analysis from china showing that covid‐19 patients of high‐altitude origin had a lower mortality risk than those from lower altitudes. 59  determination of relevant biomarkers, especially troponin and d‐dimer provides an indication of myocardial injury and thrombotic risk, and can help inform appropriate treatment strategies.for non‐hospitalized patients with covid‐19, ongoing management of comorbid conditions is essential to minimize risk. this includes lifestyle factors such as diet and sleep, along with maintaining regular medications (eg, antihypertensives and antidiabetics). patients with hypertension on current therapy with ace inhibitors or arbs can continue treatment without any negative effects on covid‐19 outcomes. ras inhibitors are particularly beneficial in patients who have heart failure or renal disease because they have a positive effect on prognosis. for older patients with hypertension and no other comorbidities and risk factors, calcium channel antagonists might be a good option for antihypertensive therapy. maintaining good glycaemic control is also important because this might help reduce the risk of infection with sars‐cov‐2 and the severity of covid‐19. 60  in addition, regular monitoring of home bp will help to ensure the achievement and maintenance of bp targets in patients with hypertension.lockdown requirements could impact on the ability of individuals to get regular exercise. regular exercise is important for maintaining health status 61  and to counteract the negative consequences of cardiovascular, metabolic, and respiratory diseases. 62  even if unable to get outside, continuing some form of home‐based exercise would be beneficial, especially in older adults. 63  maintaining regular exercise could help to ensure that the current viral pandemic does not contribute to the worldwide obesity epidemic, which in turn increases the rate of cardiovascular and metabolic comorbidities. 64  ensuring that the world population is not burdened by high rates of noncommunicable diseases might help lessen the impact of future pandemics given that patients with comorbidities tend to fare poorly during an infectious disease pandemic. 64  another potential benefit of physical activity is its ability to stimulate immune function, 65  something that is highly relevant during a global pandemic.health care professionals should also be aware of the potential non‐infectious impacts of covid‐19. for example, non‐infected individuals might be at risk of developing stress‐related physical health conditions (such as gastrointestinal disturbances and cardiovascular disease) and psychological disturbances (such as anxiety and depression).strict lockdown and social distancing rules are being enforced in many countries to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus. in addition, a large proportion of “elective” or “non‐essential” procedures have been postponed or canceled to allow health care systems to cope with the influx of infectious disease cases. this has created a requirement for a large proportion of health consultations to be conducted remotely. telemedicine strategies are ideally suited to facilitating patient management in the absence of face‐to‐face consultations, and the value of this approach (which has otherwise been slow to be widely used in clinical practice) has become clear. 66 ,  67  one of the hidden “blessings” of the covid‐19 pandemic may be the widespread adoption of telemedicine approaches to improve patient management.out‐of‐office bp monitoring is a recommended approach for the diagnosis and management of hypertension. 14 ,  15 ,  16 ,  68 ,  69 ,  70 ,  71 ,  72 ,  73 ,  74 ,  75  therefore, this field of medicine is better placed than many to be able to continue to effectively manage patients during a global pandemic.new information and communication technology‐based home bp monitoring devices that perform automatic, fixed‐interval bp measurement during sleep and store or transmit the data could facilitate a novel approach to patient management. 76  validated wearable technologies for evaluation of home bp 77 ,  78  might also be useful for patient monitoring and management during the covid‐19 outbreak. telemedicine‐based strategies for managing bp were implemented and used effectively during the aftermath of the great east japan earthquake and tsunami in march 2011, 79  highlighting their potential for use during the covid‐19 pandemic to ensure that patients with hypertension have well‐controlled bp. this has the potential to help mitigate the negative effects of hypertension on prognosis in patients with covid‐19.patients with hypertension are at increased risk of morbidity and mortality if they become infected with sars‐cov‐2, although this is confounded by other factors such as age and vascular disorders. however, all usual antihypertensive therapy including ras inhibitors should continue. physicians need to take a holistic approach to patient management due the wide range of possible complications, and biomarkers can provide important prognostic information. overall, multidisciplinary management of covid‐19 based on a rapidly growing body of evidence will help ensure the best possible outcomes for patients, including those with risk factors such as hypertension.all authors report no potential conflicts of interest in relation to this article.hypertension and diabetes are among leading causes of end-stage renal disease in most regions of the western world. moreover, they contribute to the progression of cardiovascular disease [1, 2] . angiotensin i-converting-enzyme (ace) inhibitors have been shown to have the broadest impact of any drug in cardiovascular medicine, reducing the risk of death, stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetes, and renal disease [2, 3] . ace inhibition results in direct cardiovascular protective effects by lowering levels of angiotensin ii (ang ii) and through increasing bradykinin availability. constant reduction of blood pressure is considered the most beneficial effect of ace inhibitors in both experimental and clinical studies of progressive diabetic and non-diabetic renal disease [4, 5] . in addition to important haemodynamic effects such as reduced systemic blood pressure and glomerular capillary pressure, inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) also produces important non-haemodynamic benefits such as stimulation of extracellular matrix degradation and blockade of macrophage/monocyte permeation of glomerular vascular beds [1] . hence, efforts have been focused on understanding the physiological role of ace, design of ace inhibitors, and its interaction with other components of the ras.angiotensin ii (ang ii), the principal effector of the ras, causes vasoconstriction both directly and indirectly by stimulating angiotensin type 1 (at1) receptors present on the vasculature and by increasing sympathetic tone and stimulating arginine vasopressin release. longterm, blood pressure is regulated by ang ii by modulating sodium and water reabsorption through direct stimulation of at1 receptors in the kidney, or indirectly through the production and release of aldosterone from the adrenal glands or thirst via a central action [6, for review]. the classical enzymatic pathway by which ang ii is formed begins with the cleavage of precursor angiotensinogen by renin, an aspartic proteinase, to the decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i). the cascade continues with ace cleaving a dipeptide from the c-terminus of ang i to form ang ii. the actions of ang ii are mediated via specific g-protein-coupled receptors. in humans, two angiotensin receptors have been described, at1 and at2, that bind ang ii with differing affinities [6] . angiotensin ii is further cleaved by a variety of enzymes to produce the bioactive angiotensin fragments, angiotensin iii (ang 2-8), angiotensin iv (ang 3-8) and angiotensin (1-7) {ang (1-7)} [7] . whilst this depiction ( figure 1 ) represents the ras described in textbooks, the role of these other angiotensin fragments, the enzymes (ace2, neprilysin (nep), aminopeptidase a, prolyl carboxypeptidase and prolyl endopeptidase) implicated in their formation and the identification of new angiotensin receptors (at4 and mas) have all been pivotal in redefining the ras in the last decade. of particular interest to this review is ace2, and its possible physiological roles in the control of blood pressure, renal disease and cardiac function. renin-angiotensin system. the last 10 years has seen the discovery of new components that interface with the classical depiction of the renin-angiotensin system and formation of its physiological end-product, angiotensin ii (encased in grey box). angiotensin ii is metabolised to several bioactive fragments, ang (1-7), ang iii and ang iv by different enzymatic pathways. ace, angiotensin converting enzyme; ace2, angiotensin converting enzyme 2; ap-a aminopeptidase a; ap-n, aminopeptidase n.ace2 is the first human homologue of ace to be described [8, 9] and is also now known to serve as a functional receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus [10] . to date, relatively little is known of the cell biology of ace2 or regulation of its expression in normal and pathological conditions. northern blot analysis revealed highest levels of ace2 expression in kidney, heart and testis [8, 9] . more extensive surveys have shown detectable levels of ace2 expression in other tissues, especially the gastrointestinal tract [11] . however, in human primary and transformed vascular and kidney cell lines examined to date, no abundant source of ace2 protein expression has emerged with ace2 levels generally being an order of magnitude lower than those of ace (f. j. warner and a. j. turner, unpublished observations). when expressed stably in human embryonic kidney cells, ace2 is found to be expressed predominantly at the cell-surface as an ectoenzyme, consistent with its existence, like ace, as a type i integral membrane peptidase ( figure 2 ). its cell-surface location is also consistent with its ability to be shed from the membrane as a soluble protein [9, d.w. lambert, n.m. hooper and a.j. turner, unpublished observations], as is ace [12] , and to serve as a viral receptor [10] .substrate specificity ace2 has been classified as a member of the m2 zinc metalloproteinase family along with somatic and testicular forms of ace. the 805 amino acid sequence of ace2 displays approximately 42% identity to human somatic ace in the regions surrounding the catalytic active sites [8] . unlike ace, however, ace2 contains only a single catalytic domain compared with the two active sites (n-and c-domains) of somatic ace. furthermore, ace2 is a carboxypeptidase rather than a peptidyl dipeptidase, being the first mammalian carboxypeptidase to be identified that contains the hexxh motif rather than the typical carboxypeptidase a-like motif, hxxe(x) 123-132 h. ace2 cleaves a single hydrophobic or basic residue from the c-terminus of a limited range of biologically active peptides [13, 14] . indeed, of 126 peptides tested, only 11 served as ace2 substrates in vitro under the assay conditions used [13] . as a consequence, the substrate specificity of ace2, and hence its physiological roles, differ from those of ace [15] , nor is ace2 inhibited by classical ace inhibitors such as captopril, lisinopril or enalaprilat, in vitro [8, 16] . two strategies have been used to develop selective inhibitors of ace2. dales et al. [17] employed a substrate-based design, whereas huang et al. [18] used peptide library selection using phage display technology. both strategies led to the identification of inhibitors of nanomolar potency against ace2 that did not affect ace activity. the recent solution of crystal structures for human ace2 ectodomain [19] and testicular ace (tace) [20] as well as comparative modelling of the ace2 active site [14] indicate the catalytic mechanism of ace2 closely resembles that of tace. however, differences in substrate specificity and inhibitor sensitivity suggest distinctive differences exist between the substrate binding subsites of ace2 and tace. ace2 cleaves a single amino acid from the c-terminus of its substrates, whereas ace functions as a peptidyl dipeptidase. the basis for this difference relates primarily to the specificity pocket (s2 0 subsite) and binding of the substrate c-terminus. in ace2, the s2 0 subsite is smaller as a result of the r273 þ q substitution and is only able to accommodate one amino acid instead of a second terminal peptide bond, as compared with that of tace [14, 19] . the action of ace inhibitors such as captopril and lisinopril, is based, in part, upon their ability to mimic the dipeptidyl c-terminal binding of ace substrates [3] .amongst the substrates cleaved efficiently by ace2 are angiotensin ii, dynorphin a(1-13) and the apelin peptides, apelin-13 and apelin-36. angiotensin i, des-arg 9 -bradykinin, b-casomorphin, and ghrelin are also hydrolysed by ace2, although to a lesser extent [13, 14] . the n-domain specific ace substrate and haemoregulatory peptide, n-acetyl-ser-asp-lys-pro [21] , and the vasodilator bradykinin are not cleaved by ace2, although (des-arg 9 )-bradykinin is an ace2 substrate in vitro [13] . hence, it is possible that ace2 may terminate the in vivo actions of (des-arg 9 )-bradykinin, which is the endogenous ligand of the bradykinin b 1 receptor [more detail 15] . some of the differences in substrate specificity between ace and ace2 are summarised in table 1 . pertaining to the ras, two angiotensin fragments produced through ace2 cleavage of either ang ii or ang i are ang (1-7) and ang (1-9), respectively. of these two pathways, the conversion of ang ii to ang (1-7) by ace2 is kinetically substantially more favourable both in vitro [13, 14, 16, 22] and in vivo in humans [23] . studies in vitro show ace2 to be 10-to 600-fold more potent in hydrolysing ang ii to ang (1-7) than prolyl endopeptidase and prolyl carboxypeptidase [24] . it is hence this ability of ace2 to form ang (1-7), a vasodilator, that has attracted most attention. there is increasing evidence to suggest that the majority of effects produced by the heptapeptide, ang (1-7) are in counteracting the pressor, proliferative and profibrotic actions of ang ii and thereby providing a mechanism for ang ii counter-regulation [25] . these effects include vasodilatation, anti-proliferation [26, 27] , increased baroreflex sensitivity [28] , potentiation of bradykinin activity at b2 receptors [25, 29, 30, 31, for review] and inhibition of c-domain ace activity [32] . it should also be noted that in addition to the ang ii counter-regulatory effects of ang (1-7), this peptide has been shown to produce effects that are either similar [33, 34, 35, 36] or distinct from those of ang ii [37, 38] .santos and co-workers [39] have recently demonstrated that ang (1-7) is the endogenous ligand (1-7) continues to be generated by non-ace pathways ( figure 1 ) [40, 41] . future investigations are now required to decipher which of the known ang (1-7) effects can be attributed to interaction with the mas receptor.within the ras, it is hypothesised that ace2 generates ang (1-7) through hydrolysis of ang ii, thereby maintaining a state of normal tension by limiting the vasopressor effects of ang ii as well as its hypertrophic and pro-oxidative effects. it should also be noted that the bioavailability of ang i is also a regulatory step in the formation of ang ii. in normal subjects, an inverse correlation between ang (1-7) and arterial pressure has been reported [42] . several authors have speculated that ace2 may be an important regulator of blood pressure homeostasis and contribute to the pathophysiology of essential hypertension [43, 44] . this suggestion is based upon genetic studies [43, 45] , as well as data obtained both in vitro and in vivo [18, 43, 46] . in humans, the ace2 gene is located in a region of the x chromosome (xp22) [8] . on the rat x chromosome, the ace2 gene maps to a defined quantitative trait locus (qtl) that is associated with hypertension and has been previously identified in rat models of spontaneous or diet-induced hypertension [43] . this observation suggests ace2 may be a candidate gene for this hypertension-related qtl. furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphisms have been identified in the ace2 locus and were associated with a number of cardiovascular endpoints: percutaneous transliminal coronary angioplasty, coronary artery bypass grafting, myocardial infarction and catheterisation in patients with > 70% stenosis [45] , but not essential hypertension [62] .in rat models of hypertension, the levels of kidney ace2 mrna and protein expression is markedly lower than that observed in normotensive controls [43] . based upon the hypothesis mentioned above, reduced levels of ace2 increase ang ii availability and reduce ang (1-7) formation, and therefore lead to an increase in blood pressure. this trend is observed in vitro in hypertensive rat models. the baseline systolic blood pressure of salt-sensitive sabra hypertensive rats (sbh/y) is 10-15 mm hg higher compared to that of the control salt-resistant sabra normotensive rats (sbn/y). upon salt-loading a further decrease in ace2 expression in conjunction with an increase in systolic blood pressure is observed, whilst no change is noted in control animals. a further example of this trend is also reported in spontaneously hypertensive rats (shr) and stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat strains (shrsp), which present hypertension without any obvious external stimulus. shr and shrsp consistently have reduced kidney ace2 expression compared to those levels seen in wistar-kyoto control rats [43] .whilst both genetic and in vitro data follow this apparent trend quite closely, the data produced from in vivo ace2 knockout mice are less obvious. in ace2 -/mice, allred and co-workers [46] reported higher systolic blood pressures (5 mm hg) in ace2 null mice than in control littermates. this increase in blood pressure is further exacerbated by chronic infusion with ang ii. this reported increase in blood pressure, although only preliminary data published in an abstract form [46] , is consistent with findings in the sabra model in which sbh/y rats with lower ace2 expression have a higher baseline blood pressure [43] . furthermore, allred et al. [46] also observed three-fold higher ang ii levels in the serum of ace2 null mice compared to control mice following ang ii infusion. this observation is in accord with the current hypothesis that ace2 regulates the level of ang ii in vivo and maintains blood pressure homeostasis. in contrast, no change in blood pressure was observed in 3-month old ace2 null mice compared with control littermates, despite there being an increase in kidney, heart and plasma ang ii levels [43] . at 6 months old, ace2 null mice of both genders displayed impaired heart function, which in male mice coincided with a slight reduction in blood pressure. this result highlights a gender-specific effect of x-linked ace2 on the cardiovascular system, but secondly suggests other genetic factors may also contribute to the effects of ace2. the aetiology of essential hypertension is considered multi-factorial being influenced by genetic as well as environmental factors. the somewhat contradictory results of these two knockout mouse studies by allred et al. [46] and crackower et al. [43] may originate from differences in the genetic make-up, which greatly influences the phenotype of gene knockouts.to add further confusion to the above hypothesis, the blocking of ace2 activity via intravenous bolus injection (3 mg/kg) of the selective ace2 inhibitor, dx512 (k i , 139 nm) in conscious shr produces a dose-dependent depressor response [18] . this response was characterised by a decreased mean arterial pressure (maximal average depressor response 70.5 mm hg from an average mean arterial pressure 155 mm hg) and reflex tachycardia [18] . these experiments warrant further investigation since they disagree with both the in vitro studies in shr rats [43] and in vivo data discussed above showing either an increase or no change in systolic blood pressure [43, 46] . it may be possible that this inhibitor is potentiating the effects of a substrate other than ang ii. for instance, apelin-13 is hydrolysed by ace2 with comparable kinetics to ang ii [13] and has been shown to produce hypotensive effects and increase water intake [47, 48] , through interaction with its endogenous receptor, apj (a putative receptor related to at1 and a co-receptor for the hiv-1 virus) [49] . overall, this contradiction of results in vivo between ace2 gene ablation and the effect of an ace2 inhibitor provides an excellent example of fundamental differences that exist between knockout animals, which have never produced ace2 and may have developed compensatory mechanisms, and animals in which ace2 is inhibited for only a short span of time.in the kidney, ace2 displays a similar localisation pattern to that observed for ace being primarily localised to both distal and proximal renal tubules and rarely to glomerular cells in rats and humans [9, 50, 51, 52] . whilst it is hypothesised that ace2 may regulate blood pressure through conversion of ang ii to ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) , it is unclear if ace2 has an important role in renal function and homeostasis. two studies have emerged investigating a role for ace2: the first in diabetes [51] and the second in the production of ang (1-7) during pregnancy [52] . in the animal models studied by tikellis et al. [51] and brosnihan et al. [52] , there was an absence of hypertension, suggesting ace2 may have a role in the local production of ang (1-7) and in the intrarenal ras within the kidney. moreover, these studies provide the first evidence of the presence of ace2 activity within the kidney. in a rat model of diabetic nephropathy, gene and protein expression of tubule ace2 were observed to decrease in line with ace [51] . however, for both ace2 and ace there was an increase in protein expression in diabetic glomeruli [51] . this finding is in keeping with the observation that ace is redistributed towards glomeruli and renal vasculature and away from the proximal tubules in diabetic rat and human kidney [53, 54] . furthermore, this may suggest a role for glomerular ace, and possibly ace2, in mediating nephron injury by increasing intraglomerular ang ii formation. intrarenal expression of ang ii is increased in diabetic nephropathy despite suppression of the systemic ras [55] . an increase in glomerular ace may explain this increase in ang ii, despite there being a decrease in tubule ace. the study by brosnihan et al. [52] also supports the concept for an intrarenal ras and presents data suggesting ace2 has a prominent role in local production of ang-(1-7) during pregnancy. nevertheless, further study of ace2 and its involvement in both systemic and local ras systems is required.the contribution of ace2 to cardiac function, ventricular remodelling and heart failure whilst the majority of research has concentrated on a possible role for ace2 in hypertension and counteracting the actions of ace, a new field of research has emerged identifying a role for ace2 in cardiac function, especially ventricular remodelling and heart failure. the first evidence that ace2 may have a role in cardiac function was demonstrated by crackower et al. [43] where the genetic ablation of ace2 in mice resulted in a severe heart contractility defect, increased levels of ang ii in the kidney, heart and plasma and an up-regulation of hypoxia-induced genes in the heart. these findings led to the suggestion that ace2 is an essential regulator of heart function [43] . however, it remains unclear if the ras is involved in mediating this heart dysfunction. studies where the ras has been either blocked by ace inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists suggest the involvement of the ras in the regulation of heart function and cardiac hypertrophy [56] . neither ace, angiotensinogen nor at1 receptor null mice show any defects in heart development and function [57, for review]. however, when ace is also ablated alongside ace2 in mice, the cardiac phenotype of this double knockout is restored to that of wild-type littermates. it seems likely that a product of ace may be responsible for the cardiac impairment observed in ace2 null mice [43] . however, current literature would tend to suggest ang ii is not responsible for this cardiac defect, since ang ii promotes myocardial fibrosis and cardiac hypertrophy [58] . further study of the effects of ang ii or the role of other candidate substrates is required.both the ras and ang ii are key factors in ventricular remodelling associated with heart failure [59, for review] . in contrast to the ace2 knockout study by crackower et al. [43] , cardiomyocyte-specific overexpression of ace2 in mouse heart results in conduction disturbances and lethal ventricular arrhythmias. these outcomes were in association with a down-regulation of connexins, suggesting that overexpression of ace2 disrupts gap junction formation [60] . whilst there does not appear to be a clear link between the ras and the loss of cardiac function observed in ace2 null mice, ang ii has been implicated in gap junction dysregulation and development of conduction disturbances, which are thought to lead to lethal ventricular remodelling in heart failure [61] . investigations of ace2 and its role in cardiac function and heart failure will no doubt provide greater insight into the roles of this novel enzyme.since the first descriptions of ace2 in 2000 [8, 9] , information has rapidly accumulated on its possible functions from a variety of biochemical, genetic and physiological studies, yet much remains to be learned. it is clear that ace2 has important roles in heart function, and possibly in blood pressure regulation and diabetes. it has also been identified as a sars receptor. hence, the diversity of its biological roles is perhaps the most surprising discovery in relation to this novel enzyme. it is now important to provide a much fuller description of the expression sites of the enzyme and the regulation of this expression. the identification of physiologically relevant peptide substrates, other than angiotensin ii, is critical to a greater understanding of ace2 biology. finally, the involvement of ace2 in human pathologies needs to be critically evaluated and its potential as a therapeutic target exploited where possible.[abstract]debate continues in the medical literature on the role of the renin angiotensin system (ras) in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pathophysiology and the implications for the use of cardiovascular drugs acting on the ras. could these drugs -which include angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin receptors blockers (arbs) -be harmful or potential key therapeutic agents in covid- 19? debate has arisen due to the finding that underlying cardiovascular disease and hypertension are associated with significantly increased risk of hospitalisation and death in covid-19 [1, 2] , in addition to the viral receptor being angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) [3 -5] . coronaviruses downregulate ace-2 anti-inflammatory actions leading to imbalance in ace:ace-2 [4] which may be fundamental in covid-19 pathophysiology. key gender and genetic differences in the regulation of ace:ace-2 balance [6] [7] [8] may explain differences observed in disease severity [2, 9, 10] .social media amplification of concern about continuation of ras medications during the current pandemic prompted cardiovascular societies to publish position statements strongly advising continued use, given a lack of evidence that ras drugs were unsafe and the substantial risk of hospitalisation when these drugs are withdrawn from patients with valid indications for treatment [11, 12] . three (3) large observational studies published in the new england journal of medicine (nejm] now support the view that there is no evidence for harm due to ras medications in covid-19 [10, 13, 14] .however, given the fundamental role of the (ras) in covid-19, a broader therapeutic indication for acei and arbs, over and above treatment of patients with established cardiovascular indications has been suggested [15, 16] but is yet to be tested in randomised trials. vitamin d status may also be linked to the ras impacts of covid-19, as vitamin d is a negative regulator of renin synthesis, and a small study has reported high rates of vitamin d deficiency in covid patients requiring intensive care [17] . both vitamin d and ace have a role in the immune system, which may add a complex dimension to the issue of ras drugs and vitamin d status in covid-19 [18, 19] .covid-19 has a more severe course in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease [1, 2, 10] and causes a significant rate of cardiovascular events [20] . further research is required to define the pathological mechanisms and the basis for the observed gender, age, and racial differences in severity. ras medications can be used with greater confidence in covid-19 patients with valid indications for their use, but a broader role for manipulation of the ras in covid-19 will require randomised trial data.coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-19) is believed to gain cell entry via viral spike protein binding to the ace-2 receptor [3, 4] . virology research for other similar coronaviruses indicates that viral cell infection is followed by rapid downregulation of ace-2 [4, 5] . the ace-2 system is the yang of the yin-yang balance of the ras hypertension system. ace-2 is a zinc metalloprotease, discovered in 2000 [21] , which mainly breaks down angiotensin ii (ang ii), the main effector of the ras system, to ang(1-7), resulting in a decrease in blood pressure, vasoconstriction and decreased inflammation. ace-2 is usually membrane bound but is shed in covid infection, in acute lung injury and myocardial infarction [16] . whilst the role of circulating ace-2 is unclear, conditions such as advanced heart failure have higher plasma ace-2 proportional to worsening clinical status [22, 23] . serum ace-2 levels are also significantly higher in hypertensive patients [23] and gender differences are described with up to 50% greater levels in male patients [23] . there is debate as to whether the observed higher levels in male, hypertensive, and diabetic patients are related to increased ace-2 expression as a compensatory mechanism, or whether it is due to increased ace-2 shedding, limiting tissue ace-2 activity and causing excess tissue ang ii. the role of circulating, versus tissue, ace-2 levels in susceptibility to covid infection is unclear [24] . in viral downregulation of ace-2, unopposed ace generates high ang ii causing increased bp, vasoconstriction, inflammation and cell damage. to exacerbate matters, the active metabolite generated by ace-2, ang(1-7), can be broken down by ace itself, accentuating the ras imbalance caused by covid-19 [21] (figure 1 ). covid-19 is highly contagious spreading from one province, in december 2019, to the whole of china in 30 days, despite extreme shutdown measures [2] . by may 2020, the disease has infected 3,392,718 people with 239,178 deaths worldwide [9] and is causing enormous global economic and social impacts. epidemiology for 72,314 confirmed, suspected and asymptomatic cases in china suggested mild disease in 81%, with 2.3% fatality overall [2] . early mortality figures in different countries have shown striking differences, with greater mortality in europe, compared to asian countries [9] , which may relate to fundamental differences in racial ace and ace-2 polymorphisms, impacting both susceptibility to the disease and subsequent pathological severity. population demographics clearly play a role with elderly patients at greatest risk of severe disease and death. key differences in the speed of government actions to implement extensive public health measures, as recommended by the world health organization (who), have also impacted mortality rates as hospitals in some countries have been overwhelmed by a rapid rise in cases.why do 81% of cases have a mild disease and yet 19% have a more severe disease? the chinese center for disease control and prevention (ccdc) epidemiology showed that there was an overall mortality of 2.3% [2] . the death rate increased with age and with co-morbidities, particularly cardiovascular disease (13.2%), diabetes (9.2%) and hypertension (8.4%), all the risk factors typically seen in those with "metabolic syndrome". whilst it is clear that co-morbidities and age increase mortality, what is not clear is whether this excess is due to the impact of the co-morbid conditions on host inflammatory response alone, or to the impact of a treatment some of this patient group is taking [25] . since the ras system is fundamentally involved in covid-19 pathogenesis, there was great speculation that drugs widely used in hypertension and heart failure treatment, acting on the ras, may impact disease severity, with some suggesting a protective effect [15, 16] and others concerned about potential harm [24] . these drugs include arbs, aceis and the combination drug valsartan/sacubitril (entresto) which combines an arb with a neprilysin inhibitor (also known as an angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor [arni]). whilst there is evidence that acei and arb treatment may increase expression of ace-2 in some tissues in animal models, data supporting or quantifying this effect in human subjects at clinical doses of ras medications is lacking [24] . hence the relevance of possible medication-induced alteration in ace-2 levels, over and above the welldescribed significant differences in circulating levels of ace-2 in advanced heart failure, hypertension, males and diabetics, and the implications for covid-19 severity, is unclear [22, 23, 25] . increased ace-2 was speculated to increase susceptibility to covid-19 by allowing more virus into cells which, in turn, may exacerbate disease severity. the counter argument is that, once infected, having more ace-2 could be protective against viral attack and downregulation of the ace-2 antiinflammatory system [26, 27] . three (3) large observational studies reported in the nejm have now examined this issue and found no evidence for increased risk of adverse outcomes in covid-19 patients taking acei or arbs [10, 13, 14] adding weight to previously reported smaller retrospective clinical studies [28] [29] [30] which also showed no excess mortality for acei/arbs. mehra et al. [10] reported data for 8,910 patients admitted with covid-19 in 169 hospitals in europe, asia and north america, and confirmed that age, coronary disease, heart failure, cardiac arrhythmia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and current smoking were all associated with increased in-hospital mortality but there was no increased risk of mortality associated with risk of acei or arbs. they did find that use of acei and statins was more common in survivors, however this was not randomised data. a multicentre chinese study of 1,128 hospitalised patients with covid-19 and pre-existing hypertension showed a death rate of 3.7% in those on acei or arb versus 9.8% in non-users (p=0.03). the data was observational and not randomised, but even after adjustment for confounding variables a lower mortality, with a hazard ratio of 0.37 (p=0.03) persisted for those receiving acei/arbs, with a hr of 0.3 (p=0.03) compared to use of other antihypertensive agents [28] . the study did not separate treatment with arbs from acei [29] .the answer to observed differences in covid-19 death rates could lie in key differences in the ace:ace-2 system balance related to age, gender and racial variation in genetic ace and ace-2 polymorphisms and environmental factors influencing ace-2 expression [6, 31) . there are ace gene polymorphisms that cause insertion (i) or deletion (d) of a sequence of the gene, and ace activity levels in dd carriers are approximately twice that found in ii genotypes [7] . the possible impact of ace genotype in the covid-19 disease state, when the ability to breakdown ang ii is impaired, could be hypothesised to cause a greater quantity of circulating ang ii and a more marked imbalance of the ras and more severe disease. genetic and environmental factors influencing ace-2 expression could also result in differences in the risk of becoming infected in the first place by affecting the affinity of the ace-2 binding domain for the viral spike protein and by causing differences in the density of ace-2 receptors present in tissues such as the lungs. ace-2 polymorphisms may then contribute to significant differences in disease severity by determining the extent of the ace:ace2 imbalance, particularly in the endothelium of the lungs, where the virus attacks at the same time as disabling the ace2-mediated repair systems.chen and co-workers (2020) [8] have analysed 30 tissues in thousands of individuals and found significantly higher tissue ace-2 in asian females compared to males and other ethnic groups. they have described an age-dependent decrease in ace-2 expression and a highly significant decrease in type ii diabetic patients. the loci for higher ace-2 expression is almost 100% in east asians and >30% higher than other ethnic groups. ace-2 is suppressed by inflammatory cytokines, by diabetes and induced by oestrogen and androgen, both of which are decreased in the elderly. the work by chen and co-workers suggests a negative correlation between covid-19 mortality and tissue ace-2 levels, at both a population and molecular level [8] . circulating ace-2, however, has been described to increase in pathological states such as hypertension, diabetes and heart failure and perhaps differences in circulating, shed ace-2 and tissue-bound ace-2 are key in virus susceptibility and subsequent disease severity.gender differences in ace-2 ace-2 is on the x chromosome, hence men have only one allele and women have two [6, 31] . further to this, oestrogen is believed to upregulate ace-2 expression [32] , giving pre-menopausal women the advantage of two alleles and oestrogen upregulation, making a deficiency of ace-2 and its ability to rally less likely in the event of a viral attack. in support of this hypothesis, the chinese cdcc reported overall female mortality of 1.7% including suspected cases as well as serologically confirmed cases versus 2.8% in males. this difference was more marked in serologically confirmed cases, 2.8% female versus 4.7% male mortality. the overall ratio was 1.06 males to 1.0 females believed infected [2] . hence the men were not significantly less likely to become infected, just more likely to have a more severe pathophysiological expression of the disease. whilst the who suggested [9] that these gender differences may be driven by substantially greater rates of smoking in the chinese male population, the rates of smoking in the covid-19 cases were not provided in the epidemiological study. the x-linked nature of the ace2 gene, with females having a greater range of phenotypes, may have a greater role than has been yet been fully defined in coronavirus pathogenesis gender differences. the range of ace-2 phenotypes and their ability to upregulate compensatory mechanisms in the face of viral ace-2 downregulation may play a role. marked gender differences in disease have been confirmed in other large observational studies with marcia et al reporting 37% women in 6,232 patients with covid and mehra et al. reported 40% female patients in 8,910 covid-19 patients requiring hospital admission and furthermore reported improved survival in female patients, independent of older age [10] .serum ace-2 levels are reported to be significantly lower in females [23] and there are fundamental differences in immune responses to viral infections based on gender with stronger humoral and cellular immune responses described in females [33] .smoking has been linked to upregulation of ace and downregulation of ace-2 [34] , which could be hypothesised to make smokers less likely than the general population to become infected by virtue of having less ace-2 required for viral entry. however, if a smoker becomes infected, a pre-existing ace:ace-2 imbalance may result in more severe disease due to greater inflammation, higher risk of ards and multi-factorial issues including poor baseline lung function and bacterial superinfection. evidence supporting this picture is seen in data from wuhan. although smokers are said to comprise 52.1% of the male population in china [9] , the rate of current smokers reported in covid-19 series seems well below this; 7% by huang et al. [ due to the extreme complexity of the ras system, another component may be relevant in causing greater mortality in smokers with covid-19. neprilysin is a metalloprotease that has a number of functions but can act to breakdown ang ii to ang(1-7) 4 , the role usually performed by ace-2. it is highly expressed in airways, pulmonary interstitium and alveolar cells. a study examining circulating neprilysin levels in 1,536 community-based subjects >45 years, found that the lowest tertile group had the highest rates of smokers (p<0.001) and higher rates of hypertension (p=0.04) [38] . if smokers have low lung neprilysin activity, they may lack an important safety mechanism that could overcome virally mediated loss of the ace-2. this might be relevant in patients taking entresto (sacubitril/valsartan), a medication with proven benefit in the treatment of patients with heart failure. neprilysin inhibition by the sacubitril component of entresto may block the alternate method of generating the anti-inflammatory mediator (1-7) when ace-2, under viral attack, is less able to do so. clearly this is a complex question, impossible to answer without more data and even recently reported observational studies did not have sufficient patients taking entresto to report on the safety of this drug in covid-19 [10, 14, 22] .reports from china showed that patients with severe disease, leading to intensive care unit (icu) admission and death, had features consistent with unopposed ras activity, such as higher blood pressure (bp) on admission to hospital and higher bp on admission to icu in non-survivors [1, 35] , with a mean systolic bp of 145 mmhg in those requiring icu admission versus 122 mmhg in milder cases (p=0.018) [35] . lower serum potassium levels, combined with high urinary potassium has also been reported in more severe patients [39, 40] , suggesting ang ii-mediated activation of aldosterone. the presence of significant hypertension, instead of hypotension, in a group of patients admitted to icu versus those not requiring icu, is a particularly interesting clinical finding with implications for the pathogenesis of covid-19. excess ras activity without ace-2 balance to break down ang ii and block adverse effects, such as cellular damage and fibrosis, may play a key role in determining disease severity, similar to the ras pro-inflammatory effects well known to contribute to heart failure ( figure 2 ). autopsy data published for four covid-19 patients [41] has described platelet rich clot formation occluding small vessels and a microangiopathic picture, consistent with virally mediated vascular damage. the ace:ace-2 imbalance caused by viral ace-2 downregulation understanding the ace:ace-2 imbalance in covid-19, its role in age, gender and racial differences in disease severity, and the difference between tissue bound and circulating ace-2, could all prove key in treating this disease. in support of the fundamental ace:ace-2 imbalance having clinical relevance, it has been reported that serum ang ii levels are indeed significantly elevated in covid-19 and correlate with both viral load and lung injury [42, 43] . whilst ace formation of ang ii can be blocked by ace inhibitors, up to 40% of ang ii is formed via non-ace pathways such as chymase [4] , making ace inhibitors potentially less effective than arb blockers in diminishing the problem of the excess ang ii, since the acei may only block 60% formation of the ang ii. on the other hand, the arbs are highly selective blockers of the main receptor for the ang ii, the angiotensin receptor type 1 (at 1 ) receptor. arbs do not decrease the amount of ang ii produced in the first place, but by blocking the at 1 receptors they activate a key counter regulatory anti-inflammatory cascade to restore the ace:ace-2 balance. the excessive circulating ang ii, unable to bind blocked at 1 receptors, binds at2 receptors which trigger counter-regulatory anti-inflammatory actions and upregulates ace-2 expression [15] to remove excessive circulating ang ii. a protective role of increased tissue ace-2 expression seems plausible since groups with higher levels such as younger people, premenopausal women and possibly asian populations [8] do seem to have lower disease severity and mortality [2, 9] compared to european populations with an older population and high rates of co-morbidities such as diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease, all of which have been described as having higher circulating ace-2 levels, due to increased ace-2 shedding. it has been pointed out that in another rna virus, human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), higher expression of binding sites such as cd4 actually protected from, rather than increased, virulence [15] .males have only one x-linked ace-2 allele and could be more vulnerable to phenotypes causing impaired ace-2 regulation. patients with pre-existing hypertension may have a greater frequency of the ace polymorphisms that result in excessive ang ii levels, exacerbated by viral impairment of ang ii clearance. covid-19 is a disease where a major battlefront is at the endothelium, fought by the tissue ras. there have already been cases reported in the media of families tragically affected by very high rates of severe disease and mortality, in line with genetic factors playing a significant role in covid-19 pathophysiology [44] .coronaviruses directly impact cellular systems, other than the ras, which are important in inflammatory pathways. rna viruses remodel host membranes and lipid metabolism creating a suitable environment for their replication [45] . lipid metabolism pathways are impacted in corona virus infection, with glycerophospholipids and fatty acids significantly elevated in sars cov-229e infected cells. up-regulated phosphatidylinositol (pi) may promote coronavirus entry [46] . covid-19 is associated with cardiac events and significant serum troponin level elevation in a clinical setting [36] and elevated lysophospholipids, including lp1, have been reported in acute coronary syndromes from other causes, undergoing coronary angiography [47] .hcov-229e infection up-regulates fatty acids, believed to promote efficient coronavirus replication. however, yan and co-workers [46] reported that exogenous addition of fatty acids may interfere with viral replication by upsetting the delicate balance of fatty acids, causing reversion of lysophospholipids into phospholipids, limiting viral replication. it is possible that the manipulation of fatty acids in a clinical setting may upset the balance needed for viral replication. use of drugs such as statins may also impact viral ability to harness cellular lipid pathways. clearly more data is needed to investigate the role of fatty acid and cholesterol manipulation. the finding that statins decrease in-hospital mortality, even in a non-randomised study [10] , is of interest.long term sequelae of sars, caused by a related coronavirus (sars co-v), have been reported in follow-up studies in survivors out to 15 years. these include sleep disturbance, characterised by increased stage 2 sleep percentage, diffuse myalgia, chronic fatigue, depression, lung damage and avascular femoral head necrosis [48] [49] [50] .deranged lipid metabolism has also been reported in sars survivors. lipid metabolites, including phosphatidylinositol (pi) and lysophosphatidylinositol (lpi), are associated with cellular entry and/or egress of respiratory viruses. lpis and pis were markedly upregulated in recovered sars patients. lpis are thought to have a critical role in glucose homeostasis. a large proportion of the recovered sars patients reported glucose metabolic disorders, including hyperinsulinaemia, insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia, and type 1 or 2 diabetes [49] . patients who died of sars were found to have extensive lung damage as well as features of systemic vasculitis. autoantibodies against human epithelial and endothelial cells can develop after sars-cov infection and this could explain the severe deterioration in some patients in phase ii of the disease and may lead to post-infectious cellular injury and sars-induced immunopathology in survivors [51] . this long-term immunopathology could also be a risk in covid-19, a related virus which also acts to inflame the endothelium and, due to gender differences in immune function, female survivors may be at greater risk to autoimmune mediated sequelae [33] .immune system role of vitamin d and ace vitamin d deficiency can be related to immune system dysfunction [18] and inflammation, and can cause a pro-thrombotic state; it is common in europe in winter. vitamin d is a potent negative endocrine regulator of the ras and works predominantly by suppressing renin synthesis [52] . vitamin d deficiency and genetic and geographical variation in its function may be another factor contributing to greater imbalance of the ace:ace-2 system leading to differences in disease severity in covid- 19 . it has been suggested that vitamin d supplementation could reduce the risk of covid-19 infection and death [53] . lau et al. [17] reported a small study of vitamin d levels in 20 patients which is yet to be peer reviewed. they described vitamin d deficiency in 84.6% of covid-19 patients in icu and 57.1% of patients admitted to a ward bed. they found that 100% of patients under age 75 admitted to icu had vitamin d deficiency (n=11).ace is best known for its role in blood pressure regulation by converting angiotensin i to ang ii, but in fact it cleaves many peptides and has a role in innate and adaptive immune responses, with ace expressed on both neutrophils and macrophages. the role of ace in immune responses and inflammation is complex and includes defence against intracellular pathogens, mediated via actions that are not dependent on ang ii, as reviewed by bernstein and co-workers [18] . these complex interactions mean that acei and arbs may not have the same impacts in covid-19, a disease impacting both haemodynamic and inflammatory pathways.many agents are under investigation or in clinical trial for the treatment of covid-19 but so far no anti-viral drugs or vaccine has been officially approved for covid-19 treatment. hundreds of trials are listed in the who covid-19 trial data base (www.who.int international clinical trials registry). a small trial using hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin showed some promise in decreasing viral carriage to only 3 to 6 days [54] , an improvement on 20 days reported from china [1] . this combination could, however, carry a risk of arrhythmia due to long qt, in a group of patients where abnormal troponins and endothelial dysfunction can be present, with some arrythmias reported in china [1] . longer trials will be needed.preliminary clinical data for the investigational rna antiviral agent, remdesivir, did not show a survival benefit in a study of 237 patients in china but did show a trend to earlier recovery [55] , and the adaptive covid-19 treatment trial (actt) a study of 1,063 patients with lung involvement in the usa has not yet been peer reviewed but a press release from the national institutes of health (nih) [56] reports a 31% faster recovery time (p<0.001) of 11 versus 15 days and possibly a trend to a survival benefit with 8% versus 11.6% mortality (p=0.059).a variety of therapeutic approaches, in addition to a vaccine, may contribute to covid-19 treatment and prevention in the medium and long term. however, in the current more urgent situation there are 2,075,668 active cases and 51,332 (2%) are serious or critical, with many countries still in the exponential rise phase of new cases. treatment that can be distributed in large quantities is needed if the economic impact of this pandemic is to be addressed.a meta-analysis of cardiac troponin results in covid patients reported that higher levels correlated with more severe disease [20] . this is consistent with either myocarditis or an acute coronary syndrome, conditions for which manipulation of the ras with commonly available drugs, already have an indication, based on treating endothelial and myocardial inflammation. use of these drugs in covid-19 patients meeting the definition for an acute coronary syndrome or for another valid cardiovascular indication can now be given with more confidence in light of recent studies showing no detriment for these drugs in covid-19 [10, 14, 22] .this approach may be one that is directed at fundamental viral vascular pathogenesis.a broader therapeutic role for ras inhibition in covid-19 is being investigated in two randomised trials examining the effects of the arb losartan on the severity and prognosis in covid-19, in hospitalised covid-19 patients (nct 04312009) and in non-hospitalised patients (nct04311177).in the current global covid-19 pandemic, many countries are in lockdown with social and economic paralysis. the impact of covid-19 has been described as a warzone with many patients dying a lonely death, isolated from loved ones in overcrowded and hastily expanded hospitals. currently, only supportive care is available. whilst many therapeutic agents are under investigation [57, 58] , none have yet been approved for use in covid-19, nor demonstrated a significant survival benefit. even if some agents are proven to be effective, it will take time for trials and for production on a large scale.thinking of covid-19 as a fundamentally cardiovascular disease that attacks the endothelium could provide momentum to use safe, established and widely available medications acting on the ras, where they are already indicated for acute coronary syndrome and cardiac dysfunction, present in many patients with covid-19. whilst more data on the role of vitamin d in covid pathogenesis is needed, replacing an essential vitamin when it is deficient, seems a safe, cost effective and easily achieved therapeutic strategy.any successful shift to milder disease severity will ease the burden on health care systems. switching on endogenous anti-inflammatory pathways may also play a key role in decreasing the risk of longterm vascular and autoimmune sequelae in covid-19 survivors, which could pose a further economic burden once the pandemic is over.although there may be more questions than answers and hot debate in the medical literature about the role of the ras and drugs acting on this system in covid-19, the consensus opinion is they are safe to use in covid-19 [11, 12] , a view now supported by retrospective clinical data [110, 14, 22, [28] [29] [30] . in managing a global pandemic with a high death rate, treatments aimed at the fundamental pathology, that can meet the scale of the problem, are an appealing option. data from randomised clinical trials examining a broader role for ras agents in covid-19, beyond existing indications, is awaited and will further define the role of these medications.we are currently in the midst of a covid-19 pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the global shutdown, with more than a third of the world's population facing some form of lockdown or quarantine measures, is on an unprecedented scale and will no doubt be etched in history. at the time of writing, more than 2 million people have been diagnosed to have the infection, with more than 50,000 deaths worldwide. it is expected that an even larger number are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic and undiagnosed.during this time, while the world's focus is on the novel coronavirus, there is a danger that other illnesses might be overlooked. members of the public are being urged not to attend emergency departments for non-urgent matters, with the dual intention of protecting healthcare workers whilst freeing resources to treat the covid-19 patients. indeed, hospitals have reported a decrease in the number of patients attending emergency departments with myocardial infarctions and cerebrovascular accidents [1, 2] . it is likely that patients are concerned about contracting the virus while attending the hospital and are staying away, as there are reports of delayed presentation of patients with acute myocardial infarctions [3] . it is imperative that these other life-threatening conditions are not forgotten while we deal with the coronavirus.in addition to the acute conditions, management of stable chronic illnesses such as hypertension and diabetes may also be affected. many hospitals worldwide have cancelled all in-person elective patient care, including routine outpatient clinics, and moved towards telemedicine as part of social distancing measures. doing so also preserves resources to help tackle supply chain problems and other challenges created by a surge in patients infected by the novel coronavirus. even in these circumstances, it is important that blood pressure and blood glucose levels are monitored regularly. this is particularly important as patients with diabetes and hypertension may be at higher risk for complications of covid-19 [4] .early data from china and the united states suggest that hypertension appears to be the most prevalent comorbidity among patients admitted with covid-19 being present in at least 30-49% of them [4, 5] . hypertensive patients who develop covid-19 are more likely to be admitted to hospital than normotensive individuals [6] . the presence of hypertension also seems to be associated with poorer outcomes from covid-19 [7] . it not clear whether it is hypertension per se that contributes to the increased morbidity, or whether patients with hypertension have more underlying health problems, as data have confirmed that patients with multiple comorbidities are likely to fare worse [8] . we should bear in mind though, that these are retrospective data from patients admitted with covid-19 and therefore can only suggest association and not causation. nevertheless, the interaction of sars-cov-2 virus with ace2 in the endothelial cell [9] does raise the possibility that endothelial dysfunction, which commonly occurs in hypertension [10] , may exacerbate the effect of the virus.a major problem during a pandemic with a hithertounknown organism is early conflicting data that can cause uncertainty and confusion in the management of these patients. it has been shown that sars-cov-2 binds to cells via the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) 2 receptor [9] thereby gaining entry to the cells. concern was therefore raised at the start of the pandemic that ace inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), medications that are commonly used for hypertension and heart failure, could have a potential deleterious effect [11] , as ace2 is widely expressed in the cardiovascular system and is up regulated by these drugs in some tissues in a subset of animal models [12, 13] . these initial publications led to a considerable amount of discussion and debate with the counter argument being that ace inhibitors and arbs have been shown to protect from lung injury in experimental models of coronavirus infections [14] . these agents have also previously been demonstrated to reduce systemic inflammation and could potentially reduce the degree of multi-organ failure seen in severe covid-19 [15] . it was also considered that uncontrolled blood pressure or heart failure that could ensue as a result of discontinuation of these therapies and could contribute to morbidity in infected patients. guidance was promptly issued advising that these drugs not be discontinued [16, 17] . subsequent data have raised the possibility that patients treated with ace inhibitors or arbs do indeed have a better outcome, with the crucial caveat that the possibility of unmeasured confounding and bias precludes drawing cause-effect conclusions from the clinical studies available thus far. a recent retrospective study from china comparing outcomes on hospitalised patients with covid-19 with and without ace inhibitors or arbs for hypertension has suggested that in the former all-cause mortality was lower (adjusted hr, 0.42; 95% ci, 0.19-0.92; p = 0.03) [18] . another retrospective study from china showed that fewer patients on ace inhibitors or arbs had severe disease as compared with those who were not on these drugs (23.5% and 48%, respectively). the ace inhibitor/arb-treated group also had significantly higher cd3+ and cd8+ t cells and a trend towards lower il-6 levels [19] more recent analyses (preprints), though, have suggested that after adjustment for certain likely confounders, the signal for improved outcomes is no longer as strong as first believed [20] . in the end, the effects of treatment with ace inhibitors or arbs will only be positively identified through rcts, which are ongoing [21] .there is also mounting concern about possible thromboembolic complications of the virus and a possible procoagulable state [22] . various factors which can lead to a hypercoagulable state such as inflammation, hypoxia, immobilisation, dehydration and diffuse intravascular coagulation have been described in covid-19. in addition, hypertension has also known to be associated with a hypercoagulable state [23] and it is possible that an interaction between these two conditions might lead to a worsening thrombotic milieu.we are still learning more about this new virus and information continues to mount. in the meantime, it would be prudent to continue the guideline-based management of all chronic conditions and cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension. healthcare practitioners need to ensure that patients are appropriately advised and have access to their drugs. patients should be made aware that despite the lockdown, pharmacies and hospitals are still open. indeed the british heart foundation has recently issued a notice reminding the public not to ignore chest pain and seek help immediately, as they also report a 50% drop in patients presenting with a myocardial infarction since the start of the pandemic [22] . general practitioners and family physicians are still available for consultations, even if it is over the telephone. patients should also be encouraged to monitor their blood pressure at home, be adherent with treatment, and adopt healthy lifestyles. in many countries, individuals are allowed to go out to exercise, while ensuring they maintain social distancing and take all the other necessary precautions as advised by their public health authorities.this current pandemic has brought about profound changes in the social and economic lives of many. it has also changed the way healthcare is being delivered and prioritised. even when social restrictions are relaxed, it is hard to imagine that things would quickly (if ever) go back to how they were before the pandemic. whilst we get used to the new "normal" way of life, we should remember that other diseases and illness are still out there and still need our care. perhaps this is a time for much of the control of chronic illnesses to go back to the community and the patients. we have to ensure that patients with chronic illnesses are not forgotten in our fight against sars-cov-2 and do not end up as collateral damage.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.ace2 processes angiotensin i and the at 1 and at 2 receptor agonist angiotensin ii to produce angiotensin (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) and the mas receptor agonist angiotensin (1-7), respectively, but its exact role in the renin-angiotensin system (ras) needs to be clarified. one group has reported that c57bl/6 ace2 (à/à) mice exhibit a severe reduction in cardiac contractility, which is rescued in the ace (à/à)/ace2 (à/à) double knockout. 6 in contrast, another group has disclosed that ace2 (à/à) mice of 129/svev, c57bl/6, and mixed background do not exhibit cardiac contractility defects, but have increased susceptibility to angiotensin ii-induced hypertension. 7 while, a third group has revealed that male ace (à/y) mice are more susceptible to heart failure and death after transverse aortic constriction than their normal littermates. 8 supporting a role for ace2 in cardiac function, transgenic mice overexpressing ace2 in the heart have lower mean arterial pressure with rare focal myocyte vacuolization, myofibril splaying, and nuclear enlargement. many of these mice develop terminal ventricular fibrillation with lethal arrhythmias. 9 furthermore, male ace2 (à/y) mice, but not female ace2 (à/à) mice, also accumulate fibrillar collagen in the renal glomerular mesangium, leading to development of glomerulosclerosis of the kidneys. 10 in addition, ace2 (à/à) mice exhibit lower body weights than wild type mice with reduced fat mass. 11 moreover, ace2 is also utilized by the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus as the receptor for infection. 12 ace2 (à/à) mice are resistant to sars corona virus infection. 13 finally, ace2 (à/à) mice have enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, and worsened lung function in several murine acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) models. 14 with the many potential functions of ace2, small molecule inhibitors of this enzyme could be utilized to help further define the physiological roles of this protease.ace2 belongs to the zinc metalloprotease family and it has been reported that classical ace inhibitors such as captopril and lisinopril do not attenuate ace2 enzyme activity. as part of a strategy to discover lead molecules for an ace2 inhibitor program, a directed screen of ace2 versus a set of metalloprotease inhibitors from the glaxosmithkline compound collection was performed. surprisingly, although confirming that classical ace inhibitors like captopril were inactive in the screen, the thiol acid 1a was identified as a potent ace2 inhibitor (k i app = 86 nm). 15 this biphenyl analog 1a is a known dual ace and m13 metalloprotease neutral endopeptidase (neprilysin, nep, ec 3.4.24.11) inhibitor (ace k i app = 30 nm, nep k i app = 1.1 nm). 16 it also inhibits the m14 metalloprotease carboxypeptidase a1 (cpa, ec 3.4.17.1, k i app = 1,200 nm). speculating that the thiol functioned as a binding group for the active site zinc and that the carboxylic acid served as a recognition element for the enzyme's monocarboxypeptidase activity, the benzyl and methylene p-biphenyl moieties were surmised to be the p 1 and p 1 0 substituents. with this premise, the structure activity relationships of the p 1 position of the lead inhibitor were explored with the goal of improving potency and reducing ace and nep inhibitory activity. the thiol analogs 1a-1s were prepared as depicted in scheme 1. the acids 3a-3s were activated in situ via the carbodiimide, converted into the activated esters with the aza-hydroxybenzotriazole, and then coupled to the amine hydrochloride 4 to produce the fully protected amides. subsequent hydrolysis of the methyl ester, as well as the thioacetate, with lithium hydroxide afforded the thiol acids 1a-1s. 17the thiol acids 3a-3s were produced by three different routes. acids 3c and 3e were prepared by reaction of the commercially available thiols 2c and 2e (x@s) with acetyl chloride. in contrast, the acids 3k, 3m, and 3n were produced from the alcohols 2k, 2m, and 2n (x@o) via the mitsunobu reaction with thioacetic acid. 18 alternatively, the acids 3a-3b, 3d, 3f-3j, 3l, and 3o-3s were synthesized from the commercially available amino acids 2a-2b, 2d, 2f-2j, 2l, and 2o-2s (x@nh), by diazotization of the amines to afford the bromides, then subsequent displacement of the bromides, by potassium thioacetate, with stereochemical inversion. some stereochemical erosion, presumably resulting from formation of the a-lactone before nucleophilic trapping, resulted during the mitsunobu and diazotization reaction steps, but after coupling with the amine 4, the minor diastereomer could be removed via chromatography.the structure/activity relationships of p 1 analogs are depicted in table 1 . the (r) isomer 1b derived from l lphenylalanine displays the p 1 benzyl substituent in the unnatural configuration. this orientation of the p 1 substituent was detrimental to the ace2 inhibitory activity of diastereomer 1b (k i app = 1400 nm) as well as that of ace (k i app = 520 nm). this loss in inhibition is not surprising, since nature has evolved proteases to recognize the natural configuration of physiological peptide substrates. in contrast, nep (k i app = 1.3 nm) accommodated the alternate configuration with no loss in potency.complete removal of the p 1 moiety caused a modest loss in inhibitory potency versus ace2 (h, k i app = 320 nm). this decrease in potency could arise from reduced van der waals interactions due to the lack of a p 1 substituent, the increased entropic cost for the inhibitor to bind to the protease given the inhibitor's increased rotational freedom, or a combination of these factors. in contrast to the d-isomer 1b, the ace activity (k i app = 16 nm) of the glycine-like analog 1c was not affected by elimination of the p 1 element, while nep potency (k i app = 13 nm) of 1c decreased by over an order of magnitude.the alanine-derived analog 1d (me, k i app = 6.9 nm) decreases rotational freedom and was an even more potent ace2 inhibitor than the starting lead 1a, while increasing selectivity versus both ace (k i app = 21 nm) and nep (k i app = 23 nm). in contrast, the geminal dimethyl analog 1e (ace2 k i app = 2300 nm) decreased inhibitory potency versus not only ace2, but also ace (k i app = 3,400 nm) and nep (k i app = 730 nm). similar to the methyl analog 1d, the linear p 1 ethyl and n-butyl analogs 1f (et, k i app = 1.4 nm) and 1g (n-bu, k i app = 1.8 nm) were also potent ace2 inhibitors, but these extensions in p 1 also increased activity versus ace (1f k i app = 8.6 nm, 1g k i app = 9.3 nm) and even more so versus nep (1f k i app = 0.80 nm, 1g k i app = 1.2 nm).with the hope of improving the selectivity of these thiolbased inhibitors versus ace and nep, the effect of branching along the p 1 side chain of this inhibitor class was explored. branching along the p 1 chain was well tolerated in the s 1 subsite of ace2. the a-branched iso-propyl 1h (i-pr, k i app = 1. and neo-pentyl 1p (ch 2 t-bu, k i app = 7.1 nm) analogs maintained their ace2 inhibition. only the bulkier branched analogs, like the a-branched cyclohexyl 1m (cyh, k i app = 65 nm) and phenyl 1n (ph, k i app = 84 nm), the b-branched methylene cyclohexyl 1q (ch 2 cyh, k i app = 420 nm) and methylene b-naphthyl 1r (ch 2 b-np, k i app = 550 nm), and the c-branched ethylene phenyl 1s ((ch 2 ) 2 ph, k i app = 860 nm), were too large to be accommodated by the ace2 s 1 subsite.in contrast, a-branching of the p 1 moiety was poorly tolerated by the ace s 1 subsite, resulting in substantial decreases in ace inhibitory activity for the a-branched iso-propyl 1h (k i app = 200 nm), (r)-sec-butyl 1i (k i app = 490 nm), (s)-sec-butyl 1j (k i app = 200 nm), cyclobutyl 1k (k i app = 620 nm), cyclopentyl 1l (k i app = 700 nm), cyclohexyl 1m (k i app = 13,000 nm), and phenyl 1n (k i app = >10,000 nm) analogs. the s 1 subsite of nep is more accepting of a-branching in p 1 substituents than the ace enzyme, but less liberal than ace2. the a-branched iso-propyl 1h (k i app = 13 nm), (r)-sec-butyl 1i (k i app = 27 nm), (s)-sec-butyl 1j (k i app = 2.4 nm), cyclobutyl 1k (k i app = 5.4 nm), cyclopentyl 1l (k i app = 38 nm), cyclohexyl 1m (k i app =1300 nm), and phenyl 1n (k i app = 410 nm) analogs lost some inhibitory activity versus nep relative to the ethyl analog 1f (k i app = 0.80 nm). thus, a-branching at the p 1 group enhanced selectivity for ace2 protease inhibition relative to ace and nep. the (r)-sec-butyl analog 1i (k i app = 1.5 nm) has 330-fold selectivity versus ace and 18-fold selectivity versus nep, while the cyclopentyl 1l (k i app = 1.8 nm) has 390-fold selectivity versus ace and 21-fold selectivity versus nep.in comparison to a-branching, both ace and nep s 1 subsites were more permissive to b-branching in p 1 groups. thus, the iso-butyl 1o analog is not only a potent ace2 inhibitor (k i app = 1.4 nm), but also a low nanomolar ace (k i app = 3.2 nm) and subnanomolar nep inhibitor (k i app = 0.28 nm). ace is less tolerant of bulky b-branching, with the neo-pentyl 1p analog exhibiting potent dual ace2 (k i app = 7.1 nm) and nep (k i app = 2.6 nm) inhibition with good selectivity over ace (k i app = 2700 nm). larger b-branched substituents like the methylene cyclohexyl 1q (ace2 k i app = 420 nm, ace k i app = 840 nm, nep k i app = 130 nm) and methylene b-naphthyl 1r (ace2 k i app = 550 nm, ace k i app = 210 nm, nep k i app = 140 nm) attenuate inhibitory activity at all three enzymes. finally, as the ethylene phenyl analog 1 s shows, like ace2 (k i app = 860 nm), ace (k i app = 93 nm) was less tolerant of c-branching in p 1 groups, while nep (k i app = 2.6 nm) accepted it. none of these thiol-based inhibitors was a potent inhibitor of cpa.a model of the thiol 1i 19,20 docked into the active site of ace2 based on the recent x-ray crystal structure 21 is shown in figure 1 . it provides insight into the sar of the thiol series. in addition to binding to the imidazole nitrogens of 374 his and 378 his and the carboxylate of 402 glu, the active site zinc coordinates the thiol of the inhibitor. also, the terminal carboxylate of the inhibitor forms electrostatic interactions with the guanidine of 273 arg and accepts hydrogen bonds from the imidazoles of 345 his and 505 his. moreover, the carbonyl of 346 pro accepts a hydrogen bond from the amide nitrogen of the inhibitor, while the amide carbonyl is stabilized by a hydrogen bond to 515 tyr. furthermore, the p 1 0 methylene biphenyl substituent of 1i forms significant lipophilic interactions with the quite large s 1 0 channel composed of the lengthwise canal between the two subdomains, including residues 274 phe, 276 thr, 346 pro, 367 asp, 370 leu, 371 thr, and 374 his. this biphenyl substituent is hypothesized to occupy a different part of this large pocket than the carboxyl inhibitor co-crystallized in 1r4l. the p 1 (r)-sec-butyl group of the inhibitor forms van der waals interactions with the s 1 pocket composed of 347 thr, 504 phe, 510 tyr, and 514 arg. as shown in the close-up of the s 1 subsite depicted in figure 2 , 510 tyr forms part of a pocket which the abranched methyl of the p 1 (r)-sec-butyl group occupies. larger substituents are disfavored as they would require movement of the phenol side chain of 510 tyr. thus, this model agrees with the sar, since the s 1 subsite can tolerate cyclobutyl and cyclopentyl substituents, but is less accepting of a cyclohexyl group.a model of the inhibitor 1i 19,20 docked into the active site of ace, focusing on the s 1 subsite, based on the x-ray structure of lisinopril with ace, 22 is shown in figure 3 . from the model, it is apparent that the methyl group of the (r)-sec-butyl p 1 moiety of inhibitor 1i bumps into the enzyme, helping explain the 330-fold selectivity for ace2 versus ace. the branching nature of 518 val (atom cg1) makes this portion of the s 1 pocket smaller than in ace2. 518 val is the homologous residue in ace to 510 tyr in ace2. this 510 tyr to 518 val substitution from ace2 to ace and resulting alteration of the s 1 pocket volume helps explain the reduced ability of ace to accommodate a-branching in p 1 substituents.although x-ray structures of nep co-crystallized with a thiol-based inhibitor (pdb code 1y8j) 23 and an analog with a p 1 0 bi-phenyl moiety (pdb code 1r1h) 24 are available, as nep belongs to a different metalloprotease family (m13 vs m2), no reasonable model of these thiol inhibitors bound to nep could be determined to help explain the increase in nep selectivity of a-branched p 1 analogs. likely protein movement to accommodate potent nep inhibitors like 1o is required. the movement of multiple amino acid residues in proteins is difficult to predict accurately.in summary, a series of a-thiol amide-based inhibitors of ace2 with varied substituents at the p 1 position were synthesized. inhibitors containing linear alkyl p 1 moieties were some of the more potent analogs in the ace2 enzymatic assay. the smaller a-branched p 1 substituents, exemplified by inhibitors 1i and 1l, maintained similar potencies, and increased selectivity versus ace and nep. information gained from these studies has proven to be useful in the design of other ace2 inhibitors. these inhibitors will be reported in due course. furthermore, a potent pan ace/ace2/nep inhibitor 1o and a potent dual ace2/nep inhibitor 1p have been identified. these tools may prove useful in further defining the roles these proteases play in the ras cascade. when hydrolyses were carried out with reactions open to the atmosphere, varying amounts of disulfide products were isolated, likely from aerobic oxidation. the enzyme assays contain a reducing agent, tris-(2-chloroethyl)phosphate (tcep), to prevent oxidation of the thiols to disulfides during the assays. dilutions of 10 mm stock solutions of the thiols 1a-1s to final assay concentrations were done with 50% aqueous acetonitrile just prior to protease inhibition studies. under these standard conditions, both the thiols and their corresponding disulfides showed enzyme inhibitory activity. presumably, the disulfides were reduced to their corresponding thiols by tcep during the pre-incubation period, before substrates were added. in contrast, if the assays were performed without tcep, the disulfides were completely inactive, while the potencies of the thiols were attenuated, probably because of partial aerobic oxidation to their corresponding disulfides during the pre-incubation period. 18. alcohols 2m and 2n are commercially available. alcohol 2k was prepared from cyclobutane methanol in three steps. first, oxidation of the alcohol with pyridinium chlorochromate afforded the aldehyde. then, reaction of the aldehyde with trimethylsilyl cyanide and n-methyl morpholine n-oxide provided the silyl protected cyano-hypertension and diabetes are among leading causes of end-stage renal disease in most regions of the western world, moreover, they contribute to the progression of cardiovascular disease [1, 2] : angiotensin i-converting-enzyme (ace) inhibitors have been shown to have the broadest impact of any drug in cardiovascular medicine, reducing the risk of death, stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetes, and renal disease [2, 3] . ace inhibition results in direct cardiovascular protective effects by lowering levels of angiotensin ii (ang ii) and through increasing bradykinin availability. constant reduction of blood pressure is considered the most beneficial effect of ace inhibitors in both experimental and clinical studies of progressive diabetic and non-diabetic renal disease [4, 5] . in addition to important haemodynamic effects such as reduced systemic blood pressure and glomerular capillary pressure, inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) also produces important non-haemodynamic benefits such as stimulation of extracellular matrix degradation and blockade of macrophage/monocyte permeation of glomerular vascular beds [1] . hence, efforts have been focused on understanding the physiological role of ace, design of ace inhibitors, and its interaction with other components of the ras.angiotensin ii (ang ii), the principal effector of the ras, causes vasoconstriction both directly and indirectly by stimulating angiotensin type 1 (at1) receptors present on the vasculature and by increasing sympathetic tone and stimulating arginine vasopressin release. longterm, blood pressure is regulated by ang ii by modulating sodium and water reabsorption through direct stimulation of at1 receptors in the kidney, or indirectly through the production and release of aldosterone from the adrenal glands or thirst via a central action [6, for review]. the classical enzymatic pathway by which ang ii is formed begins with the cleavage of precursor angiotensinogen by renin, an aspartic proteinase, to the decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i). the cascade continues with ace cleaving a dipeptide from the c-terminus of ang i to form ang ii. the actions of ang ii are mediated via specific g-protein-coupled receptors. in humans, two angiotensin receptors have been described, at1 and at2, that bind ang ii with differing affinities [6] . angiotensin ii is further cleaved by a variety of enzymes to produce the bioactive angiotensin fragments, angiotensin iii (ang 2-8), angiotensin iv (ang 3-8) and angiotensin (1-7) {ang (1-7)} [7]. whilst this depiction ( figure 1 ) represents the ras described in textbooks, the role of these other angiotensin fragments, the enzymes (ace2, neprilysin (nep), aminopeptidase a, prolyl carboxypeptidase and prolyl endopeptidase) implicated in their formation and the identification of new angiotensin receptors (at4 and mas) have all been pivotal in redefining the ras in the last decade. of particular interest to this review is ace2, and its possible physiological roles in the control of blood pressure, renal disease and cardiac function. renin-angiotensin system. the last 10 years has seen the discovery of new components that interface with the classical depiction of the renin-angiotensin system and formation of its physiological end-product, angiotensin ii (encased in grey box). angiotensin ii is metabolised to several bioactive fragments, ang (1-7), ang iii and ang iv by different enzymatic pathways. ace, angiotensin converting enzyme; ace2, angiotensin converting enzyme 2; ap-a aminopeptidase a; ap-n, aminopeptidase n.ace2 is the first human homologue of ace to be described [8, 9] and is also now known to serve as a functional receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus [10] . to date, relatively little is known of the cell biology of ace2 or regulation of its expression in normal and pathological conditions. northern blot analysis revealed highest levels of ace2 expression in kidney, heart and testis [8, 9] . more extensive surveys have shown detectable levels of ace2 expression in other tissues, especially the gastrointestinal tract [11] . however, in human primary and transformed vascular and kidney cell lines examined to date, no abundant source of ace2 protein expression has emerged with ace2 levels generally being an order of magnitude lower than those of ace (f. j. warner and a. j. turner, unpublished observations). when expressed stably in human embryonic kidney cells, ace2 is found to be expressed predominantly at the cell-surface as an ectoenzyme, consistent with its existence, like ace, as a type i integral membrane peptidase ( figure 2 ). its cell-surface location is also consistent with its ability to be shed from the membrane as a soluble protein [9, d.w. lambert, n.m. hooper and a.j. turner, unpublished observations], as is ace [12] , and to serve as a viral receptor [10] .ace2 has been classified as a member of the m2 zinc metalloproteinase family along with somatic and testicular forms of ace. the 805 amino acid sequence of ace2 displays approximately 42% identity to human somatic ace in the regions surrounding the catalytic active sites [8] . unlike ace, however, ace2 contains only a single catalytic domain compared with the two active sites (n-and c-domains) of somatic ace. furthermore, ace2 is a carboxypeptidase rather than a peptidyl dipeptidase, being the first mammalian carboxypeptidase to be identified that contains the h e x x h motif rather than the typical carboxypeptidase a-like motif, hxxe(x)123_132h. ace2 cleaves a single hydrophobic or basic residue from the c-terminus of a limited range of biologically active peptides [13, 14] . indeed, of figure 2 . immuofluorescent staining of (a, b) human embryonic kidney cells transiently expressing full-length ace2. cells grown on coversfips were fixed using 4% w/v paraformaldehyde prior to immunostaining with polyclonal anti-peptide antibodies directed to sequences in the (a) extracellular (c-62 n-terminal antibody) (1:100) or (b) cytoplasmic (c-65 c-terminal antibody (1:100)) regions of ace2. donkey anti-rabbit fitc conjugate (1:500) was used as secondary. untransfected hek cells and transfected cells stained in the absence of primary antibody displayed negative immunostaining for ace2 (not shown). 63 x bar, 2/an. 126 peptides tested, only 11 served as ace2 substrates in vitro under the assay conditions used [13] . as a consequence, the substrate specificity of ace2, and hence its physiological roles, differ from those of ace [15] , nor is ace2 inhibited by classical ace inhibitors such as captopril, lisinopril or enalaprilat, in vitro [8, 16] . two strategies have been used to develop selective inhibitors of ace2. dales et al. [17] employed a substrate-based design, whereas huang et al. [18] used peptide library selection using phage display technology. both strategies led to the identification of inhibitors of nanomolar potency against ace2 that did not affect ace activity.the recent solution of crystal structures for human ace2 ectodomain [19] and testicular ace (tace) [20] as well as comparative modelling of the ace2 active site [14] indicate the catalytic mechanism of ace2 closely resembles that of tace. however, differences in substrate specificity and inhibitor sensitivity suggest distinctive differences exist between the substrate binding subsites of ace2 and tace. ace2 cleaves a single amino acid from the c-terminus of its substrates, whereas ace functions as a peptidyl dipeptidase. the basis for this difference relates primarily to the specificity pocket (st subsite) and binding of the substrate c-terminus. in ace2, the $2 p subsite is smaller as a result of the r273 ~ q substitution and is only able to accommodate one amino acid instead of a second terminal peptide bond, as compared with that of tace [14, 19] . the action of ace inhibitors such as captopril and lisinopril, is based, in part, upon their ability to mimic the dipeptidyl c-terminal binding of ace substrates [3] .amongst the substrates cleaved efficiently by ace2 are angiotensin ii, dynorphin a(1-13) and the apelin peptides, apelin-13 and apelin-36. angiotensin i, des-arg9-bradykinin, fl-casomorphin, and ghrelin are also hydrolysed by ace2, although to a lesser extent [13, 14] . the n-domain specific ace substrate and haemoregulatory peptide, n-acetyl-ser-asp-lys-pro [21] , and the vasodilator bradykinin are not cleaved by ace2, although (des-arg9)-bradykinin is an ace2 substrate in vitro [13] . hence, it is possible that ace2 may terminate the in vivo actions of (des-arg9)-bradykinin, which is the endogenous ligand of the bradykinin b1 receptor [more detail 15] . some of the differences in substrate specificity between ace and ace2 are summarised in table 1 . pertaining to the ras, two angiotensin fragments produced through ace2 cleavage of either ang ii or ang i are ang (1-7) and ang (1-9), respectively. of these two pathways, the conversion of ang ii to ang (1-7) by ace2 is kinetically substantially more favourable both in vitro [13, 14, 16, 22] and in vivo in humans [23] . studies in vitro show ace2 to be 10-to 600-fold more potent in hydrolysing ang ii to ang (1-7) than prolyl endopeptidase and prolyl carboxypeptidase [24] . it is hence this ability of ace2 to form ang (1-7), a vasodilator, that has attracted most attention. there is increasing evidence to suggest that the majority of effects produced by the heptapeptide, ang (1-7) are in counteracting the pressor, proliferative and profibrotic actions of ang ii and thereby providing a mechanism for ang ii counter-regulation [25] . these effects include vasodilatation, anti-proliferation [26, 27] , increased baroreflex sensitivity [28] , potentiation of bradykinin activity at b2 receptors [25, 29, 30, 31, for review] and inhibition of c-domain ace activity [32] . it should also be noted that in addition to the ang ii counter-regulatory effects of ang (1-7), this peptide has been shown to produce effects that are either similar [33, 34, 35, 36] or distinct from those of ang ii [37, 38] .santos and co-workers [39] have recently demonstrated that ang (1-7) is the endogenous ligand 7) has clinical implications. in humans and rats, administration of ace inhibitors leads to an accumulation of ang (1-7); ace blockade prevents degradation of ang (1-7) to ang (1-5), whilst ang (1-7) continues to be generated by non-ace pathways ( figure 1 ) [40, 41] . future investigations are now required to decipher which of the known ang (1-7) effects can be attributed to interaction with the mas receptor.within the ras, it is hypothesised that ace2 generates ang (1-7) through hydrolysis of ang ii, thereby maintaining a state of normal tension by limiting the vasopressor effects of ang ii as well as its hypertrophic and pro-oxidative effects. it should also be noted that the bioavailability of ang i is also a regulatory step in the formation of ang ii. in normal subjects, an inverse correlation between ang (1-7) and arterial pressure has been reported [42] . several authors have speculated that ace2 may be an important regulator of blood pressure homeostasis and contribute to the pathophysiology of essential hypertension [43, 44] . this suggestion is based upon genetic studies [43, 45] , as well as data obtained both in vitro and in vivo [18, 43, 46] . in humans, the ace2 gene is located in a region of the x chromosome (xp22) [8]. on the rat x chromosome, the ace2 gene maps to a defined quantitative trait locus (qtl) that is associated with hypertension and has been previously identified in rat models of spontaneous or diet-induced hypertension [43] . this observation suggests ace2 may be a candidate gene for this hypertension-related qtl. furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphisms have been identified in the ace2 locus and were associated with a number of cardiovascular endpoints: percutaneous transliminal coronary angioplasty, coronary artery bypass grafting, myocardial 381 infarction and catheterisation in patients with > 70% stenosis [45] , but not essential hypertension [62] .in rat models of hypertension, the levels of kidney ace2 mrna and protein expression is markedly lower than that observed in normotensive controls [43] . based upon the hypothesis mentioned above, reduced levels of ace2 increase ang ii availability and reduce ang (1-7) formation, and therefore lead to an increase in blood pressure. this trend is observed in vitro in hypertensive rat models. the baseline systolic blood pressure of salt-sensitive sabra hypertensive rats (sbh/y) is 10-15 mm hg higher compared to that of the control salt-resistant sabra normotensive rats (sbn/y). upon salt-loading a further decrease in ace2 expression in conjunction with an increase in systolic blood pressure is observed, whilst no change is noted in control animals. a further example of this trend is also reported in spontaneously hypertensive rats (shr) and stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat strains (shrsp), which present hypertension without any obvious external stimulus. shr and shrsp consistently have reduced kidney ace2 expression compared to those levels seen in wistar-kyoto control rats [43] .whilst both genetic and in vitro data follow this apparent trend quite closely, the data produced from in vivo ace2 knockout mice are less obvious. in ace2 / mice, allred and co-workers [46] reported higher systolic blood pressures (5 mm hg) in ace2 null mice than in control littermates. this increase in blood pressure is further exacerbated by chronic infusion with ang ii. this reported increase in blood pressure, although only preliminary data published in an abstract form [46] , is consistent with findings in the sabra model in which sbh/y rats with lower ace2 expression have a higher baseline blood pressure [43] . furthermore, allred et al. [46] also observed three-fold higher ang ii levels in the serum of ace2 null mice compared to control mice following ang ii infusion. this observation is in accord with the current hypothesis that ace2 regulates the level of ang ii in vivo and maintains blood pressure homeostasis. in contrast, no change in blood pressure was observed in 3-month old ace2 null mice compared with control littermates, despite there being an increase in kidney, heart and plasma ang ii levels [43] . at 6 months old, ace2 null mice of both genders displayed impaired heart function, which in male mice coincided with a slight reduction in blood pressure. this result highlights a gender-specific effect of x-linked ace2 on the cardiovascular system, but secondly suggests other genetic factors may also contribute to the effects of ace2. the aetiology of essential hypertension is considered multi-factorial being influenced by genetic as well as environmental factors. the somewhat contradictory results of these two knockout mouse studies by allred et al. [46] and crackower et al. [43] may originate from differences in the genetic make-up, which greatly influences the phenotype of gene knockouts.to add further confusion to the above hypothesis, the blocking of ace2 activity via intravenous bolus injection (3 mg/kg) of the selective ace2 inhibitor, dx512 (k;, 139 nm) in conscious shr produces a dose-dependent depressor response [18] . this response was characterised by a decreased mean arterial pressure (maximal average depressor response 70.5 mm hg from an average mean arterial pressure 155 mm hg) and reflex tachycardia [18] . these experiments warrant further investigation since they disagree with both the in vitro studies in shr rats [43] and in vivo data discussed above showing either an increase or no change in systolic blood pressure [43, 46] . it may be possible that this inhibitor is potentiating the effects of a substrate other than ang ii. for instance, apelin-13 is hydrolysed by ace2 with comparable kinetics to ang ii [13] and has been shown to produce hypotensive effects and increase water intake [47, 48] , through interaction with its endogenous receptor, apj (a putative receptor related to at1 and a co-receptor for the hiv-1 virus) [49] . overall, this contradiction of results in vivo between ace2 gene ablation and the effect of an ace2 inhibitor provides an excellent example of fundamental differences that exist between knockout animals, which have never produced ace2 and may have developed compensatory mechanisms, and animals in which ace2 is inhibited for only a short span of time.in the kidney, ace2 displays a similar localisation pattern to that observed for ace being primarily localised to both distal and proximal renal tubules and rarely to glomerular cells in rats and humans [9, 50, 51, 52] . whilst it is hypothesised that ace2 may regulate blood pressure through conversion of ang ii to ang (1-7) , it is unclear if ace2 has an important role in renal function and homeostasis. two studies have emerged investigating a role for ace2: the first in diabetes [51] and the second in the production of ang (1-7) during pregnancy [52] . in the animal models studied by tikellis et al. [51] and brosnihan et al. [52] , there was an absence of hypertension, suggesting ace2 may have a role in the local production of ang (1-7) and in the intrarenal ras within the kidney. moreover, these studies provide the first evidence of the presence of ace2 activity within the kidney. in a rat model of diabetic nephropathy, gene and protein expression of tubule ace2 were observed to decrease in line with ace [51] . however, for both ace2 and ace there was an increase in protein expression in diabetic glomeruli [51] . this finding is in keeping with the observation that ace is redistributed towards glomeruli and renal vasculature and away from the proximal tubules in diabetic rat and human kidney [53, 54] . furthermore, this may suggest a role for glomerular ace, and possibly ace2, in mediating nephron injury by increasing intraglomerular ang ii formation. intrarenal expression of ang ii is increased in diabetic nephropathy despite suppression of the systemic ras [55] . an increase in glomerular ace may explain this increase in ang ii, despite there being a decrease in tubule ace. the study by brosnihan et al. [52] also supports the concept for an intrarenal ras and presents data suggesting ace2 has a prominent role in local production of ang-(1-7) during pregnancy. nevertheless, further study of ace2 and its involvement in both systemic and local ras systems is required.the contribution of ace2 to cardiac function, ventricular remodelling and heart failure whilst the majority of research has concentrated on a possible role for ace2 in hypertension and counteracting the actions of ace, a new field of research has emerged identifying a role for ace2 in cardiac function, especially ventricular remodelling and heart failure. the first evidence that ace2 may have a role in cardiac function was demonstrated by crackowo er et al. [43] where the genetic ablation of ace2 in mice resulted in a severe heart contractility defect, increased levels of ang ii in the kidney, heart and plasma and an up-regulation of hypoxia-induced genes in the heart. these findings led to the suggestion that ace2 is an essential regulator of heart function [43] . however, it remains unclear if the ras is involved in mediating this heart dysfunction. studies where the ras has been either blocked by ace inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists suggest the involvement of the ras in the regulation of heart function and cardiac hypertrophy [56] . neither ace, angiotensinogen nor at1 receptor null mice show any defects in heart development and function [57, for review]. however, when ace is also ablated alongside ace2 in mice, the cardiac phenotype of this double knockout is restored to that of wild-type littermates. it seems likely that a product of ace may be responsible for the cardiac impairment observed in ace2 null mice [43] . however, current literature would tend to suggest ang ii is not responsible for this cardiac defect, since ang ii promotes myocardial fibrosis and cardiac hypertrophy [58] . further study of the effects of ang ii or the role of other candidate substrates is required.both the ras and ang ii are key factors in ventricular remodelling associated with heart failure [59, for review] . in contrast to the ace2 knockout study by crackower et al. [43] , cardiomyocyte-specific overexpression of ace2 in mouse heart results in conduction disturbances and lethal ventricular arrhythmias. these outcomes were in association with a down-regulation of connexins, suggesting that overexpression of ace2 disrupts gap junction formation [60] . whilst there does not appear to be a clear link between the ras and the loss of cardiac function observed in ace2 null mice, ang ii has been implicated in gap junction dysregulation and development of conduction disturbances, which are thought to lead to lethal ventricular remodelling in heart failure [61] . investigations of ace2 and its role in cardiac function and heart failure will no 383 doubt provide greater insight into the roles of this novel enzyme.since the first descriptions of ace2 in 2000 [8, 9] , information has rapidly accumulated on its possible functions from a variety of biochemical, genetic and physiological studies, yet much remains to be learned. it is clear that ace2 has important roles in heart function, and possibly in blood pressure regulation and diabetes. it has also been identified as a sars receptor. hence, the diversity of its biological roles is perhaps the most surprising discovery in relation to this novel enzyme. it is now important to provide a much fuller description of the expression sites of the enzyme and the regulation of this expression. the identification of physiologically relevant peptide substrates, other than angiotensin ii, is critical to a greater understanding of ace2 biology. finally, the involvement of ace2 in human pathologies needs to be critically evaluated and its potential as a therapeutic target exploited where possible.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a novel coronavirus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , an infection characterized by flu-like symptoms, progressing in some cases to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [1, 2] or myocarditis [3] [4] [5] [6] . covid-19 was classified as a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on march 11, 2020 . the disease has reached nearly every country. as of april 16, 2020 there were 2,090,110 confirmed cases worldwide, with 139,469 deaths [7] . the death and disability from covid-19, combined with the lack of approved treatments, have created an unmet need for efficacious therapies.as researchers and pharmaceutical companies race to develop vaccines and antivirals, some have turned to remedies with little to no supporting evidence. at least 300 iranians have died and 1,000 have sustained blindness and brain damage from methanol poisoning, in the mistaken belief that alcohol could prevent coronavirus infection [8] . social media have propagated the misinformation that snorting cocaine or bleach will prevent infection [9] [10] [11] . the desperation of these acts speaks to an urgent, unmet need for effective therapeutics against sars-cov- 19 .we intend for this review to familiarize readers with the toxicities of potential therapeutics for covid-19 and possible treatments for those toxicities. this review draws on multiple sources, combining news articles, social media posts, and peer-reviewed research. we identified the substances included in this review based on discussion in the media and our experience as practicing physicians, scientists, and pharmacists. we rely on industry or news reports if no other source of information was available. our discussion here presents our knowledge of novel therapeutics as publicly known in early april 2020. supervising editor: mark b. mycyk, md this article will discuss some therapeutic options against sar-cov-2, using the life-cycle of sars-cov-2 to understand the mechanism and toxicity of each agent. we will discuss (1) viral cell entry inhibitory (e.g., chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, apn01), (2) viral replication inhibitors (e.g., protease inhibitors, nucleotide analogs), (3) nucleic acid vaccines, and (4) miscellaneous medications (azithromycin, ace inhibitors, and ibuprofen).sars-cov-2 is an enveloped non-segmented positive-sense rna virus that belongs to the coronaviridae family. to date, seven coronaviruses are known to infect humans (229e, nl63, oc43, hku1, mers-cov, sars-cov-1) with three (sars-cov-1, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2) causing severe disease in humans [3] . the genetic sequence of sars-cov-2 closely resembles that of sars-cov-1, a betacoronavirus that caused the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic in 2003. much of our current understanding of sars-cov-2 is based off in vitro and in vivo experiments conducted to investigate the pathogenesis of sars-cov-1.coronavirus spreads between humans through respiratory droplets. sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 gain entry when the spike protein on the surface of the viral capsid binds to angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2) on type ii alveolar cells, leading to fusion of the viral and host cell membranes, and injection of the viral rna into the host cytoplasm [12] . once inside the cell, the virus replicates its genetic material and then releases newly created virus particles (virions). each of these steps is an opportunity for treatments to disrupt the normal coronavirus life cycle.researchers are currently investigating treatments for covid-19, by developing vaccines and novel drugs as well as testing existing medications. a vaccine against sars-cov-2 may be clinically available in 12-18 months [13] . medications approved by the food and drug administration (fda) for other purposes,s such as chloroquine, are being repositioned to treat covid-19. therapeutic repurposing (i.e., repositioning) is an expedited drug-development strategy to reuse currently fda-approved therapeutics for new medical indications. on march 28, the fda granted emergency authorization for the use of chloroquine phosphate and hydroxychloroquine sulfate to treat covid-19 [14] . the european medicines agency recommended restricting their use pending the outcome of clinical trials [15] . the american academy of clinical toxicology (aact), the american association of poison control centers (aapcc), and the american college of medical toxicology (acmt) recommended in a joint press release that use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine should occur only under the direction of a medical provider, for an fda-approved indication, or as part of a trial for the treatment of covid-19 or as part of an approved hospital protocol [16] .our discussion does not cover all drugs, and is not intended to be exhaustive. in the absence of direct evidence, we expect drugs of a similar class to have similar toxicity.chloroquine is a 4-aminoquinoline primarily used to treat malaria, an infectious disease caused by several plasmodia species. chloroquine concentrates in acidic environments, such as the digestive vacuole of plasmodia spp. or the golgi apparatus of human cells. chloroquine prevents plasmodia from crystallizing heme to hemozoin [17] , leading to a buildup of heme that becomes toxic to the parasite. the golgi apparatus is a collection of vesicles where post-translational modifications such as glycosylation occur.chloroquine freely diffuses into vacuoles. the acidic environment of the vacuole favors the protonated (charged) form, which cannot freely diffuse away (ion trapping), leading to a buildup of chloroquine in the vacuoles. chloroquine alters the glycosylation of ace2, which decreases the affinity of ace2 for the coronavirus spike protein, reducing sars-cov-2 entry in vitro [18] . additionally, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine inhibit the toll-like receptor (tlr) pathway; the tlr pathway is involved in pro-inflammatory cytokine signaling [19] .chloroquine was found to inhibit sars-cov-1 infection and he sequence and structure homologies between sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 suggest that chloroquine could reduce sars-cov-2 infectivity [18] . indeed, one in vitro study demonstrated that chloroquine inhibits sars-cov-2 entry [21] . guangdong province recommended 500 mg chloroquine twice a day for 10 days for any person diagnosed with covid-19 without contraindications to chloroquine [20] . one abstract/ commentary suggests efficacy, but cites an audio transcript of a press conference in guangdong, china, the supporting data for which is not available [22] . doses greater than 5 grams of chloroquine are associated with mortality due to ventricular dysrhythmias and hypokalemia [23] . cardiovascular collapse and profound hypotension can occur within 1-3 hours of overdose; sodium channel blockade results in qrs widening on ecg [24] [25] [26] . neurologic effects include seizures and cns depression [27] . oxidative stress can lead to hemolysis, particularly in patients with g6pd deficiency. potassium channel blockade can result in prolonged qtc interval and torsades de pointes, and clinicians should avoid using qt prolonging agents if chloroquine toxicity is present.in this current pandemic, a man in arizona died after ingesting chloroquine phosphate, a form of chloroquine used for treating aquariums, using it to self-medicate [24] , and cases of chloroquine poisoning have been reported in nigeria [25] . it is important to store chloroquine safely to avoid secondary harm. as little as 10 mg/kg of chloroquine in children, which could be 1-2 pills, requires medical evaluation; 27 mg/kg was the lowest fatal dose in toddlers [28] .hydroxychloroquine is a derivative of chloroquine. it is considered less toxic. the difference in mechanisms of action between chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine is not fully understood. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are dealkylated into desethylchloroquine by cyp3a4/5 and 2c8 [29] . hydroxychloroquine is also dealkylated into desethylhydroxychloroquine by 2d6 [19] . chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine inhibit 2d6, which can increase serum concentrations of metoprolol, propranolol, opiates, antidysrhythmics, antidepressants, and antipsychotics [30] .the minimum fatal dose of hydroxychloroquine is not well defined. the minimum dose reported to elicit severe symptoms (hypotension, hypokalemia, and ventricular dysrhythmias) is 4 g [31] . one case report from 1965 (for which the full text is not available) describes a 16 year old who died after reportedly ingesting 12 g of hydroxychloroquine [32] . an 18year-old girl who ingested 20 g of hydroxychloroquine developed hypokalemia, hypotension, and ventricular tachycardia but survived with intubation, epinephrine infusion, high-dose diazepam, and potassium repletion [33] (see "treatment of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine toxicity" section). three other case reports describe a total of five severely symptomatic patients who survived overdoses of 20-36 g of hydroxychloroquine with aggressive interventions, including epinephrine and high-dose diazepam [33] [34] [35] [36] .data regarding the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine in treating covid-19 are limited. one clinical trial, that has not been peer reviewed, suggests that in patients with a clinical diagnosis of covid-19, 25 out of 31 who received hydroxychloroquine clinically improved after 5 days as compared with 17 out of 31 in the control group [37] . in that study, one patient who received hydroxychloroquine developed a rash without mucosal involvement and another developed a headache. both resolved without intervention.in 1988, riou et al. published a prospective study of 11 patients who were anticipated to have a likely lethal ingestion of chloroquine (greater than 5 g of chloroquine) and compared them to 11 historical controls. these individuals were treated with epinephrine infusion (initial 0.25 μg/kg/min, titrated to sbp > 100 mmhg), 2 mg/kg of diazepam over 30 min, intubation, and nasogastric aspiration. diazepam was continued at 1-2 mg/kg per day over 2-4 days. ten of these 11 patients survived to hospital discharge, compared with 1 out of 11 patients in the control group [23] . diazepam, perhaps not intuitively, was incorporated in this combination therapy due to animal [38] and human evidence that it may be beneficial in combined overdoses. this study has largely shaped the recommended treatment of epinephrine and high dose diazepam, though not without some controversy regarding its generalizability.hypokalemia is a common finding in chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine overdose and is likely due to intracellular shift of potassium. in a retrospective study of 191 patients with chloroquine toxicity, a serum potassium lower than 3.0 mmol/l was correlated with mortality, and the serum potassium decreased as serum chloroquine levels increased [39] . the linear relationship between serum potassium and chloroquine concentrations suggests that hypokalemia reflects an effect of chloroquine itself, although the severely ill patients also received epinephrine infusions (beta-adrenergic agonists can cause intracellular potassium shifts). total body potassium stores are not expected to be depleted in the setting of chloroquine toxicity, raising concern for rebound hyperkalemia as toxicity resolves. as such, some clinicians recommend less aggressive potassium repletion, supplementing normal daily potassium with 80 meq per 24 h [39] , though if severe hypokalemia is present, it would be reasonable to replete, while observing for rebound hyperkalemia. the treatment for acute toxicity from hydroxychloroquine is thought to be the same as for acute toxicity from chloroquine.qrs prolongation from xenobiotic-induced sodium channel blockade is often treated with sodium bicarbonate boluses and infusions. administration of sodium bicarbonate may treat the cardiac sodium channel blockade but worsen hypokalemia, so patient-specific characteristics must be considered when weighing the use of this therapy.lipid emulsion therapy did not lead to return of spontaneous circulation when given during cardiac arrest for either a hydroxychloroquine ingestion or a combined ingestion of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine [40] . two case reports suggest that lipid emulsion can reverse hypotension averting cardiac arrest [41, 42] . in the second case report, one patient received lipid emulsion therapy and did not develop significant cardiotoxicity beyond a prolonged qtc interval, although this patient ingested a smaller dose of hydroxychloroquine (5 g) [42] . extracorporeal circulatory support could be considered for severe overdoses refractory to other treatments [43] .chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can both lead to retinopathy. it is rare for this toxicity to develop before 5 years of therapy [44] , and is not expected with short-term use. of 3995 patients with rheumatoid arthritis who ever used hydroxychloroquine, 6.5% discontinued it because of "eye complaints," although probable or definite retinal toxicity was documented in less than 1%; the risk of retinal toxicity increased by fivefold once lifetime exposure reached 1 kg [44] . long-term use of hydroxychloroquine has also been associated with cardiomyopathy [45, 46] .clinicians should also be mindful of secondary effects of an increase in demand for chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine to treat covid-19. hydroxychloroquine is used to treat systemic lupus erythematosus (sle). some patients with sle have been unable to fill their prescriptions due to shortages [47] . some state pharmaceutical boards have noted surges in prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and azithromycin written by physicians for either themselves or their family members, a practice which the american medical association promptly denounced [48] .apn01 (apeiron biologics) is a recombinant human ace2 protein first developed to treat sars [49] . it may treat covid-19 by preventing sars-cov-2 entry and reducing acute lung injury. it does so by acting as a soluble molecular decoy for sars-cov-2, preventing the virus from binding to cellular ace2 in a dose-dependent fashion [50] . ace2, in vitro, is the essential receptor for the sars-cov-2 entry [51] and also serves to maintain normal lung physiology. when the virion binds to cell surface ace2 this lung protective signalingis lost. by preventing ace2-mediated sars-cov-2 interaction, and therefore restoring physiologic ace2 signaling, apn01 may reduce acute lung injury [52] . a randomized unblinded clinical trial is underway in china to investigate the efficacy of apn01 to reduce viral load and the duration of covid-19 symptoms [53] .a phase i trial of apn01 from 2013 by haschke and colleagues was well-tolerated with no cardiovascular side effects in 22 healthy subjects. toxicity from recombinant proteins, in general, arises from inadvertent activation of the immune system (unintentional immunogenicity) and binding of the recombinant proteins to other cell surface receptors triggering cellular signal transduction cascades that were not consciously targeted (off-target binding). unintentional immunogenicity can lead to the formation of anti-drug antibodies that can deposit in tissues as immune complexes. for example, immune complexes can deposit in the kidney impairing the kidney's ability to filter out toxins and recover electrolytes. if the immune system treats the recombinant protein as an antigen, treatment may precipitate serum sickness. off-target binding of apn01 could modulate renin-angiotensin signaling, altering blood pressure and organ perfusion. one abstract provides evidence that up to 1.2 mg/kg per day caused no immunogenicity or cardiovascular toxicity in three healthy human volunteers [54] .leronlimab (cytodyn) is an investigational humanized igg4 monoclonal antibody against ccr5 receptors found on t lymphocytes. chemokine receptor 5 (ccr5) was first characterized for its role as a co-receptor in human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) viral entry into white blood cells [55] . we now recognize that other pathogens, such as dengue [56] or staphylococcus aureus [57] also use the ccr5 signaling pathway for entry or as a virulence factor. leronlimab is being repurposed and investigated as a treatment option for patients with covid-19 who experience respiratory complications as a result of covid-19. a single-arm, open-label, multi-center clinical study is set to take place to investigate the clinical improvement in total symptom score (i.e., fever, myalgia, dyspnea, and cough). currently, leronlimab has a "fast-track" designation from the fda for hiv and metastatic triplenegative breast cancer [58] . there are no serious side effects or adverse events reported so far. leronlimab has successfully completed nine phase 1, 2, and 3 clinical trials in about 800 patients for other indications and achieved primary efficacy endpoints [59] .reasoning by analogy with approved therapeutics in oncology, the acute toxicity from humanized antibodies can include (1) immunosuppression, predisposing to opportunistic infections or viral-induced neoplasias; (2) immunostimulation, including the dramatic "cytokine storm" of fevers, chills, myalgias, and acute lung injury similar to a severe presentation of covid-19; and (3) hypersensitivity reactions [60] . the specificity of antibodies is likely to give rise to idiosyncratic side effect profiles and not all antibodies will cause the same degree of immunosuppression or immune cell activation.we expect humanized antibodies to be less likely to cause serum sickness than antibodies raised in horse (i.e., anavip) or raised in sheep (i.e., crofab). anavip (rare disease therapeutics, inc.) and crofab (protherics inc.) are antibody therapies used to treat envenomation by north american crotalids. a humanized antibody is an antibody raised from non-human species and then modified to increase its similarity to naturally occurring human antibodies so as to provoke less of a humoral immune response in humans. for example, antibodies raised in mice can have their fc region replaced by human sequences to decrease immunogenicity [61] .an rna virus must co-opt the host machinery for translating rna into protein. as discussed in "biology of coronavirus" section, the genomes of coronaviruses are sequences of nucleotides that human cells treat, effectively, as mrna. to produce virions, a virus must make a copy of its rna genome using viral rna-dependent polymerase and synthesize all the proteins needed to form the virion, including the capsid and spike proteins.the overall goal of nucleotide analogs is to halt the production of new viral rna, making it impossible for infected host cells to become manufacturing sites for new virions. nucleotide analogs do this by incorporating a base into the replicating strand from which viral rna polymerase cannot elongate.remdesivir (gilead) is a prodrug metabolized to an adenosine nucleotide analog. it has demonstrated in vitro efficacy against sars-cov-2 [21] . favipiravir (toyama chemical) mimics adenosine and guanine leading rna-dependent rna polymerase to make error-ridden nonfunctional viral genome progeny [62] .in the absence of data on remdesivir or favipiravir toxicity, one can extrapolate from the toxicity reported for other nucleoside analogs. metabolic acidosis can occur with therapeutic use, usually after a month or more of treatment [63] , though it has also been observed in acute overdose. severe metabolic acidosis with elevated lactate is a toxicity of nucleoside analogs that has a high mortality. peripheral neuropathy is a doserelated, subacute phenomenon seen with stavudine, 2′,3′didehydro-2′,3′-dideoxythymidine (d4t), didanosine (ddi), and zalcitabine (ddc) [64] . bone marrow suppression is seen in about 5% of patient s starting 3′ -azido-2′ ,3′dideoxythymidine (azt) treatment [65] . pancreatitis and myopathy have been observed with several medications in this class [66] . each of these toxicities are thought to reflect mitochondrial dysfunction. in addition to inhibiting viral polymerase, nucleoside analogs also inhibit mitochondrial dna polymerase-gamma, leading to decreased mitochondrial dna and synthesis of mitochondrial proteins [64] . if severe toxicity occurs, the offending agent should be stopped. there is no specific antidote, though some suggest that treatment with mitochondrial cofactors, such as thiamine, riboflavin, l-carnitine, and vitamin c, may help patients recover [63] . additional idiosyncratic toxicities may also occur, for example, tenofovir inducing crystalluria [67] .protease inhibitors prevent infected cells from forming competent new virions by binding to and inactivating viral proteases to halt viral replication. viral proteases process the initial products of translation to make the final versions of viral proteins. viral proteases are unique to each virus. the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 main protease has recently been identified [68] . drugs that are effective against one virus are not expected to be effective against another virus unless the viruses' proteases are sufficiently similar. protease inhibitors that target hiv protease, for example, do not target hepatitis c protease, even though both are rna viruses. the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 main protease has been identified and it closely resembles sars-cov-1 but not any known human proteases [68] .screening of hiv protease inhibitors against sars-cov-1 found that nelfinavir, but not ritonavir, inhibited viral replication in vitro [69] . although this study described the efficacy of nelfinavir, it did not determine if nelfinavir's effects were specifically due to sars-cov-1 protease inhibition. another screening study identified lopinavir, but not nelfinavir, as inhibiting sars-cov-1 and demonstrated that treatment with lopinavir-ritonavir (abbvie) and ribavirin reduced mortality and ards compared to treatment with ribavirin alone [70] . ritonavir is added to lopinavir as a pharmacokinetic booster [71] ; ritonavir is a potent inhibitor of cytochrome cyp 3a4, the enzyme that inactivates lopinavir. the same regimen (lopinavir-ritonavir with ribavirin) was used as post-exposure prophylaxis for healthcare workers treating patients with severe middle east respiratory syndrome (mers, also caused by a coronavirus), which showed a 40% decreased risk of infection, and no severe adverse effects were reported [72] .early experience in the treatment of sars-cov-2 suggests that patients treated with lopinavir-ritonavir commonly experience nausea and vomiting as well as mild transaminase elevations [73] . lopinavir-ritonavir seemed to hasten recovery in a case series of 10 hospitalized patients [74] , but a larger randomized trial of 99 test subjects and 100 controls showed no difference in time to clinical improvement [75] . in all three studies, many patients receiving the combination left the study due to nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.acute overdose of protease inhibitors is uncommon, but a large overdose of more than 50 g of lopinavir-ritonavir was generally well tolerated and managed supportively [76] . ritonavir is a very potent inhibitor of cyp3a4 (ki 0.59 ± 0.12μm), and may slow the metabolism of drugs which are substrates of cyp3a4, leading to potential dangerous drugdrug interactions [77] .lopinavir-ritonavir is associated with increases in transaminases in 3-10% of individuals being treated for hiv, though clinically significant liver injury appears to be rare and resolves with drug removal [78] . a cholestatic pattern of injury is sometimes observed, which may be explained by lopinavir reducing expression of the bile salt export pump (bsep) in human hepatocytes [79] . a latency period of 1 month or longer is common, which may make this a less relevant feature in the treatment of sars-cov-2.. there are genetic variations (polymorphisms) across patients, such as a loss-of-function of cyp3a4 [80] , that can make patients more susceptible to metabolic toxicities [81] . screening for these susceptibilities is not practical in the setting of short duration treatment for sars-cov-2. arthralgias may occur in 35% of patients [82] . achilles tendinopathy has been reported in individuals taking lopinavir-ritonavir, even in shortterm use for post-exposure prophylaxis [83] .protease inhibitors cause lipodystrophy, characterized by central adiposity, dorsocervical fat deposition ("buffalohump"), and extremity wasting when used to treat hiv. multiple mechanisms may explain these metabolic derangements, including inhibition of srebp-1, a master regulator of lipogenesis and adipocyte differentiation, and direct inhibition of glucose transporter-4 [79] .the goal of a vaccine is to develop longstanding immunity without exposure to the full brunt of the disease. in vivo and phase i trials of new vaccine candidates are currently underway to evaluate safety and immune response.s-trimer refers to a vaccine made to resemble the spike protein, the protein on the capsid surface that binds to ace2 in alveolar cells to initiate viral entry. the spike protein is an attractive target because it elicits an immune response and mutations in the spike protein may explain the virulence of sars-cov-2. the sars-cov-2 spike protein binds about ten times more tightly to ace2 than the sars-cov-1 spike protein does [84] . the mutations also create the need for new therapeutics as that same paper noted that three monoclonal antibodies raised against sars-cov-1 spike protein did not strongly bind to sars-cov-2 spike protein. the s-trimer vaccine candidate is expected to be tested in pre-clinical studies shortly. the generation of antibodies against the spike proteins of sars or mers [85] was challenging because the spike proteins of coronaviruses are heavily glycosylated.dna vaccines work by inserting dna plasmids that encode antigens into host cells. this generates cellular and humoral antigen-specific immunity, allowing the patient to mount an immune response to the target disease [86, 87] . studies are ongoing regarding the effectiveness and longevity of vaccine immunogenicity for several infections, including hiv, mers, ebola, and zika. gls-5300 (inovio pharmaceuticals, inc., geneone life science inc.), a dna vaccine for mers-cov, is entering phase 2 trials. mers-cov is the coronavirus that causes middle east respiratory syndrome. gls-3500 encodes for the mers-cov spike glycoprotein and demonstrated an immunogenic response in non-human primates. in phase 1 studies, gls-5300 demonstrated local injection site symptoms in most patients, along with headaches, malaise, and myalgia. some patients developed mild creatinine phosphokinase elevations, but no renal injury or myopathy developed [88] .ino-4800 (inovio pharmaceuticals, inc.) is a dna vaccine that encodes the sars-cov-2 spike protein and is delivered intradermally [89] . a phase 1 clinical trial ino-4800 started in early april. to enhance uptake, dna vaccines are administered via an electroporation device such as the cellectra [90] . safety and tolerability studies of the cellectra did not identify severe adverse events, though injection site pain, mild elevations in creatinine phosphokinase, and paresthesias were described [91] . animals that received the vaccine produced antibodies and t cells against the virus [13] . a phase 1 clinical trial ino-4800 has started.beyond local tissue reactions, dna vaccines raise the concern of adverse events from plasmid integration with host dna, disrupting usual transcription. in vitro studies thus far suggest that the rate of insertional mutagenesis is lower than the rate of spontaneous mutations in mammalian cells. generally, dna vaccines appear to be safe, without apparent off-target effects or idiosyncratic toxicities [87] .messenger rna (mrna) vaccines direct the production of antigens but, unlike dna vaccines, cannot integrate into the host genome, lowering the risk of mutations [92] . once in the cytosol, mrna vaccines direct antigen production and then rapidly degrade. moderna therapeutics, in collaboration with the national institute of allergy and infectious disease, announced that it launched a phase i trial of the mrna-1273. the mrna-1273 vaccine is a novel lipid nanoparticle encapsulated mrna-based vaccine that encodes for the prefusion stabilized form of the spike protein [93] . the prefusion form refers to the spatial conformation of the spike protein before it binds to ace2. an antibody against the prefusion form could prevent viral entry as well as mitigate the spread of virions.azithromycin is a macrolide antibiotic used for its ability to inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 50s subunit of the bacterial ribosome. it is also used to treat exacerbations of copd and reactive airway disease. this second use may reflect azithromycin's modulatory effect on immune cells. it reduces respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) release by decreasing interferon signaling in vivo and inhibits proinflammatory cytokine release in airway smooth muscle and epithelial cells [94] . a prospective trial in france of 22 patients noted that a combination of 600 mg hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin (500 mg on the first day and then 250 mg each day for the next 4 days) reduced viral load more effectively than hydroxychloroquine alone [95] . this trial broke randomization as those who declined treatment were analyzed as controls.the main toxicity from azithromycin is qtc prolongation leading to cardiac dysrhythmias owing to herg (an inward rectifying potassium channel) blockade [96] . in one cohort study, a 5-day course of azithromycin led to a nearly threefold increase in cardiovascular death as compared to other antibiotics [97] , although a follow-up cohort study of similar size (2,204,100 prescriptions) [98] and meta-analysis of prospective randomized controlled trials identified no increased risk in mortality [99] .we expect the combination of azithromycin and chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine to be more likely to precipitate cardiac dysrhythmias than either alone. azithromycin weakly blocks herg from conducting potassium ions across the cardiac membrane while chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine decrease the number of ions available for transit.there is concern in the media that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors may increase susceptibility to sars-cov-2 [100] . ace inhibitors can increase ace2 expression in human tissue [101] , potentially creating more binding sites for sars-cov-2. the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of sars-cov-2 has a high affinity for ace2. however, ace inhibitors have been shown to reduce viral entry by competitive inhibition of spike protein binding to ace2 in vitro [102] . lastly, alveolar cells infected with coronavirus express less ace2 on their cell surface than normal cells in vitro. knocking down the expression of ace2 in uninfected mice creates acute lung injury histologically similar to that seen in sars, suggesting intact ace2 function serves a lungprotective role [103] .one could interpret these findings to suggest that those patients taking ace inhibitors may benefit from stopping them, while those not taking them may benefit from starting. at this time, however, there is no direct clinical evidence of any impact of ace inhibitors on the clinical trajectory of those with covid-19. a retrospective study from wuhan, china identified hypertension, diabetes, and cerebrovascular disease as poor prognostic factors, but did not isolate the relative risk attributable to taking an ace inhibitor [1] . the worse outcome in this study of patients on ace inhibitors may reflect the generally poor outcomes of patients with multiple comorbidities. no patient should abruptly discontinue an ace inhibitor except at the direction of a physician. blood pressure rapidly rises in the first 48 hours after ace inhibitor discontinuation [104] , which could precipitate hypertensive emergencies and subsequent acute pulmonary edema.that same study stated that ibuprofen increases ace2 receptor expression but provided no supporting evidence. neither the who [105] nor the fda [106] recommends withholding ibuprofen for symptomatic treatment of covid-19.convalescent plasma refers to pooled plasma or immunoglobulins from patients who have been infected and then recovered from a disease. in ten patients seropositive for sars-cov-2 and hypoxic, but not intubated, one dose of 200 ml of convalescent plasma led to a nearly immediately undetectable viral load and improved oxygenation in 3 days [107] . in five patients who were intubated with radiographic evidence of acute lung injury, transfusion of 200-250 ml of convalescent plasma on days 10 and 22 of admission reduced hypoxia in all five and three were able to be weaned from mechanical ventilation [108] .risks commonly associated with plasma transfusion include (1) transfusion-associated acute lung injury (trali), (2) transfusion-associated circulatory overload (taco), and (3) allergic/anaphylactic reactions. other less common risks include (1) transmission of infections, (2) febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reactions, (3) rbc alloimmunization, and (4) hemolytic transfusion reactions [109] . a meta-analysis of studies that used convalescent plasma to treat sars and influenza a (h1n1) reported no adverse effects beyond minor infusion reactions such as chills and fevers [110] . four critically ill patients with sars-cov-2 had no significant adverse events when treated with convalescent plasma and supportive care [111] .the unmet need for effective treatments for covid-19 has spurred pharmaceutical companies to develop or repurpose therapeutics against sars-cov-2. frontline providers may be unfamiliar with the usage of older therapeutics, such as chloroquine, or medicines typically used by subspecialists, like dna vaccines, protease inhibitors, or convalescent plasma therapy. in conjunction with effective infection control policies, a combination of measured and reasoned repurposing of existing therapies, development and vetting of novel drugs, and guidance by medical toxicologists may reduce morbidity and mortality from covid-19 and avoid cases where the cure is worse than the disease.angiotensine ; inhibiteurs de l'enzyme de conversion ; inhibiteur de l'enzyme de conversion ii ; rénine ; récepteur de la prorénine résumé la découverte de l'enzyme de conversion de l'angiotensine 2 (ac2) et un récepteur à la prorénine est une avancée récente dans la compréhension de la physiologie du système rénine-angiotensine. au sein de l'axe inhibiteur de l'enzyme de conversion de l'angiotensine 2/angiotensine 1/mas, l'ac2 contrebalance l'effet vasoconstricteur, prolifératif, fibrosant et pro-inflammatoire de l'axe ace/angiotensine 2/at1. le récepteur à la prorénine a une fonction angiotensine dépendante, liée à l'augmentation de la production d'angiotensine 1, et un aspect indépendant de l'angiotensine, lié aux signaux intracellulaires. l'activation de l'ac2 et l'inhibition de l'ace de la rénine ont été considérées comme au centre de la régulation du système rénine-angiotensine. l'objet de cette revue générale est de discuter les fonctions biochimiques et biologiques de l'ace, de l'ac2 et de la rénine au sein et au-delà du système rénine-angiotensine et ainsi de proposer une perspective de développement d'agents actifs extraits de plantes naturelles ou d'alimentation, produits liés à ces trois protéases. © 2012 elsevier masson sas. tous droits réservés.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is not only an endocrine but also a paracrine and an intracrine system [1] . in mammals, the intravascular ras plays a key role in maintaining blood pressure homeostasis and fluid and salt balance, and the tissue or local ras is involved in physiological and pathological processes, such as tissue growth and remodelling, development and inflammation [2] . in a classical ras, the substrate angiotensinogen (agt), which is released into the circulation from the liver, is degraded by the enzyme renin that originates in the kidney, generating the inactive angiotensin i (ang i). when this decapeptide comes into contact with angiotensin-i-converting enzyme (ace) at the endothelial surface of blood vessels, the c-terminal dipeptide is cleaved, giving rise to angiotensin ii (ang ii), the main effector molecule of the ras. through interactions with specific receptors, particularly its type 1 or at1 receptor, ang ii stimulates a wide variety of signalling pathways in the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, adipose tissue, pancreas and brain, initiating most of the physiological and pathophysiological effects that have been attributed to the ras [3] . due to the function of directly generating the main effector ang ii, ace -together with the classical axis ace/ang ii/at1 -has been at the core of ras studies since its discovery.in 2000, a homologue of ace, known as angiotensin-iconverting enzyme 2 (ace2), was cloned by two independent research groups [4, 5] . evidence indicates that ace2 negatively regulates the activated ras by degrading ang ii to the heptapeptide ang- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . moreover, through the mas receptor (a g protein-coupled receptor), the resulting ang-(1-7) counterbalances the cardiovascular effects of ang ii by opposing many at1 receptor-mediated actions [6] . ace2 and the axis ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas are becoming the focus of intense research regarding the ras [1] . the discovery of a (pro)renin receptor ([p]rr) and the introduction of renin inhibitors have also brought (pro)renin back into the spotlight [7] . far from being a straightforward cascade containing one substrate (agt), two proteases (renin and ace), two peptides (ang i and ang ii) and one receptor (at1), the ras currently consists of several axes upstream and downstream of the classical cascade, which include more than two dozen peptidases, nearly a dozen ang fragments and at least six different receptors [8] . here, we review three critical proteases (ace, ace2 and renin) within and beyond the ras and thus intend to find new connections between natural plant and/or food resources and the ras.occurrence, gene encoding and structure of ace ace (ec 3.4.15.1) is a monomeric glycoprotein that is distributed in many tissues and biological fluids. there are two isoforms of ace in humans: somatic ace (sace) and germinal ace (gace). somatic ace is found in many types of endothelial and epithelial cells [9] . germinal ace or testicular ace is present exclusively in germinal cells in the male testis. although ace is a type i integral membrane protein, it can also be released as a soluble enzyme into extracellular fluids, such as plasma and seminal and cerebrospinal fluids, following post-translational proteolytic cleavage by a membrane protein sheddase or secretase [10] [11] [12] .somatic ace and gace are encoded by a single gene containing 26 exons. the promoter for sace is situated in the 5 flanking region of the first exon, whereas that for gace is within intron 12, which results in different lengths for the two isoforms. the longer sace (150-180 kda) is transcribed from exon 1 to exon 26, excluding exon 13, whereas the shorter gace (90-110 kda) is transcribed from exon 13 to exon 26. exon 13 encodes a unique sequence for the n-terminus of gace, whereas downstream exons encode a common sequence for both isozymes [13] .somatic ace and gace both consist of a 28-residue hydrophilic c-terminal cytoplasmic domain, a 22-residue hydrophobic transmembrane domain that anchors the protein in the membrane and an n-terminal ectodomain ( fig. 1 ) that is heavily glycosylated with mannose, galactose, fructose, n-acetylneuraminic acid and n-acetylglucosamine [14] . the ectodomain of sace is further divided into two similar domains (n domain and c domain) encoded by the homologous exons 4-11 and 17-24, respectively, and each domain contains an active his-glu-x-x-his (hexxh) sequence [9] . somatic ace is the only known metallopeptidase with two homologous active sites [15] , which implies that there has been a gene duplication event during evolution [16] . except for a unique sequence constituting its n-terminus, gace is identical to the c-terminal half of sace [17] . due to cleavage of the membrane-bound residues by ace secretase, soluble circulating ace lacks a transmembrane portion and a cytosolic domain [18] .the three-dimensional x-ray crystallographic structure of a deglycosylated truncated version of gace (c domain of sace), reveals a preponderance of ␣-helices with a zinc ion and two chloride ions incorporated. a deep narrow channel separates the molecule into two subdomains and the active site is located toward the bottom of this channel. an n-terminal 'lid' on the top of molecule appears to allow only small peptide substrates access to the active site cleft. in fact, the structure bears little similarity to that of carboxypeptidase a (m14 family) on which the initial drug development of ace inhibitors was based. instead, it resembles rat neurolysin (m3 family) and pyrococcus furiosus carboxypeptidase (m32 family), despite sharing little sequence similarity with these two proteins [17] . corradi et al. [18] reported the crystal structure of the n domain of sace. similarly, it has an ellipsoid shape with a central groove dividing it into two subdomains, one of which contains the n-terminal region that covers the central binding cavity. but the structure reveals differences in the active site and it contains only one chloride ion, equivalent to chloride ii of gace. the three-dimensional structures of c domains (based on gace) and n domains provide an opportunity to design domain-selective ace inhibitors that may exhibit new pharmacological profiles [17, 18] .according to the catalytic mechanism and the critical amino acid residue involved, peptidases are classified into four major types: serine, cysteine, aspartic and metallo [15] . ace is an m2 family metallopeptidase: ma(e), the gluzincins [19] . two histidine residues of the functional motif hexxh and a third distant glutamate positioned 23-24 residues further towards the c-terminus are the ligands for the zinc cofactor [20] . an activated water molecule complexed to zn 2+ serves as the nucleophile to attack the carbonyl group of the targeted peptide bond [15] .the activity of ace is also chloride dependent. chloride primarily activates the active sites of ace and enhances the binding of substrates [9] . each active domain of ace displays differences in sensitivity to chloride activation [21] . the activity of the c domain of sace depends highly on chloride ion concentration and is inactive in its absence, whereas the n domain can be completely activated at relatively low concentrations of this anion and is still active in the absence of chloride [22, 23] . germinal ace depends on chloride to a lesser extent compared with the c domain of sace [9] . cushman and cheung [24] reported an optimal in vitro ace activity of rabbit rung acetone extract in the presence of 300 mm nacl at ph 8.1-8.3.the two active domains of sace are also subtly different in substrate specificity. they hydrolyze bradykinin almost equally but the c domain active site can hydrolyze ang i, substrate p [23] and hippuryl-his-leu [25] more efficiently, while the n domain active site preferentially hydrolyzes ang-(1-7) [26] , luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (lh-rh) [23] , the haemoregulatory peptide n-acetyl-ser-asp-lys-pro (acsdkp) [27] and alzheimer amyloid ␤-peptide (a␤) [28] . fuchs et al. [29] proved that the c-terminal catalytic domain was the main site of ang i cleavage in mice. the differentiation of catalytic specificity might be due to very subtle variation in substrate-specific amino acids [22] and chlorideinduced conformational alteration of active sites [23] .ace acts as an exopeptidase to cleave dipeptides from the free c-termini of two typical substrates, ang i and bradykinin. for certain substrates such as cholecystokinin [30] , substrate p [31] and lh-rh [32] , which have amidated c-termini, ace not only displays exopeptidase activity but also acts as an endopeptidase [33] . the most prominent example of endopeptidase activity is ace hydrolyzing the synthetic a␤-(1-40) peptide into four fragments: an a␤- peptide and the others corresponding to products of a␤-(1-7) hydrolysis [34] . thus, ace might have a more general impact on the metabolism of biologically active peptides than previously recognized [16] . the two substrates used most often for measuring ace activity and inhibition in vitro -hippuryl-his-leu and n-[3-(2-furyl)acryloyl]-lphenylalanylglycylglycine (fapgg) -only have the n-termini blocked and substrates with two termini blocked have been developed [22] .ace was originally isolated in 1956 as a 'hypertensinconverting enzyme' [35] . in the ras, ace cleaves the decapeptide ang i-(1-10) (asp-arg-val-tyr-ile-his-pro-phe-his-leu) into the octapeptide ang ii-(1-8) by removing the c-terminal dipeptide his-leu. when the ras is overactive, ang ii exerts its harmful effects primarily via the at1 receptor, whereas the at2 receptor may oppose and counterbalance those effects mediated by at1 receptor to exert protective actions [1] . ang ii is a potent vasoconstrictor, stimulates the release of aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone or vasopressin and increases the retention of sodium and water. these effects act directly in concert to raise blood pressure. a nonapeptide derivative of ang i, des-asp1-ang i-(2-10), prevents infarction-related and non-infarction-related cardiac injuries and disorders. his-leu can be cleaved from the peptide by ace to produce ang iii-(2-8) [14] , which has 40% of the vasoconstriction activity of ang ii. ang iii exerts its effects, in principle, in a similar manner to ang ii, and may be equally or even more important in mediating the release of vasopressin [1] . ace also degrades ang-(1-9) to ang-(1-7) then further degrades this peptide to the inactive ang-(1-5) (fig. 2 ). in addition, ace (also termed kininase ii) inactivates the vasodilators bradykinin-(1-9) (arg-pro-pro-gly-phe-ser-pro-phe-arg) and kallidin (lys-bradykinin) in the kallikrein-kinin system, by cleaving the c-terminal dipeptide phe-arg. ace eventually cleaves its primary metabolite bradykinin-(1-7) into the shorter fragment bradykinin-(1-5) [36] .through ang ii and aldosterone, ace may also be implicated in the impairment of nitric oxide bioavailability and cell oxidative stress, augmenting the generation of reactive oxygen species and peroxynitrite [37, 38] . with the ability to hydrolyze neuropeptides such as enkephalin [39, 40] , substrate p, neurotensin [31] and lh-rh, ace may be involved in the functioning of the brain and nervous system. ace may affect the digestive system by hydrolyzing the peptide hormone cholecystokinin and gastrin [30] . the in vivo experiment conducted by azizi et al. [41] proved that acute ace inhibition could increase the level of the natural stem cell regulator acsdkp in plasma. acsdkp substantially inhibits cell cycle entry of normal haematopoietic stem cells and protects haemopoiesis against damage caused by cycleactive cytotoxic agents [42] . acsdkp can also inhibit the proliferation of hepatocytes [43] and lymphocytes [44] and stimulate angiogenesis [45] in vivo. the in vivo antifibrotic effect of ace inhibition is partially mediated by acsdkp [46] . ace may also affect susceptibility to alzheimer's disease by degrading a␤ and preventing the accumulation of amyloid plaques in vivo [47] . in the brains of amyloid precursor protein swedish mutation transgenic mice, ace converts a␤ 1-42 to a␤ 1-40 and degrades a␤, and chronic inhibition of ace with captopril enhances predominant a␤ 1-42 deposition [48] . however, through the inhibition of brain ace activity in the a␤ 25-35 -injected mice, perindopril ameliorates cognitive impairment and may therefore have a beneficial effect on alzheimer's disease as well as hypertension [49] .using the assumed mechanistic analogy to other zinc metallopeptidases, plus the knowledge that several snake-venom peptides potentiate the action of bradykinin by inhibiting ace, efforts were undertaken to develop orally-active peptide analogues for potential use in the treatment of hypertension [9] . the first such compound, captopril or d-3-mercapto-2-methylpropanoyl-l-proline, is an analogue of the ala-pro sequence, with sulphydryl as a strong chelating group for the zinc ion. its adverse effects, which were the same as those caused by mercapto-containing penicillamine, prompted the design of non-sulphydryl ace inhibitors [50] . the results were two active inhibitors: enalaprilat and lisinopril. they are both essentially tripeptide analogues with a zinc-co-ordinating carboxyl group and a phenylalanine that occupies the s1 groove in the enzyme. lisinopril is a lysine analogue of enalaprilat but it is hydrophilic, with greater affinity than enalaprilat. the later compounds are all variations of the first three inhibitors, with most of the differences residing in the functionalities that bind the active site zinc and the s2 pocket. in addition to phosphonates, ketones are also useful as chelators [51] .currently, there are more than 10 ace inhibitors marketed that are widely used as first-line therapy for cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, heart failure, heart attack and left ventricular dysfunction. according to the functional moiety, they are divided into three types: thiol (captopril), carboxylate (benazepril, enalapril, lisinopril, moexipril, perindopril, quinapril, ramipril, trandolapril) or phosphate (fosinopril). some ace inhibitors are now administrated clinically as ethyl-ester prodrugs, which have good bioavailability but are inactive in their own right. they are then converted to the active diacid molecules in vivo by esterases.as a drug class, ace inhibitors are very effective, have a relatively low incidence of side effects and are well tolerated. a common side effect of ace inhibitors is a dry cough, which appears in 5-20% of patients and may result in the discontinuation of treatment. another serious problem is angioedema, which affects 0.1-0.5% of patients and can be life-threatening. the two side effects have generally been attributed to altered concentrations of bradykinin [51] . use of ace inhibitors during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy is contraindicated because of their association with an increased risk of foetopathy, a group of conditions that includes oligohydramnios, intrauterine growth retardation, hypocalvaria, renal dysplasia, anuria, renal failure and death. exposure to ace inhibitors during the first trimester of pregnancy may place the infant at increased risk for major congenital malformations [52] .the initial drug development of clinical ace inhibitors was based on the assumption of an active site related to that of carboxypeptidase a but organized to remove a dipeptide rather than a single amino acid from the cterminus of its substrate. it is now known that sace has two active sites, neither of which resembles that of carboxypeptidase a, and that these sites are not identical. clinical ace inhibitors, however, show little discrimination between these two active sites [9] . ang i is hydrolyzed predominantly by the c domain of sace in vivo [29] but bradykinin is hydrolyzed by both active sites [53] ; therefore a c domain-selective inhibitor would allow some degradation of bradykinin by the n domain and this degradation could be enough to prevent the accumulation of excess bradykinin that has been observed during attacks of angioedema. that is, the c domain-selective inhibition could possibly result in specialized control of blood pressure with fewer vasodilatorrelated adverse effects [51] . a structure-activity study has proved that the group substitution involving the phenyl ring and carbon chain at the sulphonyl and propionyl moieties of captopril is essential for better activity towards the c domain of ace [54] . there is increasing evidence that the n domain of sace is responsible for the in vivo degradation of the natural haemoregulatory hormone acsdkp [27, 41, 55] . so, n domain-selective inhibition might open up novel therapeutic areas. two phosphinic tetrapeptides, rxpa380 and rxp407, have been found to be highly selective inhibitors of the c and n domains of sace, respectively [51] . the availability of the three-dimensional structures of the c and n domains of sace makes the structure-based design of active site-specific inhibitors possible [17, 18] .ace2 (ec 3.4.17.-) is also a type i transmembrane glycoprotein and its expression has now been recognized as being ubiquitous. it appears to be susceptible to cleavage that releases the catalytical active ectodomain. a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (adam17; also known as tumour necrosis factor-alpha cleavage enzyme [tace]) is a major protease for soluble ace2 shedding, while phorbol ester, ionomycin, endotoxin and the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1␤ and tumour necrosis factor-alpha can also acutely induce ectodomain release [56] . calmodulin binding sites have been identified in the cytoplasmic tail of ace2 and calmodulin inhibitors are proved to increase ace2 shedding [57] . the cleavage site resides between amino acids 716 and 741 near the predicted transmembrane domain and residue lys 548 in the ectodomain plays an important role in dictating ace2 ectodomain shedding [58] . ace2 has 805 amino acids encoded from 18 exons and shares about 42% sequence identity with the n and c domains of sace [16] . ace2 also belongs to the m2 family of metalloproteases but consists of a single active site domain that, by sequence comparison, more closely resembles the n domain than the c domain of sace ( fig. 1) [11] . in addition to the conserved zinc metallopeptidase consensus sequence hexxh (amino acids 374-378), there is a conserved glutamate residue 24 residues c-terminal to the second histidine of the zinc motif, which serves as the third zinc ligand [16] . the threedimensional structure of a truncated extracellular region of human ace2 shows that the active site domain (residues 19-611) can be further divided into two subdomains i and ii, which form two sides of a long deep cleft and are connected only at the floor of the active site cleft by a prominent ␣helix. the deeply recessed and shielded proteolytic active site of ace2 is a common structural feature of proteases and can avoid hydrolysis of correctly folded and functional proteins. the zinc is co-ordinated by his 374 , his 378 , glu 402 and one water molecule in the subdomain i near the bottom, whereas a chloride ion is co-ordinated by arg 169 , trp 477 and lys 481 in the subdomain ii [58] . the ace2 transmembrane c-terminal domain shares 48% sequence identity with collectrin (fig. 1) , a non-catalytic protein shown to have a critical role in amino acid reabsorption in the kidney [59] , pancreatic beta cell proliferation and possibly insulin exocytosis [6] .unlike sace and gace, which are primarily dipeptidylcarboxypeptidases, ace2 functions predominantly as a monocarboxypeptidase, with a substrate preference for hydrolysis between proline and a hydrophobic or basic cterminal residue [6] . it is like carboxypeptidase a in its action model but is different in active structure because the latter has an hxxe zinc-binding motif with the third ligand (histidine) positioned 108-135 residues further towards the c-terminus [16] . ace2 efficiently cleaves a single residue phenylalanine from ang ii to generate ang- (1-7) , with about 400-fold higher catalytic efficiency than the conversion of ang i to ang-(1-9) by removing the c-terminal leucine residue (fig. 2 ). other substrates with high catalytic efficiency are apelin-13, dynorphin a-(1-13) and des-arg9bradykinin [60] . arg 514 of ace2 has been identified as a residue critical to substrate selectivity [61] . ace2 activity is also regulated by chloride ions; it has been proposed that chloride binding induces subtle changes in the conformation of the active site, which either facilitate or hinder substrate binding [6] . for the substrate ang i, ace2 activity increases with increased [cl − ] and a plateau is reached at approximately 500 mm cl − . for the substrate ang ii, an increase in ace2 activity is observed as [cl − ] increases from 0-100 mm but any further increase in [cl − ] decreases ace2 activity until a plateau is reached at 500 mm cl − ; ace2 activity at 500 mm cl − is even lower than that in the absence of cl − (0 mm). consequently, an increase in [cl − ] above 100 mm, which is the physiological concentration in human plasma, increases ang i and decreases ang ii cleavage by ace2. this has an effect on the localized concentration of ang ii in the kidney, where ace2 has a high level of expression and extracellular chloride ion levels fluctuate. thus, in vivo cl − sensitivity may serve as a homeostatic regulatory mechanism [61] . ace2 activity is unaffected by inhibitors of ace (captopril, lisinopril and enalaprilat) or carboxypeptidase a (benzylsuccinate and potato carboxypeptidase inhibitor) [16] .the major function of ace2 is to counter-regulate ace activity by reducing ang ii bioavailability and increasing ang-(1-7) formation. as a result, ace2 plays a crucial role in maintaining the balance between the two axes ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas and ace/ang ii/at1 of the ras; a chronic and sustained imbalance may lead to pathophysiology of the cardiovascular, renal, pulmonary and central nervous systems [62] . studies have shown that ace2 overexpression and recombinant ace2 treatment can attenuate hypertension in animal models [63, 64] , while in humans, there is a strong association between ace2 polymorphisms and hypertension in han chinese [65] . in addition to the ang ii system, ace2 may regulate blood pressure through other peptide systems, such as bradykinin and/or apelin [6] . ace2 gene delivery [66] and ace-(1-7) infusion [67] also have beneficial effects on atherosclerosis, whereas ace2 deficiency accentuates vascular atherosclerosis and inflammation [67] in animal models. regarding heart function, ace2 null mice display impaired cardiac contractility [68] and the loss of ace2 in wild-type mice accelerates adverse ventricular remodelling by potentiation of ang ii effects by means of the at1 receptors [69] . ang-(1-7), through interaction with the mas receptor, can improve atrial tachyarrhythmias [70] , myocardial performance, cardiac modelling and survival [3, 6] in rodent heart failure models. in humans, ace2 gene variants might be involved in modulation of left ventricular mass in men [71] and soluble ace2 activity is increased in patients with heart failure and correlates with disease severity to exert cardioprotective actions [72] . deletion of the ace2 gene in mice leads to the development of glomerulosclerosis and increased albuminuria [73] , while treatment with the ace2 inhibitor mln4760 can worsen renal damage in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice [74] . chronic treatment with ang-(1-7) improves renal endothelial dysfunction via the mas receptor in apolipoprotein e-deficient mice, by increasing levels of endogenous nitric oxide [75] , whereas genetic deletion of the mas receptor in mice leads to a reduction in urine volume, sodium retention, microalbuminuria and reduced renal blood flow, which are associated with upregulation of the at1 receptor and transforming growth factor-beta messenger ribonucleic acid [76] . this evidence indicates the protective role of ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas in renal function. ace2 has also been shown to regulate cardiovascular functions in brain regions. overexpression of ace2 in the rostral ventrolateral medulla reduces high blood pressure and heart rate in spontaneously hypertensive rats (shrs) [77] . in the nucleus tractus solitarius of shrs, ace2 gene transfer improves baroreceptor heart rate reflex [78] . in the mouse subfornical organ, ace2 overexpression inhibits at1 receptor expression and prevents ang ii-mediated pressor and drinking responses [79] . in addition, ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas can exert cerebroprotective functions in endothelin-1-induced ischaemic stroke in rodent models [80] . ace2 exerts a host of actions on the cardiopulmonary system, which include prevention of endothelial dysfunction, reduction in pulmonary oxidative stress, attenuation of vascular impairment, anti-inflammatory effects and anticardiac remodelling effects. all these properties are responsible for the protective role of ace2 against pulmonary arterial hypertension [81] .structure-based drug screening has identified two ace2 activators: a xanthenone (1-[(2-diethylamino)ethyl-amino]-4-(hydroxymethyl)-7-[(4-methylphenyl)sulphonyloxy]-9h-xanthene-9-one; xnt) and resorcinolnaphthalein. xnt hydrogen bonds with ace2 residues lys 94 , tyr 196 , gly 205 and his 195 , and resorcinolnaphthalein is involved in three hydrogen bonds with residues gln 98 , gln 101 and gly 205 . xnt and resorcinolnaphthalein modulate ace2 activity possibly by two mechanisms. logically, the closed conformation of the enzyme cannot allow the substrate into its active site. in the presence of compound, the free enzyme may be shifted to the open form, effectively increasing the activity coefficient of the enzyme. alternatively, product release is a rate-limiting step in ace2 turnover. ace2 activity may be enhanced in the presence of compound, as the enzyme-product complex empties more quickly and ace2 becomes available to start another cycle. xnt and resorcinolnaphthalein enhance in vitro ace2 activity in a dose-dependent manner and show no significant effects on ace activity. administration of xnt to shrs can result in a decrease in blood pressure, improvements in cardiac function and reversal of myocardial, perivascular and renal fibrosis [82] . the protective role of xnt against hypertension-induced cardiac fibrosis is associated with activation of ace2, increases in ang-(1-7) and inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinases [83] . furthermore, ace2 activation by xnt attenuates thrombus formation and reduces platelet attachment to vessels [84] . xnt also prevents pulmonary vascular remodelling and right ventricular hypertrophy and fibrosis in a rat model of monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension [85] . development of xnt is being pursued to translate the vasoprotective concept of ace2 into an effective cardiovascular therapy [62] . diminazine aceturate, a small molecule antiprotozoal agent that shares structural similarity with xnt, has recently been demonstrated to be a potent activator of ace2 and to decrease mean arterial pressure and myocardial fibrosis in shrs [86] . intracerebroventricular infusion of diminazine aceturate, prior to and following endothelin-1-induced middle cerebral artery occlusion, significantly attenuates cerebral infarct size and neurological deficits in a rat model [80] . these data suggest that diminazine aceturate may serve as a lead compound for the discovery of the next generation of drugs for the treatment of cardiovascular disease and hypertension [86] .interestingly, peptidase-independent actions of ace2 have also been elucidated. ace2 has been identified as an essential receptor for the coronavirus (cov) that causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). the spike protein of sars-cov attaches the virus to its cellular receptor ace2 with a binding domain on the spike protein mediating the interaction [87] . this ace2-spike interaction leads to endocytosis of virus particles through internalization with ace2, induces the fusion of virus with host cells and establishes sars-cov infection with the release of viral rnas into cytoplasm [6] . the spike protein of sars-cov also induces tace-dependent shedding of the ace2 ectodomain, with the involvement of the ace2 cytoplasmic domain. cellular tace and the ace2 cytoplasmic tail promote viral entry and infection. these observations indicate that ace2 shedding and its causative cellular signals may be attributable to sars-cov-induced tissue damage [88] . an ace2 inhibitor, n-(2-aminoethyl)-1 aziridine-ethanamine, has been identified as being effective in blocking sars-cov spike proteinmediated cell fusion [89] . the sars-cov receptor function of ace2 is independent of its catalytic activities for ang ii degradation but ace2-mediated ang ii degradation is still important for lung protection from sars pathogenesis [6, 90] . so, the consequence of long-term activation of ace2 must be determined and the effects of ace2 activators on the immune competence of animals and their vulnerability to sars-cov infection must be tested before these molecules are ready for preclinical trials [64] . ace2 is also the receptor for the human coronavirus nl63 that was discovered in 2004 in the netherlands and was shown to be globally distributed [91] . additionally, due to the high homology with collectrin at its transmembrane, ace2 binds to b 0 at1-family amino acid transporters and contributes to the absorption of neutral amino acids in animal intestines [6, 92] . thus, ace2 may be involved in multiple biological functions.renin (ec 3.4.23.15) is a key enzyme of the ras. since its discovery 100 years ago, an impressive quantity of information about renin has been compiled. it is generally accepted that the active renin found in the circulation of mammals almost exclusively originates from the kidney. in addition to systemic renin, there are a number of extrarenal tissues that express renin as part of the local or tissue-specific rass. within the kidney, renin is predominantly produced by the juxtaglomerular cells. (pro)renin gene transcription in these cells is controlled through several mechanisms, among which cyclic adenosine monophosphate (camp)/protein kinase a/camp response element binding protein (stimulatory) and calcium/protein kinase c (inhibitory) cascades are employed by physiological cues, whereas signal transducers, activators of transcription and nuclear factor b transcription factors (inhibitory) and members of the nuclear receptor superfamily probably become relevant in pathological situations. prorenin is stored in vesicles, activated to renin and then released upon demand. the release of renin is under the control of the intracellular camp (stimulatory), ca 2+ (inhibitory) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate signalling pathways. meanwhile, a great number of intrarenally generated or systemically acting factors have been identified that control renin secretion directly at the level of renin-producing cells, by activating the camp or ca 2+ signalling pathways [93] . renin is an aspartyl protease with a typical structure made of two lobes. the cleft between the lobes contains the active site, characterized by two catalytic aspartic residues. renin is a highly specific enzyme and has only one known substrate (agt) [94] .prorenin is the 'inactive' precursor of renin. in addition to the main organ, the kidney, other tissues, such as the brain, the adrenal gland, the submandibular gland, the glands of the reproductive system and adipose tissue, are also able to secrete prorenin in the surrounding milieu and in plasma. in contrast to renin, prorenin is released constitutively; renin and prorenin levels are usually well correlated. under some physiopathological circumstances, such as pregnancy and diabetes, prorenin levels exceed by far those of renin [94] . prorenin has a prosegment of 43 amino acid residues attached to the n-terminus of mature renin; the prosegment folds into an active site cleft of mature renin to prevent catalytic interaction with agt [95] . prorenin-renin conversion occurs in the kidney before renin is released from the juxtaglomerular cells. several enzymes, including proconvertase 1 and cathepsin b, have been proposed to be responsible for this irreversible cleavage of the prosegment from prorenin to form mature renin. a (reversible) non-proteolytic activation of prorenin may also occur. at acidic ph and/or low temperature, prorenin is capable of undergoing a conformational change, involving the unfolding of the prosegment from the enzymatic cleft. this non-proteolyticallyactivated prorenin is fully enzymatically active [96] . under physiological conditions, approximately 2% of plasma prorenin is in the open form and can also display enzymatic activity [94] .the traditional assumptions of renin being just an enzyme responsible for the cleavage of agt and prorenin being just an 'inactive' proenzyme were challenged by the cloning of a human (p)rr in 2002 [94] . the (p)rr is a single transmembrane-domain protein of 350 amino acids, with a large unglycosylated and highly hydrophobic n-terminal domain responsible for renin and prorenin binding and a short cytoplasmic tail of about 20 amino acids involved in intracellular signalling [97] . the (p)rr was first identified on cultured human mesangial cells and bound well to renin and prorenin with a k d in the nanomolar range [96] . binding of prorenin induced a conformational change in the molecule, increasing its enzymatic activity from virtually zero to values similar to those of active renin in solution without proteolytic removal of the prosegment [93, 98] . two regions in the human prorenin segment, namely t 7p fkr 10p (a gate that is not accessible by its specific antibodies until it is loosened from the active site cleft) and i 11p flkr 15p (a handle, a protruding pentameric segment), have been identified as being crucial for the non-proteolytic activation [99] . renin bound to the (p)rr displays a 3-to 5-fold increase in the catalytic efficiency of agt conversion to ang i compared with free renin [97, 100] . in addition to the ang-dependent function on the cell surface related to the increased catalytic activity of receptor-bound (pro)renin (renin activity of activated prorenin and increased activity of renin) that leads to the formation of ang i from agt, the (p)rr system also has ang-independent intracellular effects that are not necessarily related to the ras [7] . pathological conditions like high blood pressure upregulate the receptor, whereas elevated (pro)renin concentrations downregulate the receptor via translocation of the transcription factor promyelotic zinc finger protein to the nucleus [98] . in the ang-independent signalling pathways, prorenin-induced activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 and subsequent phosphorylation of heat shock protein 27 result in actin polymerization, while (pro)renin-induced activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (p44/p42) signalling cascade leads to the intracellular expression of profibrotic genes, giving rise to the synthesis of transforming growth factor-␤, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, collagen 1 and fibronectin. these effects potentially increase cardiac and renal hypertrophy and fibrosis [97, [101] [102] [103] . the discovery of the (p)rr has confirmed the hypothesis that renin is also a hormone. it has been suggested that blocking the (p)rr may be a new target for renal and cardiac end-organ protection [1] . additionally, the mannose-6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor ii receptor can bind both renin and prorenin with high affinity and is believed to serve as a clearance receptor for renin/prorenin. an intracellular renin-binding protein has been also cloned and found to be an inhibitor of renin activity but its deletion affected neither blood pressure nor plasma renin [94] .after the discovery of the receptor, a (p)rr antagonist was designed, based on the idea that the prosegment contains a handle region that binds to the receptor, allowing prorenin to become catalytically active in a non-proteolytic manner [96] . the antagonist (also known as hand region peptide, hrp), consisting of 10 amino acids (nh 2 -rillkkmpsv-cooh), resembles the handle region (i 11p llkk 15p ) of rat prorenin prosegment and will thus competitively bind to the (p)rr as a decoy peptide and inhibit the receptor-mediated activation of prorenin [95] . treatment with the hrp in diabetic mice and rats decreased the renal content of ang i and ii and inhibited the development of nephropathy without affecting hyperglycaemia [104, 105] . in stroke-prone shrs, continuous subcutaneous administration of the hrp inhibited activation of the tissue ras without affecting the circulating ras or arterial pressure and significantly attenuated the development and progression of proteinuria, glomerulosclerosis and cardiac fibrosis [106, 107] . infusion of the hrp in human (p)rr transgenic rats significantly inhibited the development of glomerulosclerosis, proteinuria, mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and transforming growth factor-␤ expression in the kidneys [108] . future research should be able to determine to what degree the beneficial in vivo effects of hrp are due to prorenin blockade [98] and are related to interference with renin binding and the ras [4] . decoy effects of the hrp, however, were not confirmed by other research groups [109] [110] [111] [112] .ace inhibitors and at1 receptor blockers (arbs) are proven to be effective therapeutic agents in the treatment of cvd. however, both ace inhibitors and arbs lead to a substantial compensatory rise in circulating active renin and ang peptides that may eventually limit their therapeutic potential [113] . moreover, the increased ang i seen with ace inhibitors can subsequently be converted to ang ii by non-ace pathways, mediated by chymase and chymotrypsinlike ang-generating enzyme [114] . in addition to the side effects of ace inhibitors, such as cough and angioedema, a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials in 2010 suggested that arbs are associated with a modestly increased risk of new cancer diagnosis, although conclusions about the exact risk of cancer associated with each particular drug have not been drawn [115] . based on this study, the united states food and drug administration is conducting a review to assess the possible link between the use of arbs and cancer. therefore, direct renin inhibition may be an alternative pharmacological approach to ras inhibition.renin is the rate-limiting step of the ras and the concept of blocking the ras at its origin by inhibiting renin has existed for at least 50 years [113] . the first-generation renin inhibitors were peptide analogues of agt and the secondgeneration compounds were peptidomimetic agents that are dipeptide transition-state analogue inhibitors of the active site. but these renin inhibitors had limited clinical use due to poor metabolic stability and oral bioavailability, short duration of action, weak antihypertensive activity and high cost of synthesis [114] . a combination of molecular modelling and x-ray crystallographic analysis of the active site of renin led to the development of aliskiren, a new non-peptide low-molecular-weight orally-active renin inhibitor. aliskiren has a high binding affinity for renin and appears to bind to both the hydrophobic s1-/s3-binding pocket and a large, distinct subpocket that extends from the s3-binding site toward the hydrophobic core of the enzyme. aliskiren is a potent competitive inhibitor of renin but very poorly inhibits related aspartic peptidases. it shows no effects on cytochrome p450 isoenzyme activities and is not bound extensively to blood proteins, therefore having a low potential for drug interactions [113] . compared with the earlier renin inhibitors, aliskiren is more resistant to intestinal degradation and possesses significantly improved oral bioavailability. the terminal half-life ranges from 23 to 40 hours, which makes it suitable for once-daily dosing. aliskiren monotherapy displays an antihypertensive efficacy similar if not superior to that of other first-line antihypertensive drugs, with a safety and tolerability profile similar to that of arbs. combined with various antihypertensive agents, aliskiren exhibits synergistic effects [114] . from 2007, aliskiren was approved by regulatory bodies in both europe and the united states, for use alone and with other agents in the treatment of hypertension [113] . recent studies showed that aliskiren treatment also markedly increased the plasma concentration of (pro)renin in patients and failed to inhibit the non-catalytic effects of (pro)renin [110, 116] . the pharmaceutical company novartis reported that the addition of aliskiren to standard therapy for patients recovering from a heart attack did not provide the anticipated effect of limiting adverse changes to the heart's left ventricle. in december 2011, novartis announced the early termination of the aliskiren trial in type 2 diabetes using cardio-renal endpoints (altitude) and advised that aliskiren should not be used in combination with ace inhibitors or arbs in patients with diabetes. the study was conducted in type 2 diabetic patients at high risk of fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular and renal events; aliskiren 300 mg was given in addition to an ace inhibitor or an arb. the overseeing data monitoring committee concluded that study patients were unlikely to benefit from aliskiren and that there was a higher incidence of adverse events related to non-fatal stroke, renal complications, hyperkalaemia and hypotension in this highrisk population after 18-24 months of combined therapy (www.novartis.com). aliskiren has been shown to be a very safe antihypertensive after more than 20,000 patient-years of data. however, as we have seen in ongoing telmisartan alone and in combination with ramipril global endpoint trial (ontarget) that the combination of telmisartan (an arb) and ramipril (an ace inhibitor) is associated with more adverse events without an increase in benefit in patients with vascular disease or high-risk diabetes without heart failure [117] , the combination of multiple safe drugs in this class may no longer be a promising strategy.over the last decade, a number of food-derived compounds have been shown to have in vitro ace inhibitory activity. some of them display significant antihypertensive activity in rats and humans. among these compounds, foodderived ace inhibitory peptides have been most widely studied [14, 118] . a quantitative structure-activity relationship study indicated that a potent ace inhibitory dipeptide should have a large and hydrophobic amino acid at the c-terminus and a non-polar amino acid or possibly a positively charged amino acid at the n-terminus. for tripeptides, the most favourable residues for the c-terminus are aromatic amino acids, while hydrophobic amino acids are preferred for the n-terminus and positively charged amino acids are preferred for the middle position [119] . the in vitro half-maximal inhibitory concentration (ic 50 ) values of food-derived ace inhibitory peptides are about 1000fold higher than that of synthetic captopril but they have higher in vivo activities than would be expected from their in vitro activities. it has been suggested that food-derived peptides might act via different antihypertensive mechanisms, possess higher affinities for tissues and be more slowly eliminated than synthetic captopril [118] . until now, only two lactotripeptides (vpp and ipp) have been successfully commercialized. data from van mierlo et al., however, did not support a blood pressure-lowering effect of the two tripeptides in caucasians [120] . given the discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro results, further investigation into the in vivo and clinical antihypertensive effects and mechanisms of food-derived ace inhibitors is necessary. three dipeptides (ir, kf and ef) in pea protein hydrolate have been identified as inhibiting renin activity in vitro [121] . oleic acid and linoleic acid isolated from rice and some cereals also have in vitro renin inhibitory activity [122, 123] . a series of studies have shown that saponins from different food/plant sources, primarily from soybean, can inhibit in vitro renin activity [124] [125] [126] [127] ; among them, orally administered soybean saponin can lead to a reduction of blood pressure in shrs but the direct evidence for saponin suppressing plasma renin activity in vivo is still lacking [124] . experiments are required to further investigate the biochemical and biological properties of these plant/food-derived non-peptides that are related to renin inhibition. significant conceptual progress made in the last few years leads us to conclude that ace2 could serve as a new direction for improved therapeutics for cardiovascular disease. compared with ace inhibitor therapy, ace2 is an endogenous regulator of the ras. targeting ace2 would not only produce the vasoprotective/antiproliferative peptide ang-(1-7) but would also influence the vasoconstrictive/proliferative effects of the ace/ang ii/at1 axis. as a part of the vasoprotective/antiproliferative axis, ace2 can effectively control fibrosis and structural remodelling and is extremely beneficial for pulmonary hypertension. ace2 activation may provide improved protection and reversal of ischaemia-induced neural damage. thus, direct activation of ace2 could result in better outcomes in cardiovascular disease. additionally, ace2 is a multifunctional enzyme with many biologically active substrates. the effects of ace2 on substrates other than ang i and ang ii may hold relevance for the treatment of cardiovascular disease [62] . xnt analogues exist in many natural plant resources and have shown various physiological functions. using these resources to search for in vitro ace2 activators would be a good starting point for developing plant food-derived ace2 activating agents. ongoing experiments would characterize these ace2 activators. compared with ras regulatory drugs, these plant/food-derived bioactives appear more natural and safer to the consumer. as part of a daily diet, bioactives from food sources may result in a much lower healthcare cost. plant/food-derived ras regulators could be applied in the prevention of hypertension and as initial treatment in mildly hypertensive individuals [118] .the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.over 60 years have passed since the renin-angiotensin system (ras) was initially described [1] . since that time, the ras has become one of the best-characterized hormonal systems, reflecting its central role in the control of blood pressure. within the ras, angiotensin ii (ang ii) is considered the primary physiological product, and the basic pathway leading to ang ii formation has remained unchanged in theory. the ras cascade is inaugurated with the hydrolysis of the precursor angiotensinogen to angiotensin i (ang i) by the aspartic protease, renin. ang i is, in turn, converted to ang ii principally by the zinc metallopeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace), although in the heart the serine protease chymase also appears to play a role ( fig. 1) [2] . throughout the past decade, the formation and function of other angiotensin fragments, such as ang (1-7), ang (1-9), ang iii [ang (2- 8) ] and ang iv [ang (3- 8) ] have been investigated. in particular, the role of ang (1-7) has been of greatest * corresponding author. impact, since this fragment mediates opposing effects to ang ii, thus providing a novel channel of regulation within the ras [3] ( fig. 1 ). ang (1-7) acts through its own specific g-protein-coupled receptor, mas [4] . ace has been identified as a fundamental regulator of the ras in humans and is an important target in regulation of blood pressure homeostasis. classical ace inhibitors, such as captopril and lisinopril, have proven to be effective anti-hypertensive therapeutics [5] . in 2000, a human homologue of ace was discovered independently by two groups using differing genomic-based strategies and was referred to as aceh [6] or ace2 [7] . the ability of ace2 to produce ang (1-7) via two alternative pathways, in concert with ace ( fig. 1) , has led to its increasing therapeutic relevance and interest. most recently, ace2 has been implicated in cardiac dysfunction, hypertension [8, 9] , heart failure and ventricular remodelling [10, 11] , diabetes [12] , ang (1-7) regulation during pregnancy [13] and as a functional receptor to the coronavirus that cause severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) [14] . the foundation for future research into the biochemistry and physiological role of this enzyme has been provided both by the development of specific ace2 in-multi-author review 2705 hibitors [15, 16] and the elucidation of crystal structures for ace2 [17] , testicular ace (tace) [18] and its drosophila orthologue, ance [19] .orthologues of human ace2 have been identified in both the rat and mouse genomes and display ~86 and 82% identity, respectively, to the nucleotide sequence of human ace2. the human ace2 gene consists of 18 exons, with the first 12 exons of ace2 being of similar size to the first 11 exons of the ace gene [6, 7] (fig. 2 ). in ace2 there is a union of exons 5 and 6, which jointly correspond to exon 5 of ace ( fig. 2) ; the zinc-binding motif (hexxh) of ace2 is located within exon 9, compared to exon 8 of the ace gene. a significant difference between ace2 and ace is that only a single ace2 protein species appears to be formed. the mammalian ace gene gives rise to two isoforms, somatic ace (sace) with two catalytic domains (n-and c-domain) and tace, which has only a single catalytic domain and resembles the c-domain of sace ( fig. 2) . the initiation sites of the transcripts for sace and tace occur in different regions of the ace gene and are under the control of alternate, tissue-specific promoters [20] . the regulatory elements for the ace2 gene have thus far not been described.the ace2 gene maps to the x chromosome in humans (xp22) [6, 7] , rodents (xq32) [8] and mice (xf5) [21] . in three different rat models of either spontaneous or salt-induced hypertension, the rat gene was mapped to a defined quantitative trait locus (qtl) on the x chromosome. in these hypertensive rat models, a reduction in ace2 gene and protein expression was observed, suggesting that ace2 is a strong candidate for a hypertensive qtl on the x chromosome [8] . furthermore, two single-nucleotide polymorphisms have been identified in the ace2 locus and were associated with a number of cardiovascular endpoints in caucasian subjects [22] . the strong association of the ace2 gene with hypertension is further strengthened by the tissue-specific expression of the ace2 messenger rna (mrna) at high levels as a single 4.3-kb transcript in kidney and heart [6, 7] . immunohistochemical studies of heart sections have localised ace2 to the endothelium of ventricular intramyocardial vessels and occasionally over the smooth muscle and adventitia of larger blood vessels. surprisingly, no difference in immunoreactive staining was observed between sections of non-failing and failing hearts, although ace2 was originally cloned from a human heart failure complementary dna (cdna) library [7] , and ace2 activity is increased in human heart ventricles of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy patients [10] . in the kidney, ace2 was observed on endothelium of intrarenal arteries figure 1 . schematic diagram of the renin-angiotensin system (ras). in the classical ras, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) catalyses the production of angiotensin (ang) ii from ang i. ang ii is a biologically active vasoconstrictor that interacts with angiotensin g-protein-coupled receptors at1 and at2. ang (1-7), a metabolite of ang i and ang ii, has opposing effects to ang ii which are mediated via interaction with the mas [ang (1-7)] receptor. ace2 converts ang ii to ang (1-7) with 370-fold greater catalytic efficiency than its conversion of ang i to ang (1-9). nep, neprilysin; ap-n, aminopeptidase n; ap-a, aminopeptidase a. and the epithelia of proximal tubules [7] . as with other zinc metalloproteases, such as tace [23] and neprilysin [24] , ace2 is also highly expressed in testes [6, 7] , although ace2 knockout male mice appear fertile [8] .recently, a more extensive assessment of ace2 expression using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) and tissue immunohistochemistry has revealed an even higher level of ace2 gene and protein expression in all regions of the gastrointestinal (g-i) tract, in addition to its high expression in the heart, kidney and testes [25, 26] .the open reading frame of human ace2 encodes an 805amino-acid polypeptide [6] . hydropathy analysis of the ace2 protein sequence reveals two hydrophobic regions, a potential 18-amino-acid signal peptide at the n-terminus and a 22-amino-acid hydrophobic region near the cterminus. like ace, ace2 is likely to be a type i integral membrane protein, anchored to the cell membrane via the hydrophobic region located towards the c-terminus of the protein. the n-terminal region of ace2, which contains the active site, faces the extracellular space. ace2 has been localised to the cell surface in stably transfected chinese hamster ovary (cho) cells by both immunofluorescence and cell surface biotinylation studies (f. j. warner and turner a. j. 2003, unpublished data). thus, ace2, like ace, is an ectoenzyme, poised at the cell surface to hydrolyse circulating peptides.human ace2 has six potential n-glycosylation sites, as indicated by the presence of the asn-x-ser/thr motif (at positions asn 53 , asn 90 , asn 103 , asn 322 , asn 432 , asn 546 ) in its primary structure [6, 17] . complete deglycosylation of denatured soluble ace2 with n-glycosidase f, which hydrolyses all classes of asn-linked glycans, results in a shift in the migration of the polypeptide from 120 to ~85 kda, the predicted m r for unglycosylated ace2 [6] . comparatively, sace contains 17 n-glycosylation sites, of which 10 are located in the n-domain, the remaining 7 being found in both the c-domain of sace and in tace. in addition to n-linked glycans, tace is also extensively o-glycosylated within the first 36 amino acids of the nterminal sequence, although these o-linked sugars are not essential for expression or activity [27] . o-linked glycosylation has not been reported for sace or ace2. whether the presence of all sugar moieties associated with ace2 glycosylation is necessary for correct targeting and activity remains to be established. the contribution of five of the potential glycosylation sites for expression, processing and activity in human tace and rabbit ace has been investigated [28] [29] [30] in an effort to produce a minimally glycosylated form of tace for crystallisation studies [18] . glycosylation at either the first or third sites (from the n-terminus) is sufficient to produce a catalytically active form of human tace [30] . similarly, the first and second sites are essential for rabbit tace [28] . of the seven potential glycosylation sites of ace2, the first putative site, asn 53 , in humans is found to be conserved in rat ace2, as well as in human, mouse and rabbit tace, and drosophila ance and acer, suggesting that this site is essential for maintaining activity. overall, these studies of sace and tace [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] imply that carbohydrate processing has an essential role in the expression, maturation and proteolytic activity of membrane-bound and soluble ace by influencing polypeptide folding and intracellular targeting and transport. similar studies are required to reveal which of the potential glycosylation sites are important for the processing of ace2.both sace and tace are solubilised from the membrane surface through the action of ace secretase [33] , the precise identity of which is still unknown. even so, it is thought to be a member of the adamalysin (adam) family of zinc metalloproteases [34] . comparative inhibitor studies suggest that ace secretase is related, although distinct from, the well-characterised, tumour necrosis factor-a convertase (tace, adam 17) [35] [36] [37] . ace2 also exists in both a membrane-bound and a soluble form [6] [7] [8] . in cho cells stably expressing ace2, an active form of ace2 is secreted from cells into the medium [6] . these studies suggest that the soluble form of ace2 is derived from the membrane-bound form via a post-translational proteolytic cleavage event similar to that occurring with ace. the cleavage site for human tace and sace has been mapped to the arg 1203 /ser 1204 bond (sace numbering), 24 amino acids proximal to the cell membrane, in vitro and in vivo [38, 39] . the exact sequences around the cleavage site or distance from the membrane do not appear to be direct determinants of secretase activity [40, 41] , but may be dependent on the conformational state of the juxta-membrane stalk region [42] . the juxtamembrane regions of human ace and ace2 display minimal sequence homology. nevertheless, at least two potential (arg-ser and arg-leu) secretase cleavage sites exist within the juxtamembrane stalk region of ace2. whilst the formation of soluble ace2 has been established in vitro [6, 7] , a soluble form of ace2 has not yet been detected in vivo in human body fluids, although ace2 has been detected in urine collected from rats [m. c. chappell, 2003, unpublished data]. until now, the majority of studies in rat and mouse models [8, 9] have thus far relied on an indirect means of measuring ace2 activity in plasma through changes in levels of either ang ii or its metabolite ang (1-7), by radioimmunoassay [43] . future investigation into the mechanisms involved in the solubilisation of ace2 and whether this secretory event is regulated will aid our understanding of the physiological relevance of ace2 in modulating ang i, ang ii and its other potential substrates both locally and systemically.ace2 is a zinc metalloprotease that belongs to the gluzincin clan (ma) of metalloproteases, of which thermolysin is the archetypal member. catalysis by members of this family occurs via a mechanism whereby zinc facilitates nucleophilic attack by a water molecule on the scissile carbonyl bond of the substrate. rather than form a covalent intermediate, metalloproteases utilise co-ordination of a water molecule to a metal ion to form a noncovalent intermediate. three other ligands co-ordinate the zinc ion and are conserved in all metalloproteases of the ma family ( fig. 3a) . in ace2, the first two zinc coordinating ligands, his 374 and his 378 , are found within the consensus sequence, hexxh, whereas the third zinc ligand, glu 402 , lies 23 amino acids c-terminal to this motif. corresponding residues are found in the two domains of ace and tace ( fig. 3a) [18, 20] . in ace, an exxxd motif contains the third zinc ligand (e) followed by an aspartyl residue. in ace2, glu 406 replaces this aspartyl residue, whose role in ace is to position the first histidine zinc ligand ( fig. 3a) . mutagenesis of asp 991 to glu in the c-domain of sace reduces, but does not eliminate, the activity of wild-type ace [44] . the role of glu 406 in ace2 remains to be explored. based upon sequence alignment, ace2 more closely resembles the n-domain of sace with ~60% similarity and 41% identity to the overall protein sequence of sace [6] . although the juxtamembrane, transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of ace2 do not resemble sace, they do share 48% identity with a 222-amino acid transmembrane glycoprotein, collectrin, which is derived from renal collecting ducts [45] (fig. 2 ). ace2 has been classified as member of the m2 family along with sace, tace and drosophila ance and acer. however, unlike other cmls, cell. mol. life sci. vol. 61, 2004 multi-author review 2707 members of the m2 family, ace2 is a carboxypeptidase rather than a peptidyl dipeptidase, being the first mammalian carboxypeptidase to be identified to contain the hexxh motif rather than the typical carboxypeptidase a-like motif, hxxe(x) 123-132 h. in this sense, ace2 more closely resembles the bacterial carboxypeptidases of the m32 family, thermus aquaticus carboxypeptidase (taqcp) [46] and pyrococcus furiosus carboxypeptidase (pfucp) [47] , which also utilize an hexxh motif for zinc binding [48] (fig. 3a) . the high sequence homology between ace2 and the bacterial carboxypeptidases is, however, only confined to the region surrounding the catalytic binding domains. consequently, ace2 has been separated from the m32 family carboxypeptidases when portrayed schematically in a cladogram based upon pro-tein sequence alignment ( fig. 3b ). however, despite there being a lack of sequence homology, close similarities have been noted between the tertiary structures of ace2 [17] tace, [18] , pfucp [47] and the neurotensin-degrading enzyme, neurolysin [49] , suggesting convergent structural evolution of these metalloproteases.the recent elucidation of crystal structures for human ace2 [17] and a previously described comparative model of the ace2 active site, based upon the crystal structure of tace [18, 50] , have identified key active site differences between ace2 and tace. both studies indicate that the catalytic mechanism of ace2 closely re- multi-author review 2709 sembles that of ace. differences in substrate specificity, however, suggest distinctive differences exist between the substrate binding subsites of ace2 and tace. ace2 cleaves a single amino acid from the c-terminus of its substrates, whereas ace functions as a peptidyl dipeptidase. the basis for this difference relates to the pocket (s2¢ subsite) and binding of the substrate c-terminus. in ace2, the s2¢ subsite is smaller as a result of the r273 fi q substitution and is only able to accommodate one amino acid instead of a second terminal peptide bond, as compared with that of tace [17, 50] . the inhibitory action of ace inhibitors, captopril and lisinopril, is based, in part, upon their ability to mimic the dipeptidyl c-terminal binding of ace substrates [51] . this feature may be one factor that contributes to the ineffectiveness of captopril and lisinopril to inhibit the proteolytic activity of ace2 [6] . a diverse range of peptides have been screened as potential physiological substrates for ace2 [50, 52] . around 12 peptides have been identified that are hydrolysed to a significant extent by ace2 (table 1) . ace2 cleaves both ang i and ang ii, although ace2 has an almost 400-fold higher catalytic efficiency for hydrolysis of ang ii [52] . ang i also inhibits ace2 hydrolysis of fluorogenic sub-strate mca-apk(dnp)-oh weakly (k i = 2.2 mm) [14] . the majority of studies investigating a physiological role for ace2 have concentrated on the ability of ace2 to hydrolyse ang ii and its role in the ras. however, ace2 also hydrolyses the opioid peptide dynorphin a (1-13) and the hypotensive peptide apelin-13 with comparable kinetics to that of ang ii, as well as des-arg 9 bradykinin, b-casomorphin and the growth hormone secretagogue ghrelin [52] . the ability of ace2 to hydrolyse substrates other than ang ii suggests ace2 may have a role in these other peptidergic systems. alignment of the substrates hydrolysed by ace2 reveals a potential consensus sequence, p 3 -x-p 1 fl x hydrophobic/basic , where the cleavage site occurs between the p 1 and a c-terminal hydrophobic/basic residue [50] . the vast majority of peptides efficiently cleaved by ace2 possess a proline at the penultimate position (p 1 ) of the peptide and a phenylalanine at the c-terminus. however, a basic residue can be substituted at the c-terminus, as observed in neurotensin (1-8), neurotensin (1-11) and ghrelin (table 1) [50, 52] . the topology of the s1 subsite, in particular residue y510, appears to be a determining factor in limiting the size of the residue found at the substrate p 1 position. substrates with medium-sized amino acids such table 1 . substrates and inhibitors of human soluble ace2 (adapted from [52] ).sequence p 3 -x-p 1 ø x hydrophobic/basic hydrolysis reference the sequence of each peptide is depicted using single-letter codes for each amino acid. an arrow indicates the site of hydrolysis. c, complete hydrolysis; p, partial hydrolysis; n, no hydrolysis all indicate the degree to which peptide substrates were hydrolysed. n.d., not determined. as proline or leucine, but not bulky residues like tyrosine or phenylalanine, at the p 1 position are cleaved [17] . the presence of a proline at p 3 , but not p 2 , may also be a determinant for ace2 activity [50] . for instance, both ang i and dynorphin a (1-13) which contain a proline at the p 3 position are cleaved by ace2, whereas a proline at the p 2 position, as observed in ang (1-9) and bradykinin, prevents hydrolysis by ace2. the exception to this is neurotensin (1-13) , which despite having a proline in the p 3 position, is not a substrate for ace2 (table 1) . further clarification of the rules governing ace2 hydrolysis is required.current studies [50, 52, 53] have established the dependence of ace2 on ph and monovalent anions for catalytic activity. anion activation of ang i hydrolysis by ace was first recognised by skeggs and co-workers in 1954 [54] . the dependence of ace on chloride ions is both substrate- [55] and domain-specific [56] . both ace and ace2 exhibit a preference for clover other monovalent ions, fand br - [52, 57] . the molecular mechanism for anion activation is yet to be fully understood, although it has been proposed that chloride ions may induce a slight change in the conformation of the active site that facilitates binding [58] . the crystal structure for lisinopril-complexed tace has revealed two concealed chloride ions [18] . four ligands, arg 489 , arg 186 , trp 485 and water bind the first chloride ion (cl1). the ligands, tyr 224 , arg 522 and a water molecule bind the second chloride ion (cl2), which is located closer to the co-ordinated zinc ion [18] . the c-domain ace residue arg 1098 (equivalent to arg 522 in tace) has been identified as a crucial residue for clactivation of sace activity [59] . both tyr 244 and arg 522 are conserved in human ace2 (tyr 207 and arg 514 ), in addition to all known ace sequences [59] , implying that these conserved residues may also be involved in mediating the cleffect observed for ace2 and other related aces. however, the native crystal structure of the ace2 ectodomain shows only a single bound chloride ion, instead of two as observed in the lisinopril-complexed tace [17] . the location of this single chloride ion in the native ace2 structure is almost identical to the position of the first chloride ion (cl1) in the lisinopril-complexed tace [17, 18] . since no native crystal structure for tace has been solved [18] and the resolution of the crystal structure of ace2 complexed with mln4760 (ace2 inhibitor) was not high enough to differentiate water from chloride ions [17] , it remains unknown if the second chloride ion (cl2) in lisinopril-complexed tace is unique to the inhibitor bound state. future site-directed mutagenesis studies of the potential residues involved in chloride binding will give a greater understanding of the mechanisms underlying anion activation. [50, 52] , abzgfspy (no 2 ) and abzspy(no 2 ) [53] markedly increases. in contrast, the presence of chloride ions for hydrolysis of ang ii by ace2 is not essential. in fact, hydrolysis of ang ii is inhibited ninefold at 2.0 m nacl [50] . the control of ace2 activity through ph and anion activation presents the question of its physiological relevance. both ph and chloride ion concentrations are, for the most part, relatively constant in blood plasma, to which ace and ace2 are theoretically exposed. under physiological conditions, ph 7.4 and 100 mm [cl -], and based upon the data presented by guy and co-workers [50] , ace2 would only exhibit ~15% of its maximal activity for ang i, but be ~90% active towards ang ii. hence, it may be that anion activation serves to regulate substrate specificity, particularly in organs such as the kidney where chloride ion concentrations fluctuate greatly.the first generation of selective inhibitors for ace2 have been designed and synthesised (table 1) [15, 16] . a series of non-peptide compounds were constructed based upon the ace2 substrate consensus p-x(1-3)-p 1 -fl-x hydrophobic and the requirement of a centrally located carboxylate to co-ordinate with the zinc ion [15] . this lead resulted in the synthesis of an inhibitor (mln-4760, table 1) possessing sub-nanomolar affinity (ic 50 , 50% inhibitor concentration 0.44 nm) for ace2 and 220,000-and 22,000fold less affinity for human tace and bovine carboxypeptidase a, respectively [15] .using an alternative strategy, potent ace2 peptide inhibitors have been identified through screening of constrained peptide libraries [16] . the most potent inhibitor, dx600, a 26-amino acid n-terminal acetylated and cterminal amidated peptide, displays a k i of 2.8 nm using ang i as a substrate. dx600 exhibited a combination of both competitive and non-competitive inhibition. intravenous bolus injection of dx512 (k i , 139 nm), an analogue of dx600, in conscious spontaneously hypertensive rats (shr) produced a dose-dependent depressor response characterised by a decreased mean arterial pressure and accompanied by transient tachycardia [16] . these findings are in contrast to the hypothesis that ace2 is linked to systemic arterial pressure [60] . this hypothesis is supported by studies in ace2 knockout mice where ablation of ace2 either did not have a direct effect on blood pressure or increased systolic blood pressure [8, 9] . furthermore, ace2 mrna and protein expression levels are reduced in shr compared with control wistar kyoto rats [8] . there are two possible expla-nations for these conflicting results. first, ang ii may not be the sole physiological substrate involved in mediating the effects of ace2 on blood pressure. apelin-13 (k cat /k m , 2.0 ¥ 10 6 m -1 s -1 ) is cleaved by ace2 with kinetics similar to that of ang ii (k cat /k m , 1.8 ¥ 10 6 m -1 s -1 ), and apelin-36 is also a substrate [52] . both peptides also produce hypotensive systemic effects [61, 62] that may be accentuated in the absence of ace2. second, the inconsistencies observed among these studies may originate from the fundamental differences that exist between an animal which has never produced a protein and may develop compensatory mechanisms and an animal in which the same protein is inhibited after birth. nevertheless, with the recent development of inhibitors these discrepancies can now be addressed, as well as promote new studies of ace2 in normal physiology and in disease.in a remarkably short space of time, much knowledge has accumulated on the structure, enzymology and physiological functions of ace2, but much still remains to be elucidated. the counterbalancing roles of ace and ace2 in the ras are gaining credence, but other metabolites, for example apelin, may be physiologically relevant substrates. ace2 has been implicated in a number of disease conditions including hypertension, diabetes and cardiac function. most recently, its identity as the sars virus receptor opens new avenues for ace2 research particularly in relation to the nature of the interactions between the viral spike glycoprotein and ace2. more clinical studies are required to validate disease models, and for this purpose, generally available ace2 inhibitors are of fundamental importance. the recent structural solutions of both ace and ace2 should facilitate further design of potent and selective ace2 inhibitors. finally, in this rapidly developing field, there may be yet further surprises that this new member of the ace gene family has to provide.icine blog (fang, karakiulakis, & roth, 2020; gurwitz, 2020) https:// blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2020/03/17/angiotensin-andthe-coronavirus have addressed the involvement of ace2 as the receptor for the sars viruses, raising concerns about the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, (ace inhibitors, for example, captopril, lisinopril, enalapril, as well as angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs, for example, losartan, valsartan, telmisartan) in individuals who have hypertension, cardiovascular or renovascular diseases.all three of these publications report that arbs increase ace2, either based upon an observation of increased urinary ace2 (furuhashi et al., 2015) , a misquote of a recent report (wan, shang, graham, baric, & li, 2020) of the interactions of sars cov with ace2 (fang et al., 2020) , and amplification of this misquote https:// blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2020/03/17/angiotensinand-the-coronavirus.the interpretation of the furuhashi et al., 2015 (furuhashi et al., 2015 report, that increased urinary ace2 indicates an increase in ace2 synthesis is likely incorrect for three reasons: (a) the increase in urinary ace2 was only seen with olmesartan. losartan, candesartan, valsartan and telmisartan did not increase urinary ace2.(b) soluble ace2 is ace2 that is shed from membranes, reflecting a distinctly different process than ace2 synthesis. increased urinary ace2 suggests a reduction in membrane bound ace2, indeed, it has been suggested that increased urinary ace2 is a marker for and might be a causal factor for diseases associated with hyperactivity of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), such as chronic kidney disease (palau, pascual, soler, & riera, 2019) . (c) urinary ace2 likely reflects proximal tubule ace2 expressed on the apical side of tubular epithelial cells that has been shed by the actions of adam17 (also known as tnfα converting enzyme, tace, and tnfα convertase) (palau et al., 2019; wysocki et al., 2013; xiao et al., 2014) . the molecular weight of shed ace2 arising from the cell membranes from healthy individuals is~90 and~120 kda (mizuiri et al., 2011) , well above the glomerular filtration limit, so urinary ace2 would not reflect ace2 levels outside of the kidney (wysocki et al., 2013) unless smaller fragments of shed ace2 that retain immunoreactivity to the ace2 antibody used in the elisa assay are present.at this time the effects of atr1 blockers and ace inhibitors on membrane bound ace2 in human lung is unknown, so any suggestion that they increase sars-cov-2 infectivity currently lacks a sound rationale (danser, epstein, & batlle, 2020; vaduganathan et al., 2020) .ace2 plays an important role in inactivating angiotensin (ang) ii as well as to generate ang 1-7 (lazartigues, feng, & lavoie, 2007; warner, smith, hooper, & turner, 2004) , and any reduction in its activity could increase the ability of ang ii to stimulate at 1 receptors, which mediate both the pressor and proinflammatory actions of ang ii (forrester et al., 2018; piqueras & sanz, 2020; ranjbar et al., 2019; zhou, ando, macova, dou, & saavedra, 2005) as well as reduce formation of ang 1-7 which is reported to have cytoprotective properties in the lung and its vasculature (y. li et al., 2016; ye & liu, 2020) . moreover, it is unlikely that inhibitors of ace2 activity would significantly compete for the same or overlapping binding sites on ace2, as the active site of ace2 is the hemgh domain at amino acids 374-378, while the putative sars-cov-2 spike protein binding domains are amino acids 30-41, 82-84, and 353-357 https://www-ncbi-nlm-nihgov.ezproxylocal.library.nova.edu/protein/np_001358344.1. moreover, the binding sites for sars-cov-1 on ace2, which are the same as those reported for sars-cov-2 (walls et al., 2020 ) are reported to not overlap with the substrate binding site of ace2 based upon the inability of the ace2 inhibitor mln-4760 (dales et al., 2002) to inhibit sars-cov-1 binding to ace2 (f. li, li, farzan, & harrison, 2005) . of interest however, is the promising concept of administering exogenous ace2 coupled with the fc region of an immunoglobulin as a neutralizing antibody to serve as a decoy receptor and inactivator of sars-cov-2 (kruse, 2020) thereby preventing it from binding to membrane boundclinical trials of renin-angiotensin system-based therapies (including therapies targeting sars-cov-2 ace2 interactions) listed in clinicaltrials.gov as of april 6, 2020 with cytotoxic targeting of the sars-cov-2 virus has recently been registered on clinicaltrials.gov (table 1) .since inflammation is one of the major causes of morbidity of sars-cov-2 infection, and at 1 receptors are known to cause inflammation (forrester et al., 2018; piqueras & sanz, 2020; ranjbar et al., 2019; zhou et al., 2005) , at 1 receptor blockers (arbs) present an additional therapeutic modality to minimize complications of the respiratory impairments caused by this virus. while ace inhibitors present an equivalent therapeutic option to arbs for treatment of hypertension and cardiovascular and renovascular disease, their ability to protect bradykinin from degradation, manifested as the ace inhibitor cough, as well as the increased risk of angioedema could be a cause for concern (messerli, bangalore, bavishi, & rimoldi, 2018) .however, ace inhibitors can increase ang 1-7 production directly from ang i via endopeptidase activity (karamyan & speth, 2007) and they also protect ang 1-7 from degradation to the inactive metabolite ang 1-5 (chappell, pirro, sykes, & ferrario, 1998) . there is abundant capacity to synthesize ang ii in the lungs as well as at 1 receptors to mediate its effects (oakes, fuchs, gardner, lazartigues, & yue, 2018) .in a mouse model of lung inflammation induced by bacterial lipopolysaccharide, arbs reportedly reduced the pathological injury (ye & liu, 2020) . gurwitz (2020) noted that there is a large population of individuals who are taking arbs for treatment of hypertension (gurwitz, 2020) . there are now several retrospective surveys registered with clinicaltrials.gov (table 1) to determine if the use of an arb or ace inhibitor is associated with sars-cov-2 infections and the degree of morbidity or death compared to individuals taking non-arb antihypertensive medications that will readily inform us as to the utility of arbs and ace inhibitors to ameliorate this disease.as of this writing, the american college of cardiology, theamerican heart association and the heart failure society of america all recommend that patients with hypertension continue to takearbs and ace inhibitors as directed https://www.acc.org/latest-incardiology/articles/2020/03/17/08/59/hfsa-acc-aha-statementaddresses-concerns-re-using-raas-antagonists-in-covid-19 as well as several other biomedical societies listed recently (vaduganathan et al., 2020) . 4/2/20 using anamnestic data collected from the health record of the hospital or of the general practitioner, we will count the number of covid-19 patients enrolled that were treated with ace inhibitors or arbs to observe whether antihypertensive ace inhibitors or arbs increases the severity of the clinical manifestation of covid19.note: as of april 6, 2020 there are 16 trials listed with clinicaltrials.gov: three viral decoy studies, one of which has been withdrawn, five arb therapy studies, one ang 1-7 (product of ace2) study, two withdrawal of ace inhibitor or arb therapy with or without antihypertensive drug replacement studies, and five retrospective studies of arb or ace inhibitor use relationship to covid infection incidence and morbidity. different types of studies are separated by shading differences.as of april 13, 2020, there were four additional trials listed with clinicaltrials.gov: one additional arb therapy trial, one withdrawal of aceinhibitor/arb therapy, one retrospective study of ace inhibitor/arb therapy, and one study to observe ras activity in covid 19 patients.robert c. speth https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6434-2136background: a potential association between the use of angiotensin-receptor blockers (arbs) and angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ace) inhibitors and the risk of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has not been well studied. methods: we carried out a population-based case-control study in the lombardy region of italy. a total of 6272 case patients in whom infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was confirmed between february 21 and march 11, 2020, were matched to 30,759 beneficiaries of the regional health service (controls) according to sex, age, and municipality of residence. information about the use of selected drugs and patients' clinical profiles was obtained from regional databases of health care use. odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for associations between drugs and infection, with adjustment for confounders, were estimated by means of logistic regression. results: among both case patients and controls, the mean (±sd) age was 68±13 years, and 37% were women. the use of ace inhibitors and arbs was more common among case patients than among controls, as was the use of other antihypertensive and non-antihypertensive drugs, and case patients had a worse clinical profile. use of arbs or ace inhibitors did not show any association with covid-19 among case patients overall (adjusted odds ratio, 0.95 [95% confidence interval {ci}, 0.86 to 1.05] for arbs and 0.96 [95% ci, 0.87 to 1.07] for ace inhibitors) or among patients who had a severe or fatal course of the disease (adjusted odds ratio, 0.83 [95% ci, 0.63 to 1.10] for arbs and 0.91 [95% ci, 0.69 to 1.21] for ace inhibitors), and no association between these variables was found according to sex. conclusions: in this large, population-based study, the use of ace inhibitors and arbs was more frequent among patients with covid-19 than among controls because of their higher prevalence of cardiovascular disease. however, there was no evidence that ace inhibitors or arbs affected the risk of covid-19.renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers and the risk of covid-19severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) uses the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as the receptor for its spike protein to invade cells and replicate. 1 ace2 presents a high homology with ace, a key enzyme in the regulation of blood pressure. 2 in some animal studies, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors (a category that includes ace inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers) have been reported to increase expression of ace2. [3] [4] [5] these findings have led some researchers to postulate that the use of these drugs might enhance the access of sars-cov-2 into cells, predisposing patients to infection or increasing severity of covid-19. [6] [7] [8] this hypothesis was fuelled by results from the first case series that was published in which age, hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart diseaseconditions associated with the use of raas inhibitorswere identified as potential risk factors for severe cases and in-hospital deaths. [9] [10] [11] [12] by contrast, other authors have proposed use of angiotensin-receptor blockers as a preventive measure, or even a therapy, for covid-19 because of their potential to reduce lung injury caused by angiotensin ii. 13 raas inhibitors are among the most widely used drugs globally for indications such as hypertension, heart failure, kidney complications of diabetes, and myocardial infarction; hence their discontinuation because of covid-19 could cause patients harm. 14 scientific societies and drug regulatory agencies alike have advised against their discontinuation until sound evidence is available. 15 to provide a solution to this urgent issue, we designed a pharmacoepidemiological study with the aim of assessing whether the odds of exposure to raas inhibitors relative to other antihypertensive drugs was higher among patients with covid-19 admitted to hospital than in the general population, adjusted for age, sex, and cardiovascular comorbidities and risk factors.in this case-population study, we used an epidemiological approach, conceived as a surveillance method to assess adverse drug effects, 16 to provide a rapid answer to our study question. briefly, this method uses data from a series of patients with an illness from a specific region (cases) and data from patients randomly sampled from a primary health-care database in the same region (population controls). assuming that the primary health-care database represents the source population of the cases, a random sample of controls from that database would provide a valid estimate of the prevalence of the exposure and covariates in the source population, approaching the primary base paradigm of case-control studies. 17 here, we collected data on patients (cases) aged 18 years or older with a pcr-confirmed diagnosis of covid-19 who were admitted to seven hospitals in madrid, spain, between march 1 and march 24, 2020. during the study period, the madrid region was in the upward part of the outbreak, with an average of 465 inpatient admissions, 48 intensive care unit (icu) admissions, and 76 deaths per day associated with covid-19 (official data are available online). the seven participating hospitals belong to the national health system (nhs) and are distributed all over the autonomous community of madrid (appendix p 2). cases were selected consecutively according to the date of admission to hospital until the planned sample size was met in a competitive manner. for our population controls, we used a random sample of ten individuals per case, individually matched to our cases by sex, age (exact), region (ie, madrid), and date (day and month), extracted from the last available year (2018) from the primary health-care database base de datos para la investigación farmacoepidemiológica en atención primaria (bifap; figure 1 ).the ethics research committee of the university hospital príncipe de asturias (the coordinating centre) assessed the study protocol and granted a favourable opinion on march 18, 2020, including a waiver for the informed consent of patients taking part in the study. the data extracted were fully anonymised and no attempt was made to interview patients or their relatives. the study complied with the provisions of the spanish legislation and the declaration of helsinki 2013. the scientific committee of bifap granted access to pseudonymised data for controls on march 26, 2020. the study protocol is registered in the eu electronic register of post-authorisation studies, eupas34437, and is available online.evidence before this study inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) have been hypothesised to predispose patients to more severe covid-19. this hypothesis is based on two facts: these drugs have been reported to upregulate the expression of angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace) 2, the gateway used by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 to enter cells, and patients with severe covid-19 have a high prevalence of cardiovascular diseases. many scientific societies adopted the position of not recommending the discontinuation of treatment. yet, epidemiological evidence is lacking and the hypothesis has not been confirmed or refuted. we searched pubmed on april 15, 2020, for publications in english since jan 1, 2020, using the search terms "covid-19" and "ace inhibitors or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers or raas inhibitors or ras inhibitors or raas blockers or ras blockers", filtering by "human" and "observational study", and no result was returned.using a case-population study design, we found no difference between the risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital associated with the use of raas inhibitors and the risk associated with the use of other antihypertensive drugs, once fully adjusted for age, sex, and cardiovascular comorbidities and risk factors. additionally, we found no increased risk with either ace inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers. the lack of association between raas inhibitors and risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital was observed in both the most severe (fatal cases and those needing admission to an intensive care unit) and less severe inpatients.the available evidence supports that raas inhibitors are safe and should not be discontinued for fear of an increased risk of covid-19. information on disease and the clinical disease course of cases was retrieved from hospital medical records, while information on drug exposure and comorbidities before admission were mainly obtained from electronic primary health-care records that can be accessed through the nhs's primary health-care data platform, horus, by authorised health-care workers in madrid. all electronic case report forms were sent on a weekly basis from each hospital to the coordinating centre, where data quality control was done. this quality control involved the selection of a random sample of clinical records from each hospital and double-checking the information collected on drug exposure and comorbidities through horus. information on drug exposure and comorbidities of population controls was obtained from the database bifap, owned by the spanish agency for medicines and medical devices, which extracts infor mation from the electronic primary health-care records of the nhs from participating regions. this database contains information from 1·15 million patients from madrid, and the distribution of age and sex among patients is comparable to the population census of the region (appendix pp 3-4). the horus and bifap databases access the same primary health-care data of patients in the madrid nhs, and the catchment population of the seven hospitals taking part in the study and the population attending primary care were the same.the main outcome variable was admission to hospital of patients with covid-19 confirmed by a positive pcr test. hospitals posted in-house protocols for clinical management and hospital admission based on criteria issued by the ministry of health, including, but not limited to, respiratory failure (oxygen saturation <90%, severe hypoxaemia [partial pressure of oxygen <60 mm hg], or breathing rate >30 breaths per min, while breathing ambient air); abnormal chest x-ray compatible with covid-19-associated pneumonia (bilateral pneumonia or unilateral pneu monia with damage in different lung lobes); and relevant clinical alterations including haemodynamic, hepatic, renal, or haematological derangements, together with clinically significant laboratory abnormalities (such as abnormal increase in d-dimer, ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, or c-reactive protein), or severe lymphocytopenia. the date of admission was considered the index date. then, we followed up patients and identified those who had been admitted to the icu or who died in hospital. when considering a severity analysis, these patients were considered to be the most severe cases. the antihypertensive drugs examined were ace inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, renin inhibitors, aldosterone antagonists, calcium-chan nel blockers, diuretics, β-blockers, and α-blockers for cardiovascular indications (appendix p 8). also, we grouped ace inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, renin inhibitors, and aldosterone antagonists (alone or combined with any drug) in a variable called raas inhibitors; and calciumchannel blockers, β-blockers, diuretics, and α-blockers (alone or combined with other drugs different from raas inhibitors) in a variable called other antihypertensive drugs.we defined exposure to the drug or drugs of interest as current use when an individual had a prescription lasting until the month before the index date; otherwise exposure was defined as non-use. for the main analysis, we generated a variable with the following mutually exclusive categories: non-use of any antihypertensive drug, current use of raas inhibitors, and current use of other antihypertensive drugs and we used current use of other antihypertensive drugs as the reference category (unless otherwise specified). when a patient used a raas figure 1 : case-population study design covid-19 cases requiring admission to hospital were selected consecutively from seven hospitals in madrid, spain. data were collected for ten individuals per case who were matched for age, sex, and index date (day and month) of hospital admission of cases (matched controls) from the 2018 madrid region database of bifap, a national primary health-care database. drug exposure and comorbidities before the index date (2020 for cases and 2018 for controls) were collected from primary health-care records of the nhs in madrid: for cases through horus (an online platform to access primary-care clinical records from any health-care centre of the nhs in madrid) and for controls through bifap. bifap=base de datos para la investigación farmacoepidemiológica en atención primaria. nhs=national health system. inhibitor concomitantly with any other anti hypertensive drug, they were always assigned to the raas inhibitor category. subsequently, we disaggregated the category current use of raas inhibitors into their different pharmacological subgroups: ace inhibitors, angiotensinreceptor blockers (excluding current users of ace inhibitors), aldosterone antagonists (excluding current users of ace inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers), and renin inhibitors (excluding current users of any other raas inhibitor). for some analyses, we also disaggregated the category current use of other antihypertensive drugs into its respective components (calcium-channel blockers, β-blockers, diuretics, and α-blockers), and used current use of calcium-channel blockers as the reference category. among current users of raas inhibitors, we distinguished when they used the drugs in monotherapy or combined with other antihypertensive drug (either in fixed-dose combinations or concomitant use as separate medicinal products). the date of first prescription of the current treatment episode was also extracted to estimate the duration of treatment (categorised as up to 1 year and longer than 1 year).we estimated the sample size needed for different scenarios of effect size (ie, odds ratio [or]) and prevalence of use of antihypertensive drugs in controls, assuming an α error of 0·05 and a power of 80%. according to this calculation, a sample size of 1000 cases and 10 000 controls would allow us to detect an or of 1·5 or greater if the prevalence of use of raas inhibitors among controls was at least 5%. we express quantitative variables as mean (sd) and qualitative variables as frequencies and percentages. differences in means were assessed using the student's t test and differences in percentages were assessed using the χ² test. we describe the distribution of comorbidities among cases and controls and their association with covid-19 requiring admission to hospital was assessed through univariable conditional logistic regression to calculate crude ors) and 95% cis (adjusted for age and sex due to matching).when assessing potential confounding factors (covariates), we considered the presence of the fol lowing comorbidities at the index date: history of hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidaemia (defined as use of lipid-lowering drugs), ischaemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation, heart failure, thromboembolic disease, cerebrovascular acci dent, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic renal failure, and cancer. with the cardiovascular risk factors and comorbidities, we constructed a composite variable of background cardiovascular risk with the following three categories: patients with history of any of ischaemic heart disease, cerebrovascular accident, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, or thromboembolic disease; patients with any of the following cardiovascular risk factors (and no cardiovascular disease): hypertension, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, or chronic renal failure; and the remainder of patients without any cardiovascular diseases or risk factors.we assessed the association between current use of raas inhibitors and risk of covid-19 requiring data are n (%), mean (sd), or odds ratio with 95% ci in parentheses. ace=angiotensin-converting enzyme. copd=chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. raas=renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. *the exposure to the specific comorbidity or drug was compared with non-exposure of that specific comorbidity or drug; crude odds ratios are adjusted for sex and age. †includes ischaemic heart disease, cerebrovascular accident, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and thromboembolic disease. ‡includes hypertension, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, and chronic renal failure. §patients can be counted several times if they were current users of two or more antihypertensive drugs belonging to different pharmacological classes, hence total exceeds 100%. admission to hospital, compared with either current use of other antihypertensive drugs (main analysis) or nonuse of any antihypertensive drug, through univariable and multivariable conditional logis tic regressions. in the multivariable model, we included all covariates described as potential confounding fac tors (with the exception of hypertension) to calculate adjusted ors and 95% cis. current users of raas inhibitors had a prevalence of hypertension over 90% (appendix p 13); for this reason, we did not include hypertension in the multivariable model because the potential for confounding was minimal.we assessed potential effect modification by age (<70 vs ≥70 years), sex, hypertension, diabetes, and background cardiovascular risk through a stratified analysis. we assessed the statistical interaction by comparing the adjusted ors across different strata using the altman and bland test of interaction. 18 statistical significance was set at a p value of less than 0·05. however, for stratified analyses we applied bonferroni correction to allow for multiple testing, for which we set the statistical significance level at a p value of less than 0·008 (0·05 divided by 6-ie, the number of stratified analyses done).according to covid-19 severity we differentiated two groups of cases: fatal cases and those requiring admission to an icu (ie, most severe), and less severe cases. in each group, we analysed the association with raas inhibitors as described earlier and compared the adjusted or across the strata using the altman and bland test of interaction. 18 we planned four sensitivity analyses. first, an analysis for the correction for secular trends. the control series was sourced from a 2018 population, the last available year in the bifap database, while cases were from 2020. thus, in case the prevalence of use of raas inhibitors increased over time, the exposure among controls would be an underestimate of 2020 data and, as a result, the adjusted ors could be overestimated. to assess the magnitude of this potential problem, we examined trends of use of different antihypertensive drug sub groups in the madrid population in bifap over the period 2012-18 and forecast the result corresponding to 2020 via a linear regression model. then, we divided the prevalence of use estimate for 2020 by the prevalence observed in 2018 for every antihypertensive drug class and took this ratio as an indicator of the overestimation of adjusted ors. for raas inhibitors, the ratio was 1·04 overall (1·05 for ace inhibitors and 1·01 for angiotensin-receptor blockers), whereas for other antihypertensive drugs, including calcium-channel blockers, the ratio was close to 1·00 (appendix pp 5-7). in the sensitivity analysis, we corrected for these patterns of use, dividing the adjusted or of raas inhibitors, ace inhibitors, and angiotensinreceptor blockers by their respective estimated ratios 2020:2018. second, we assessed the potential effect of media alerts. concerns about the association between raas inhibitors and severe covid-19 were highlighted data are n (%) or odds ratio with 95% ci in parentheses. the different pharmacological classes examined are mutually exclusive categories, so that patients who used combinations are counted only once, applying the following criteria: ace inhibitors include current users of any ace inhibitors alone or combined with any other antihypertensive drug (in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products); angiotensin-receptor blockers include current users of any angiotensin-receptor blocker, alone or combined with any other antihypertensive drug that is not an ace inhibitor (in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products); aldosterone antagonists include current users of any antagonist of aldosterone, alone or combined with any other antihypertensive drug that is not an ace inhibitor or angiotensin-receptor blocker (in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products); other antihypertensive drugs include calcium-channel blockers, diuretics, β-blockers, and α-blockers, alone or combined (excluding raas inhibitors; either in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products). ace=angiotensin-converting enzyme. raas=renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. *adjusted for sex and age. †adjusted for the matching variables plus history of diabetes, dyslipidaemia, ischaemic heart disease, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, thromboembolic disease, cerebrovascular accident, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, cancer, and chronic renal failure.number (%) of cases and controls given is the number exposed to raas inhibitors in each stratum and the resulting odds ratio, adjusted for the matching variables and other comorbidities different from the one examined. raas=renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. in several letters to medical journals [8] [9] [10] and news began to appear in the spanish press and social media networks after march 16, 2020, when the spanish agency for medicines and medical devices published a note recommending not to discontinue these drugs. 15 because this news might have had an influence on adherence to recorded treatment, we stratified the results into two study periods: march 1-16, and march 17-24. third, we excluded aldosterone antagonists and renin inhibitors from the raas inhibitor group. for the main analysis we included aldosterone antagonists in the raas inhibitor group because these drugs have also been reported to upregulate ace2 expression; 19 but we did a sensitivity analysis to estimate the adjusted ors among raas inhibitors excluding aldosterone antagonists and renin inhibitors.finally, we included hypertension in our multivariable model.we did all statistical analyses using stata/se (version 15).the funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. the corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.we collected data on 1139 cases and 11 390 matched controls. despite being matched by age and sex, cases had a greater prevalence of diverse comor bidities than did controls (table 1) .the prevalence of use of different subgroups of antihypertensive drugs was higher in cases than in controls, which yielded positive associations with risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital in both crude and fully adjusted analyses compared with nonuse of any antihypertensive drug (adjusted or for raas inhibitors 1·71, 95% ci 1·46-2·01; and for other antihypertensive drugs 1·82, 1·47-2·26; appendix p 9). when use of other antihypertensive drugs was set as the reference category, the adjusted or associated with the current use of raas inhibitors was 0·94 (0·77-1·15; table 2). no significant increase in the risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital was observed with either ace inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers, nor did we find any difference when these drugs were used in monotherapy or in combination with other drugs (table 2) .the adjusted ors associated with other antihypertensive drugs compared with non-use by different pharma cological subgroups were 1·96 (95% ci 1·43-2·69) for calcium-channel blockers, 1·79 (1·32-2·43) for diuretics, 1·68 (1·16-2·43) for β-blockers, and 1·96 (0·57-6·71) for α-blockers (appendix p 9). when the current use of cal cium-channel blockers was set as the reference category, the adjusted or was 0·87 (0·65-1·18) for raas inhibitors, 0·74 (0·54-1·02) for ace inhibitors, and 1·02 (0·74-1·40) for angiotensin-receptor blockers (appendix p 10).compared with long-term (longer than 1 year) users of other antihypertensive drugs, long-term users of raas inhibitors had an adjusted or of 0·96 (95% ci 0·76-1·21) for risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital. likewise, compared with short-term users (up to 1 year) of other antihypertensive drugs, short-term users of raas inhibitors had an adjusted or of 1·39 (95% ci 0·92-2·10).the results of the assessment of the potential effect modification of raas inhibitors by age (<70 and ≥70 years), sex, diabetes, hypertension, and background cardiovascular risk are shown in figure 2 data are n (%), mean (sd), and odds ratio with 95% ci in parentheses. most severe cases are those who died and those admitted to an intensive care unit. less severe cases are all other inpatients. the different pharmacological classes examined are mutually exclusive categories, so that patients who used combinations are counted only once, applying the following criteria: ace inhibitors include current users of any ace inhibitors alone or combined with any other antihypertensive drug (in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products); angiotensin-receptor blockers include current users of any angiotensin-receptor blocker, alone or combined with any other antihypertensive drug that is not an ace inhibitor (in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products); and other antihypertensive drugs include calcium-channel blockers, diuretics, β-blockers, and α-blockers, alone or combined (excluding raas inhibitors; either in fixed-dose combinations or in different medicinal products). ace=angiotensin-converting enzyme. raas=renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. *adjusted for the matching variables plus history of diabetes, dyslipidaemia, ischaemic heart disease, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, thromboembolic disease, cerebrovascular accident, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, cancer, and chronic renal failure. †including ace inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and renin inhibitors. table 3 ). compared with current use of other antihypertensive drugs, the adjusted or associated with the current use of raas inhibitors was 1·08 (95% ci 0·80-1·47) among the most severe cases and 0·86 (0·66-1·11) among the less severe cases (table 3) . in both severity groups, the 95% cis for the adjusted ors of ace inhibi tors and angiotensin-receptor blockers compared with other antihypertensive drugs overlapped with each other, indicating no significant differences (table 3) .in our first sensitivity analysis, the adjusted or of current use of raas inhibitors compared with current use of other antihypertensive drugs corrected for secular trends was 0·90 (95% ci 0·74-1·11), and 0·76 (0·61-0·95) for ace inhibitors and 1·09 (0·87-1·36) for angiotensin-receptor blockers. in our second sensitivity analysis, up to march 16, the adjusted or associated with current use of raas inhibitors compared with current use of other antihypertensive drugs was 0·98 (95% ci 0·77-1·25) and for march 17 onwards was 0·88 (0·62-1·24; figure 2 ). in our third sensitivity analysis, the exclusion of aldosterone antago nists and renin inhibitors from the raas inhibitor group hardly had any effect (overall adjusted or 0·92, 95% ci 0·76-1·12; among the most severe cases, 1·06, 0·78-1·44; and among the less severe cases, 0·84, 0·65-1·09; appendix pp [11] [12] . and in our final sensitivity analysis, the inclusion of hypertension in the multi variable model had little effect on the adjusted ors for raas inhibitors (1·00, 0·82-1·23), ace inhibitors (0·85, 0·68-1·06), or angiotensin-receptor blockers (1·17, 0·93-1·47).here we show that the current use of raas inhibitors is not associated with an increased risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital (including fatal cases and those admitted to an icu) compared with other antihypertensive drugs. no substantial difference was observed between ace inhibitors and angiotensinreceptor blockers, nor among short-term and long-term users. sex, age, and background cardiovascular risk did not significantly affect the results, although use of raas inhibitors was associated with a reduced risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital in patients with diabetes.our results do not support the hypothesis that previous intake of raas inhibitors facilitates or increases the severity of covid-19. this hypothesis emerged when two facts were linked: the finding that raas inhibitors upregulate the expression of ace2, [3] [4] [5] 19 and the observation that hypertension, diabetes, and ischaemic heart disease were highly prevalent among patients with severe covid-19, [9] [10] [11] [12] conditions for which raas inhibitors are widely used. however, these facts are only two pieces of a more complex puzzle. evidence to support the idea that ace2 might have a dual role in covid-19 is increasing. 20 on the one hand, ace2 overexpression might increase the susceptibility of cells to sars-cov-2, but, on the other hand, its downregulation associated with older age, male sex, and cardiovascular comorbidities, and further heightened by sars-cov-2 binding and internalisation 21, 22 could increase the unopposed action of angiotensin ii and have a key role in the subsequent organ injury. 23 ace2 counteracts the deleterious effect of raas axis. in patients with covid-19, liu and colleagues 24 reported that serum concentrations of angiotensin ii were signifi cantly higher in infected individuals than non-infected individuals and was linearly associated with viral load and lung damage. ace2 inactivates angiotensin ii and increases the generation of angiotensin 1-7, a peptide that, acting on the mas receptor, exerts a vasodilatory effect and anti-inflammatory and antioxidative actions. 20 in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), reddy and colleagues 25 observed a higher ratio of angiotensin 1-7:angiotensin i among survivors than nonsurvivors, which adds evidence to the idea that the counterregulation exerted by the axis of ace2-angiotensin 1-7-mas receptor benefits patients with ards. in line with this theory, recom binant soluble ace2 has been shown in animal models of ards to protect subjects from lung injury, [26] [27] [28] and clinical trials are underway in patients with covid-19 (nct04287686). finally, to our knowledge, the case series of patients with covid-19 published to date has not been adjusted for important potential confounding factors, such as sex, age, and cardiovascular comorbidities. 29 in our study, we used controls who were matched to cases for sex and age, and we also adjusted for a number of comorbidities.to our knowledge, two epidemiological studies have been published to date that aimed to explore the association between raas inhibitors and covid-19 comparing severe cases with less severe cases among inpatients. 30, 31 neither of these studies found an increased risk of severe outcomes associated with these drugs, and in one study 30 a substantially reduced risk of death and transfer to a critical care unit within 7 days of admission to hospital was observed among users of ace inhibitors (or 0·29, 95% ci 0·10-0·75). notably, in both studies, the authors considered not only exposure to ace inhibitors before (7 days) or at admission to hospital, but also during hospital stay. in our study we used population controls, not just a case series, and only considered drugs used before admission.several cardiovascular comorbidities are clearly linked to severe covid-19, and raas inhibitors are often used to treat such cardiovascular conditions; thus substantial confounding by indication can be expected. 32 in our view, this bias explains the positive association we found between current use of any antihypertensive drug and risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital compared with non-use of such drugs, which did not disappear after full adjustment for comorbidities. this problem can be mitigated if current users of raas inhibitors are compared with current users of other drugs that share, at least partially, their indications, but not their safety issues. 32 for instance, some researchers have recommended calciumchannel blockers as a suitable alternative treatment to raas inhibitors, because calcium-channel blockers have not been reported to increase the expression of ace2. 8 following this reasoning, other antihypertensive drugs in general, and calcium-channel blockers in particular, can be considered a more valid comparator group than non-use of such drugs. we followed this approach and reassuringly we found no increased risk when using either of these drug groups as the reference group. nevertheless, raas inhibitors do not share all indications with other antihypertensive drugs; hence, the comorbidity pattern associated with use of these drugs might not overlap and some residual confounding by indication could remain. to explore the extent of this possibility, we examined the comorbidity pattern associated with various types of antihypertensive drugs among controls and found much fewer differences among the types of drug than when they were compared with non-users, which reinforces the validity of our approach (appendix p 13).the risk reduction associated with raas inhibitors among individuals with diabetes who had been admitted to hospital for covid-19 (not explained by chance) deserves a comment. diabetes has been reported as a risk factor for severe covid-19. 33 the biological underpinning for this clinical observation is not yet known, but experimental models of diabetes in mice have shown that ace activity is high in the lungs. 34 if this activity also occurs in humans, patients with diabetes who have covid-19 might present a great imbalance in the ace:ace2 ratio (ace activity would be high due to diabetes and ace2 would be low due to downregula tion induced by sars-cov-2) that could explain the increased severity of covid-19 among patients with diabetes and also the protective effect of raas inhibitors suggested by our data.the lack of an increased risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital associated with raas inhibitors (compared with other antihypertensive drugs) was found in both patients with most severe and less severe disease, suggesting that the outpatient use of these drugs neither facilitates nor aggravates the infection.our study has several limitations. first, we used different data sources to extract information from cases (hospital records and primary health-care records through horus, consulted case by case by local researchers) and controls (bifap database, which automatically extracted data from primary health-care records); however, both horus and bifap access the same primary health-care data, which was the main source for determining comorbidity and drug exposure in our study, making major information bias unlikely. second, cases were recorded as of march, 2020, whereas controls were sourced from records in march, 2018, which might have affected the results due to secular trends in use of antihypertensive drugs; however, when we corrected for secular trends we saw little change in the estimated adjusted or. third, we did not collect data on smoking and other lifestyle habits (eg, exercise, diet, alcohol intake), which might have affected the association between raas inhibitors and covid-19 requiring admission to hospital; however, these habits are correlated with several comorbidities that were included in the regression model. fourth, we obtained information on drug prescriptions, but adherence to treatment cannot be guaranteed. hence, when we have used the term drug use, we should say drug prescribed. the effect of non-adherence in our results is difficult to measure but would most probably cause a nondifferential misclassification of exposure that, if relevant, would distort the estimates towards the null value. fifth, we did not collect information on clinical and analytical covariates during patients' stay in hospital, nor did we collect information on in-hospital treatment (eg, if raas inhibitors were continued or withheld in hospital), which might have been interesting for the assessment of the association of antihypertensive drugs with severity of and fatality due to covid-19. sixth, we did not analyse any dose effects. finally, as in any other observational study, residual confounding due to unmea sured or unknown confounders cannot be ruled out.in summary, the results of the present study suggest that the outpatient use of raas inhibitors does not increase the risk of covid-19 requiring admission to hospital, including its most severe forms. this finding should be confirmed using other data sources, study designs, and populations. meanwhile, the data available, along with the important role of ace inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers in the management of several cardiovascular diseases, do not support their discontinuation as a preventive measure against covid-19. we declare no competing interests.after publication, study data will be made available on reasonable request to the corresponding author. a proposal with a detailed description of study objectives and statistical analysis plan will be needed for assessment of requests. additional materials might also be required during the process of assessment. de-identified participant data will be provided after approval from the principal researchers of the participating hospitals.the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus responsible for the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, is associated with a high risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome and mortality [1] [2] [3] [4] . angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) facilitates sars-cov-2 entry into host cells in the respiratory tract, and altered ace2 regulation is speculated to play a role in the pathogenesis of covid-19 [5] . in the setting of the covid-19 pandemic, there has been increasing interest in the physiologic and pathophysiologic function of ace2 [6•] . here, we briefly review the role of ace2 in the renin-angiotensin system, the therapeutic potential of ace2, and potential interactions of ace2 with sars-cov-2 and its role in covid-19 pathophysiology.counter-regulatory effects of ace2 in the renin-angiotensin system ace2 is a mono-carboxypeptidase with a single enzymatic binding site that acts as a key counter-regulatory component of the renin-angiotensin system [7] . ace2 is the only known homolog of ace; it shares 42% of sequence identity with somatic ace and 61% similarity in the area surrounding the active site [8, 9] . ace2 is expressed on the surface of endothelial and epithelial cells in membranebound form as well as soluble form in several tissues throughout the body, including the kidneys, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs [10, 11] .ace converts angiotensin i (ang i) to ang ii, which acts on the ang ii type 1 receptor (at 1 r), resulting in vasoconstriction, sodium and fluid retention by the kidney, oxidative stress, inflammation, fibrosis, and impaired fibrinolysis [11, 12] . in direct opposition to the cascade of physiological effects of the ace/ang ii pathway, the net effect of the ace2/ang-(1-7) pathway is vasodilation and anti-inflammation. ace2 hydrolyzes ang ii, converting it to ang-(1-7) (see fig. 1 ). the conversion of ang ii to ang-(1-7) diminishes the availability of ang ii to bind at 1 r, forestalling the vasoconstrictive, proinflammatory, and prothrombotic effects of at 1 r activation [7, [10] [11] [12] [13] . additionally, ang-(1-7) acts on the mas receptor, causing the release of nitric oxide, prostaglandin e 2 , and bradykinin [11] resulting in vasodilation, natriuresis, and a reduction in oxidative stress and inflammation [14, 15] . ace2 also cleaves several other peptides, including converting ang i to ang-(1-9), which is a lessbioactive peptide [16] .ace2 plays an important role in the development of several pathologic conditions, including hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy, and kidney disease. for example, in human kidney tissue, the ratio of ace to ace2 expression is higher in subjects with hypertension compared with those without hypertension [17] . these findings are consistent with morepronounced vasoconstrictive and anti-natriuretic effects of ace, compared with ace2, activity in hypertensive individuals. several experimental and human studies have also demonstrated a reduction in glomerular ace2 expression in diabetic and non-diabetic kidney disease [8] . correspondingly, experimental studies in mice show that pharmacologic inhibition of ace2 promotes the development of microalbuminuria and diabetic nephropathy [18, 19] . human data suggest that ace2 may be upregulated in individuals with existing cardiovascular disease, which is speculated to be a compensatory response to counteract the deleterious effects of ang ii [20] . in sars-cov-2, while ace2 facilitates viral entry in host cells, it may also have protective effects against severe acute lung injury [21] .given its vasodilatory, natriuretic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic effects via increased ang-(1-7) and decreased ang ii, soluble ace2 has been proposed as a potential therapeutic target in hypertension, chronic kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, and viral respiratory disease. in experimental studies, chronic administration of soluble ace2 has been fig. 1 the counter-regulatory role of ace2 in the renin-angiotensin system. this figure demonstrates the conversion of angiotensinogen to ang i by renin, ang i to ang ii by ace, and ang ii to ang-(1-7) by ace2. ang ii acts on the at 1 r receptor to increase vasoconstriction, fluid and sodium retention by the kidney, and oxidative stress, resulting in increased blood pressure. ang-(1-7) acts on the mas receptor resulting in vasodilation, increased fluid and sodium excretion by the kidney, and a reduction in oxidative stress, resulting in reduced blood pressure associated with degradation of ang ii and an increase in ang-(1-7) [22] [23] [24] . animal studies consistently demonstrate a reduction in blood pressure with recombinant ace2 administration, and in mouse models, recombinant ace2 attenuated diabetic kidney injury [22] and myocardial remodeling [24] . recombinant ace2 has also been proposed as a treatment for severe viral pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome. recombinant ace2 reduces acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome in mice with viral pneumonia [25] . children infected with respiratory syncytial virus have higher plasma ang ii concentration compared with healthy controls, suggesting upregulation of ace/ang ii and downregulation of ace2/ang-(1-7), and supporting ace2 as a potential therapy in respiratory syncytial viral lung disease in humans.ace inhibitors block the conversion of ang i to ang ii, while ang ii receptor blockers directly inhibit at 1 r. both of these medications decrease blood pressure and inflammation and mitigate fibrosis in hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and chronic kidney disease. in several animal models, these antihypertensive agents have been shown to increase ace2 expression in the heart and kidneys [26] [27] [28] [29] . however, in humans, ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers have not been associated with increased kidney ace2 expression or circulating ace2 activity [30, 31•] .ace2 is the binding site for the sars-cov-2 viral spike (s) protein and facilitates viral entry into the host cell. there has been recent speculation that ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers may increase the risk of development and severity of covid-19 due to potential upregulation of ace2 by these medications [32] . however, sars-cov-2 facilitates ace2 endocytosis, downregulates ace2 expression, and promotes ace2 shedding from the cell surface, leading to an increase in ang ii concentration and a decrease in ang-(1-7) . this is likely important in covid-19 pathophysiology due to the proinflammatory effects of ang ii with corresponding loss of ang-(1-7)-mediated counter-regulation [33] . the prothrombotic effects of excess ang ii could underlie covid-19 hypercoagulability [34, 35•] . upregulation of ace/ang ii with downregulation of ace2/ang-(1-7) in the vascular endothelium could promote covid-19-associated vasculopathy [36, 37] . extrapolating from sars-cov animal models, increased ang ii in patients with covid-19 due to loss of ace2 could mediate acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome [38] . in experimental models, ang ii administration induces at 1 r-mediated ace2 internalization and degradation [39] . ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers may have a therapeutic benefit in covid-19 by reducing ang ii concentration and at 1 r activation. thus, it remains unclear if ace inhibitors or ang ii receptor blockers have a beneficial or harmful effect in sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19.ace2 has important counter-regulatory effects on the reninangiotensin system and has been implicated in covid-19 pathogenesis. medications that act on the renin-angiotensin system, including ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers, may impact covid-19 infection and severity via potential interactions with ace2; however, the direction and magnitude of these effects are unknown at this time. several international societies have released statements discouraging discontinuation of ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers in patients who are treated with these medications for hypertension, heart failure, and chronic kidney disease amidst the covid-19 pandemic [6•]. given the clear benefits of these agents in hypertension, chronic kidney disease, coronary heart disease, and diabetes, there is an urgent need for further research to improve our understanding of the relationship between agents that act on the renin-angiotensin system and outcomes among individuals with covid-19, with several studies currently underway [6•].funding information jbc is supported by k23-hl133843 from the national heart, lung, and blood institute. tch is supported by t32-hl007891 from the national heart, lung, and blood institute. ams is supported by r01-hl146818 from the national heart, lung, and blood institute; uc4dk108173 from the national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases; and a loan repayment program award from the national heart, lung, and blood institute. apb is supported by 1k01hl133468 from the national heart, lung, and blood institute.conflict of interest the authors declare no conflicts of interest relevant to this manuscript. angiotensin converting enzyme (ace, ec 3.4.15.1) is a chloride and zinc dependent dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase ubiquitously existing in mammalian species. the main isoform predominantly expressed in lung is a membrane-bound singe peptide glycoprotein. as a bioactive component of renin-angiotensin system (ras) and kallikrein-kinin system (kks), ace plays a significant role in blood pressure regulation, fluid and electrolyte balancing, cardiovascular system development and vascular remodeling by hydrolyzing angiotensin i into a potent vasopressor peptide angiotensin ii and deactivating the vasodepressor peptide bradykinin. its inhibitors, such as captopril, enalapril, benazepril, fosinopril et al, which were developed in recent years, have been tested for treating hypertension and a nice vasodepressive effect in the clinical trial was obtained. but some side effects have been reported, such as cough and sexual hypoacusis, when these synthetic drugs are used for a long time. for further screening of natural antihypertensive drugs, the properties of ace need to be understood in depth. this article reviews the structurefunction relationship of ace as well as its gene polymorphism and inhibitor development.1 structure and function 1 there are three splicing transcripts existing in humans, which are encoded by the same ace gene. transcript 1 is ubiquitously distributed in many tissues and termed somatic ace (sace), which consists of 1306 amino acids. transcript 2 and transcript 3, referred to testicle ace (tace), were expressed in testis and mature sperm consisting of 732 amino acids and 739 amino acids, respectively.the molecular weight of sace is 149 723 da, which contains one n-terminal signal peptide sequence (1-30aa), two large homologous catalytically active sites (referred n-domain and c-domain), one hydrophobic transmembrane domain (1257-1276aa), and one cytosolic domain. there is a metalloprotease cleavage site at the residue 1232, from which sace shed from plasma membrane by truncating its c-terminus, and secreted into serum in a soluble form. so sace can exist in two forms: tissue ace and plasma ace. tissue ace anchors to plasma membrane through the transmembrane domain, whereas plasma ace is also named as soluble ace. each form contains only one catalytic domain. the transcript 2 has a molecular weight of 80073. its n-terminal signal peptide sequence is from residue 1 to 31. transcript 2 from residue 68 to its c-terminus is identical to the c-terminal domain of sace except some slight differences in signal peptide and n-terminus [1, 2] . transcript 3 has a molecular weight of 83989, whose sequence is identical to transcript 2, except for some differences in residue 657 to the carboxyl end because of frameshift mutation.the molecular differences in ace transcripts are rooted from the alternative splicing and terminal sites. the encoding gene of ace locates on the base 17q23 in the chromosome. it is about 21 kb in length and contains 26 exons and 25 introns. the expression products sace and tace are derived from the same gene using alternative promoters [3] , which contributes to the difference of n -terminal sequence. sace is transcribed from exons 1-12 and 14-26, whereas tace is transcribed from 13-26. the promoter for sace is in the 5 -flanking region of the first exon, whereas the promoter of tace is located within intron 12. the gene not only initiates at two alternative sites but also contains two potential polyadenylation sites downstream termination codon. they are 628 bp apart. tace uses the proximal site whereas sace uses the distal one [4] . analysis of the structure of the ace gene suggests that the both catalytically active sites of sace are similar not only in sequence but also in exon structure (exons 4-11 and 17-24, respectively). they are both characterized by a consensus zinc-binding motif (hegmh).this suggested that ace gene arises from the same duplication coded by an ancestral gene segment [5, 6] .by quantitative rt-pcr, harmer et al (2002) found ace is expressed in all 72 tissues examined. the expression was particularly high in ileum, jejunum, duodenum, testis, lung, pulmonary blood vessels, and prostate. sace is expressed in most human tissues, whereas tace is only found in testis at adolescence with regulation by hormone. sace and tace are the products of tissue-specific and stage-specific expression. it implied that they exerted specific biological function [7] .in the presence of zn 2+ , ace hydrolyzes the peptide bond of phe 8 -his 9 of decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i) to release octapeptide angiotensin ii (ang ii) and c-terminal dipeptide his-leu. ang ii is one of the most potent vasoconstrictor. upon binding with its type 1 receptor, ang ii contracts vascular smooth muscle, stimulates the secretion of aldosterone and na + , k + -reabsorption in kidney, and induces water-sodium retention and blood volume increase. these subsequently result in blood pressure increase and the positive inotropic effect and chronotropic effect in heart. ace inactivates the vasodilator by the sequential cleavage of two c-terminal dipeptides. it was named as kininase 2, and besides the substrates of angiotensin i and bradykinin, ace can also hydrolyze a wide range of vasoactive peptide, such as enkephalin, substance p, and neurotensin. it is demonstrated that ace can degrade amyloid -peptide overexpression in alzheimer's disease in vitro [8] .in testicular germ cells, kondoh et al (2005) identified ace as the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (gpi)-anchored protein-releasing (gpiase) factor. in addition to the peptidase activity, ace also plays the role of gpiase releasing gpi-anchored proteins from sperm membrane. because of the ace-knockout, sperm lost the egg-binding ability [9] .there is significant relationship between ace id/dd genotypes and the development of cardiovascular diseases. a polymorphism of ace involves the insertion or deletion(i/d) of a 287-base pair alu repeat sequence near the 3 end of intron 16.this is partially associated with the concentration of ace in the circulation. as the serum ace activity of the dd genotype is twice as high as that of the ii genotype, ace polymorphism is reported to associate with hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, left ventricle hypertrophy, myocardial infarction, and diabetes. the dd genotype is shown as a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases [10] . significant association of cardiovascular diseases, as hypertension, with d allele of the ace gene had been documented in african-american, chinese, japanese, bangladeshi, and turkish population. but some other influences from population backgrounds and environmental heterogeneity are also found. on the study associating ace i/d gene polymorphism with hypertension in bangladeshi population, morshed et al (2002) found the following: among the three ace i/d variants, the dd genotype was associated with the highest value of the mean systolic blood pressure and mean diastolic blood pressure, and ii genotype was associated with least value. however, the association of i/d polymorphism with hypertension was tested as sex-specific. the relationship between dd genotype and hypertension is much closer in men than in women. one reason was that estrogen in women might play a protective effect against hypertension. this sex-difference was more remarkable in younger subjects than in elderly subjects [10, 11] . bradykinin which stimulates the release of tissue plasminogen activator (tpa) in endothelial cells can be the sequence of tace is identical to that of the c-domain of sace, except tace first 36 residues. human sace and tace-732 have the same carboxy-terminal transmembrane and cytosolic sequences, while tace-732 and tace-739 have the same amine-terminal and the distinct transmembrane and cytosolic sequences. none of the drosophila ance and acer has a membrane-anchoring sequence. the carboxyl end of ace2 is homologous to collectin, a nonenzymatic protein associated with renal injury. n: amine-terminus; c: carboxy-terminus; sp: signal peptide; tm: transmembrane domain; hemgh: the locations of active-site zinc-binding motif; hexxh: locations of the active-site zinc-binding motif degraded and inactivated by ace. thus, ace inhibitor has been shown to reduce the incidence of myocardial infarction by retaining tpa. on the study of relationship between i/d polymorphism and coronary thrombogenesis, the dd genotype is associated with higher ace activity contributed to coronary thrombogenesis and myocardial infarction by inhibiting bradykinin [12, 13] . the sequence of tace is identical to that of the c-domain of sace, except for its first 36 residues. human sace and tace-732 have the same carboxy-terminal transmembrane and cytosolic sequences. tace-732 and tace-739 have the same amine terminal, and a distinct transmembrane and cytosolic sequences. neither the drosophila ance nor the acer has a membrane-anchoring sequence. the carboxyl end of ace2 is homologous to collectin, a nonenzymatic protein associated with renal injury.the high homology of ace catalytical active domains indicates that they are from the same ancestral gene. ace-like proteinases have also been found in other animal species including chimpanzee, cow, rabbit, mouse, chicken, goldfish, electric eel, house fly, mosquito, torn fly, silk worm, drosophila melanogaster (d. melanogaster), the bacteria xanthomonas sp., and shewanella oneidensis. ace and its homologs consist of the m2 gluzincin family. ance consisting of 615 amino acids is one form of ace-like protein in d. melanogaster. its catalytical activity resembles that of the c-domain of human sace. acer is the second ace-related protein identified in d. melanogaster, and its catalytical activity is more similar to the n-domain of sace. ance and acer are both single-domain enzyme and a secretive ectoenzyme without c-terminal membrane -anchoring hydrophobic sequence. they are expressed successively during the pupal development of d. melanogaster and performed different physiological functions. four additional ace-like genes have been found in the adh region of d. melanogaster chromosome 2. this reflected that an ancestral gene structure is presented in both protostome and deuterostome lineages. it further suggested that the duplication within the ace gene in vertebrate genomes predates the divergence of these lineages [7, 14, 15] .the first homologue of ace known by human is termed aceh or ace2. ace2 is a zinc dependent carboxy -peptidase which contains 805 amino acids, including one n-terminal hydrophobic signal peptide sequence (1-18aa), one catalytically active site (147-555aa), and one hydrophobic transmembrane domain (740-763aa). ace2 can also be shedd from the cell surface through proteolytic cleavage at the juxtamembrane region. ace2 has 42% sequence identity and 61% sequence similarity with the two active sites of ace. it is 33% identical overall to tace. ace2 is expressed in specific tissues such as human heart, kidney, and testis. it distributes in coronary endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and renal tubular epithelial cells. ace2 converts ang i to form ang1-9 by cleaving single c-terminal leu, and ang ii to form ang1-7 by removing the c-terminal phe. the product ang1-9 can be hydrolyzed as a c-terminal dipeptide by ace, generating a vasodilator ang1-7 [16] . therefore, ang1-9 acts as a competitive inhibitor of ace, counterbalancing its vasoconstriction. with the exception of ang i and ang ii, the substrates of ace2 also include neurotensin, kinetensin, and des-arg bradykinin. however, ace2 fails to cleave bradykinin and hip-his-leu, which shows substrate specificity of ace2 and ace. the activity of ace2 cannot be inhibited by acei captopril, lisinopril, or enalaprilat. they perform different physiological functions in the sophisticated regulation in vivo. ace2 gene orients on the human x chromosome with sex-specificity, which implies that the sex-specificity appeared in ras and cardiovascular physiology with possible relation to ace2 [17] .it is regarded that ace2 play a crucial role in cardiovascular physiological regulation and is closely identified as membrane receptor for sars coronavirus. sars-cov infects cells by the attachment of s-protein to the cell surface. the infectivity of sars-cov can be inhibited by blocking s-protein bound to its functional receptor ace2 [18] . ace2 anchoring to plasma membrane is the functional receptor for sars-cov, which mediates the fusion of viral and host membranes. antibodies or compounds, with affinity to ace2 as well as soluble ace2, are all able to prevent virus entry. lang et al (2006) found that interferon-and interleukin-4 downregulated expression of ace2 in vero e6 cells. by screening 312 controlled chinese medicinal herbs, ho et al (2006) identified that emodin inhibited the interaction of s-protein and ace2 in vero e6 cells [19, 20] .ace has been a drug target for screening antihypertensive agents. some snake venoms exert favorable inhibitory effects on ace. a nonapeptide compound, termed sq20881, has obviously a hypotensive activity. but it only works by being injected and does not work when taken orally, which restrict its medicine value. as ace shares similar advanced structure with carboxypeptidase a, and that l-benzylsuccinic acid is a strong inhibitor of carboxypeptidase a, succinyl amino acid was designed to be a target compound of acei. because of the natural peptide-inhibitors of ace such as snake venom with c-terminal of proline, succinylproline was synthesized as the first target compound and its physiological activity is systematically studied. later by modifying the structure of the compounds, an oral nonpeptide compound, captopril, was found as a new ideal hypotensive. on basis of this structure, two new oral hypotensive drugs, enalapril and lisinopril are further developed [21, 22] .acei inhibits the activity of ace in myocardium, kidney, vessel wall via decreasing blood pressure and inhibiting myocardial and vascular hypertrophy. it also can improve the autonomic nervous activity of patients with chronic heart failure. as a vasodilator initially, acei maybe associated with blockade of endocrine, cardiac tissue, paracrine, and autocrine. it is tested that myocardium hypertrophy and myocardial fibrosis were reduced and ventricular remodeling was improved. thus, acei is not only used as a hypotensive drug but also is widely used for the treatment of cardiovascular system,urinary system, and endocrine system diseases. it is demonstrated that this class of drugs distinctly improve heart function, decrease urinary protein in nephropathies, and delay the progression of renal failure after long term usage. acei also can improve patients living quality and prolong their life span [23] [24] [25] .acei not only reduces the vasoconstriction induced by ang ii but also blocks the degradation of bradykinin as well as other substrates. the increased bradykinin concentration brings some side effects such as cough [26, 27] . development of single domain specific inhibitor is expected to solve this problem. rxp407 is reported as an n-domain-specific inhibitor of sace [29] . it increases the concentration of ac-s-d-k-p in serum. it is a hematoregulator. this suggests that ac-s-d-k-p is specifically cleaved by the n-domain and some differences occur between the two active sites of sace [28] . rxpa380 was designed as a highly specific inhibitor of the c-domain of sace in the study of georgiadis et al (2003) , and they focused on the roles of the two active sites in the cleavage of ang i and bradykinin. when the two active sites of ace in tissue or plasma were inhibited by rxp407 and rxpa380 together, the largest bradykinin protection was observed. whereas one active site was inhibited by either rxp407 or rxpa380, and only half activity was protected. it leads to a conclusion that both active sites of sace equally participate in the degradation of bradykinin. a full inhibition of ang i cleavage required a blockade of both the two active sites of ace of plasma in circulatory system. ace n-domain in tissues was specifically inhibited without any differences on ang i conversion. whereas selectively inhibited its c-domain, ang i conversion was completely blocked. this shows that both active domains of plasma sace contribute to the hydrolyzation of ang i. the ang i-ang ii conversion depends exclusively on the ace c-domain. thus, ace c-domain-specific inhibitor is regarded sufficiently to regulate hypertension. between the two forms of sace (plasma ace or tissue ace), the two catalytically active sites appear with different catalytical capability and have their specific substrates, which shows that membrane-bound ace and soluble ace appear to obey different mechanisms [26] . in the study of van esch et al (2005) , it was demonstrated that selective ace c-domain inhibitor was sufficient to prevent ang ii inducing vasoconstriction. this supplies a new path to screen safer hypotensive agents of acei [27] . ace c-domain specific inhibitor is regarded as a treatment for cardiovascular diseases with fewer side effects and higher safety because it sufficiently blocks the ang ii generation with incomplete inhibition of bradykinin degradation, which maintains the bradykinin concentration. it offers a novel path for a new generation of drug structure designing.important roles of ras in cardiovascular system draw more and more attentions recently. ace inhibitor has always been used as the first line treatment of hypertension and heart failure. as new members of acei are identified continually, research on molecular mechanism is carried out more deeply. it ranges widely from pioneer peptide-inhibitors, synthetic small molecules to domain-specific inhibitors and natural drugs. we hope screening domainspecific inhibitory leading compounds from natural products as well as traditional chinese medicine, which selectively block the c-domain of ace with less toxicity and side effects.sars is an infectious disease with a high mortality rate caused by the human coronavirus sars-cov (ksiazek et al., 2003) . the severity and global spread of the 2003 sars outbreak has led to the search for specific antiviral compounds against sars-cov. results from both in vitro studies and case reports from the clinic have been published, but no consensus treatment has yet been established. major efforts are being made to understand the mechanism of sars-cov replication in order to identify drug targets of specific antiviral compounds (chu et al., 2004; liu et al., 2004; thiel et al., 2003; vastag, 2003; wu et al., 2004) . coronaviruses are enveloped positive-strand rna viruses that initiate infection of susceptible cells by binding to human angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) on the host cell membrane via the viral s protein (li et al., 2003; xu et al., 2004) . following receptor binding and membrane fusion, the infectious genomic rna is delivered into the cytoplasm and viral gene expression is initiated resulting in the translation of two replicase/transcriptase polyproteins. these two enzymes are responsible for the replication of the viral genome as well as the generation of a multiple subgenomic mrnas including those encoding the structural proteins s (spike), m (membrane), e (envelope) and n (nucleocapsid) (de haan et al., 2002) . a complex set of regulatory mechanisms controls the viral gene expression, and additional virus-encoded enzymes, such as helicase and proteases, are crucial for the production of infectious virus particles (thiel et al., 2003) . progeny virions are assembled in the endoplasmatic reticulum-golgi apparatus and released from infected cells by exocytosis. the viral entry and assembly processes as well as the enzymatic steps involved in viral replication constitute potential targets for antiviral therapy.understanding the mechanism of viral replication is not the only key step towards identification of effective drugs against a virus. development of rapid screening assays is also essential for antiviral drug discovery. the present standard infectivity assay for sars-cov is based on viral infection of veroe6 cells followed by visual monitoring of cytopathic effects (cpe; ksiazek et al., 2003) . the lowthroughput nature of this assay format limits its use for efficient screening of large chemical libraries. this study describes the development of a stable cell line susceptible to sars-cov that constitutively expresses egfp, which can be used for the automated screening of inhibitors of virus activity. a high degree of correlation between virus replication and reduced egfp signal is expected for highly cytopathic viruses such as sars-cov where the background egfp signal is rapidly reduced by extensive cell death. the specificity and selectivity of compounds active in this sars-cov screening assay were determined by parallel screening for cytotoxicity and inhibition of a porcine coronavirus using similar assay formats. this set of assays was used in the screening of a test panel of 3388 randomly chosen chemical compounds to demonstrate its application to drug discovery.the porcine kidney cell line llc-pk1 and the african monkey kidney cell line veroe6 were kindly provided by dr. k. andries (j&jprd; beerse, belgium) and dr. g. van ham (institute for tropical medicine, antwerp, belgium), respectively. the llc-pk1 and veroe6 cell lines were maintained in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem; cambrex bioscience walkersville, walkersville, md) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (fcs; highclone, logan, ut), 1% l-glutamine (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca) and 0.02% gentamycin (invitrogen). the packaging cell line retropack pt67 was purchased from bd biosciences clontech (palo alto, ca) and grown in rpmi 1640 medium (invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fcs and 0.02% gentamycin. the retroviral vector plnce, containing the egfp coding sequence under the cytomegalovirus immediate-early promotor, was a kind gift of dr. e. kandel (university of illinois, chicago, il). sars-cov, strain 200300592, was obtained from the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc; atlanta, ga) and tgev, strain purdue112, was obtained from j&jprd (beerse, belgium). the af933 antibody directed against ace-2 was purchased from r&d systems europe (abingdon, uk).to produce retroviruses for egfp gene delivery, pt67 cells were transfected with plnce using lipofectamine (invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. the supernatant of the transfected pt67 cells was collected and used to transduce llc-pk1 and veroe6 cells. the transduced cells were incubated for 3 days at 37 • c and 100 clones from each cell line were screened for homogeneous and high egfp signal by fluorescence activated cell sorting (facs). the clones were also analyzed for susceptibility to sars-cov or tgev infection and for growth capacity by seeding 15,625, 25,000, 31,250 or 62,500 cells/ml and monitoring the egfp signal over 7 days. the constitutively egfp expressing cell lines were designated veroe6-egfp and llc-pk1-egfp.all virus culture and screening assays were carried out in a certified biosafety level-3 laboratory. llc-pk1 cells were inoculated with tgev and veroe6 cells were inoculated with sars-cov and subsequently incubated in a humidified incubator at 37 • c and 5% co 2 . after 2 days, when the majority of cells showed cpe, the cell culture supernatants were clarified by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 5 min and stored at −80 • c until use. the 50% cell culture infectious dose (ccid 50 ) was determined by titration on llc-pk1 or veroe6 cells depending on virus using 10 serial five-fold-dilution steps. after 5 days incubation at 37 • c, the plates were inspected for cpe.the test compounds were serially diluted four-fold in cell culture medium and mixed with 200 ccid 50 of tgev or 300 ccid 50 of sars-cov and 1000 of llc-pk1-egfp or veroe6-egfp cells (corresponding to a final concentration of 25,000 cells/ml) in 384-well blackview plates (corning; corning, ny). the plates were sealed with gas permeable membrane and incubated in a humidified incubator at 37 • c and 5% co 2 . after 5 days, the wells were examined for egfp expression using an argon laser-scanning microscope. the microscope settings were excitation at 488 nm and emission at 510 nm and the fluorescence images of the wells were converted into signal values. the results were expressed as ec 50 values defined as the concentration of compound achieving 50% inhibition of the virus-reduced egfp signals as compared to the untreated virus-infected control cells.to test for cytotoxicity, cells were incubated with serial compound dilutions as described above but in the absence of virus challenge. the 50% cytotoxic concentration (cc 50 ) was determined by comparing the egfp signal from treated wells to that of control wells containing untreated cells and calculated similarly to ec 50 .two selectivity indices (si) were calculated. the cytotoxicity/antiviral activity si provides a measure of the range where a compound is effective without being cytotoxic and was calculated as the ratio cc 50 /ec 50 . the tgev/sars-cov si represents the specificity of a compound in inhibiting sars-cov over tgev and was calculated as the ratio tgev ec 50 /sars-cov ec 50 .the validity of reduced egfp expression as a marker for virus activity was determined by titration of a sars-cov stock on veroe6-egfp cells and by calculating titers based on both egfp signal and cpe. similar experiments were performed using tgev and llc-pk1-egfp cells.to determine the sensitivity of the assays, defined as the lowest virus titer resulting in a detectable decrease in egfp signal, serially diluted sars-cov or tgev stocks were added to their respective indicator cells and the egfp signals were recorded as described for the screening assay.to determine intra-and inter-experiment reproducibility, 25,000 veroe6-egfp cells/ml were added together with 300 ccid 50 of sars-cov into 192 wells of a 384-well plate and an additional 192 wells of the same plate were seeded with 25,000 uninfected veroe6-egfp cells/ml as controls. the egfp signal of each well was recorded 5 days post plating as described for the screening assay. the experiment was repeated on three separate days and intra-experimental variation was determined by calculating mean egfp signals for the virus-infected and control cells plated within the same day. inter-experimental variation was determined by calculating the mean egfp signal for the experiments performed on three separate days. standard deviation (s.d.), coefficient of variation (cv), and signal ratio for control versus virus-infected cells were calculated for both intra-and interreproducibility experiments.to demonstrate the specificity of the assay, defined as the ability to detect selective sars-cov inhibitors, serial dilutions of an ace-2 antibody were prepared in phosphate buffered saline (pbs; sigma, st. louis, mo) and analyzed in parallel in the sars-cov, tgev and cytotoxicity screening assays as described above.to identify potential classes of pharmacological agents active against sars-cov, a range of previously described antiviral compounds was tested ( table 1 ). the antiviral agents included compounds targeting both viral and cellular factors. ribavirin (so et al., 2003) and azt (furman et al., 1986; zhang et al., 2001) were included as representatives of the widely used class of nucleoside analogs inhibiting viral polymerases. selected antiviral protease inhibitors have been implicated as being active against the sars-cov (yamamoto et al., 2004; wu et al., 2004; chu et al., 2004) , meriting the inclusion of lopinavir/ritonavir. a range of non-specific antiviral reagents was included such as aurintricarboxylic acid (ata), dextran sulfate 5000 (ds5000), and novaron. glycirrhizin and s-nitroso-n-acetylpenicillamine were included due to previously reported activities against sars-cov by unclear mechanisms of action (cinatl et al., 2003; keyaerts et al., 2004) . additionally, a variety of antiviral compounds acting on cellular targets were included such as p38 map kinase inhibitors, tgf-␤ inhibitors, and 21 ace inhibitors (table 1) . separately, 3388 randomly chosen compounds from a proprietary chemical library were tested. all compounds were dissolved at 20 mm dimethylsulphoxide (dmso; sigma) and then diluted in cell culture medium to a final dmso concentration below 0.5 %.to provide convenient indicator cells for the highthroughput screening assays, stable cell lines constitutively expressing egfp were generated. veroe6 and llc-pk1 cell lines were transduced with a packaging retrovirus carrying the egfp gene and 100 clones were isolated for each cell line for subsequent characterization studies. the cells were subjected to facs analysis of egfp expression to select those clones exhibiting a profile of high mean fluorescence intensity and homogeneous signal (fig. 1) . the egfp expressing clones were further evaluated for susceptibility to virus infection, showing all clones were susceptible to either sars-cov or tgev as measured by cpe induction after virus challenge (data not shown). the growth characteristics of the veroe6-egfp and llc-pk1-egfp clones were similar to the parental veroe6 and llc-pk1 cell lines (data not shown), indicating that the egfp expression did not affect cell proliferation. as expected, the transduced cells showed an exponential growth that was dependent on the initial cell density (a representative example is shown in fig. 2) . moreover, the growth experiments showed that a final seeding density of 25,000 cells/ml was suitable for keeping the cells in the exponential growth phase throughout a 5-day assay period. taking all selection criteria into account, clone 21 of veroe6-egfp and clone 45 of llc-pk1-egfp (data not shown) were selected as indicator cells to be seeded at a density of 25,000 cells/ml in the screening assays.to ensure a reliable screening platform, the reduced egfp expression was validated as a marker for virus-induced cytopathic activity and the robustness and specificity of the assays were determined. the validity of using quantification of a reporter gene such as egfp to measure viral activity was determined by virus titration experiments calculating titers based on both cpe and egfp measurements. the titration experiments showed a virus-concentration dependent loss of egfp expression and that virus titers scored by both methods were in good agreement (table 2), confirming that egfp expression can serve as a marker for activity of these two viruses.the assay sensitivity was determined by the lowest virus titer resulting in an at least two-fold decrease in egfp signal. the indicator cells showed a significant reduction of egfp signal at virus titers as low as 2.0 ccid 50 sars-cov and 1.2 ccid 50 tgev (fig. 3) , confirming that the measurement of egfp expression in these cells allows sensitive detection of low levels of virus. assay robustness or intra-and inter-assay variation was assessed by multiple egfp measurements on the same day and over several days. the signal ratio between uninfected control cells and virus-infected cells varied between 4.1 and 19.8, suggesting a sufficient dynamic range to measure antiviral activity of test compounds (table 3) .the specificity of the assay, defined as the ability to detect selective sars-cov inhibitors, was determined by testing an anti-ace-2 antibody specific for the sars-cov receptor in the screening assays. the antibody showed a selective and potent inhibition of sars-cov at non-cytotoxic concentrations ( fig. 4 and table 4 ).the antiviral ec 50 value was 1.43 m when measuring virus inhibition based on egfp signal (table 4 ) and 1.56 m when using cpe as read-out (data not shown). this further shows the close correlation between egfp expression and viral cytopathic activity. together, the validation experiments showed that the screening system was reproducible and specific for the detection of agents active against sars-cov.the sars-cov screening system was initially used to test a selection of pharmacological agents. the compounds included agents targeting different viral factors as well as inhibitors of cellular p38 kinase, tgf-␤, and ace (table 1) . one of the 21 ace inhibitors (table 4 ) showed a selective antiviral activity against sars-cov using a cytotoxicity/antiviral activity si criterion of 3. however, the llc-pk1-egfp cell line appeared to be more sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of the compound than the veroe6-egfp cell line, indicating that the ace inhibitor may exhibit cellular effects not observed in the sars-cov/veroe6-egfp assay system. the other tested agents showed no antiviral activity below the cytotoxic concentration (table 4 and data not shown).to test the possible use of the assay system in a highthroughput setting, a total of 3388 small molecule compounds were tested for selective antiviral activity against sars-cov. sixty-four compounds were active in the sars-cov assay and 18 of these compounds exhibited a cytotoxicity/antiviral activity si of at least 3 (listed as compounds a-r in table 4 ). the ec 50 values ranged between 0.83 and 9.57 m. out of the 18 anti-sars-cov active and non-cytotoxic compounds, 2 showed a tgev/sars-cov si of at least 3 in the absence of cytotoxic effects on any of the two indicator cell lines (compounds n and p in table 4 ). together, these results show that the combination of assays used in this screening system has the potential to provide an efficient basis for drug discovery.an important aspect of drug screening for new viral diseases is the choice of assay system. a drug candidate has to fulfill a number of requirements regarding potency, target specificity and cytotoxicity. thus, a screening system was designed with three parallel types of assays with similar set-up and read-out to evaluate all these parameters concurrently at the initial screening phase. susceptible cell lines were equipped with egfp reporter genes and used for quantification of cytotoxicity, sars-cov and tgev activity. this assay system can be readily applied to high-throughput screening and has many advantages over assays based on laborious and subjective scoring of cpe or plaque formation.the assay system described in this study requires minimal manipulation after assay set-up, and no staining, washing, fixation or manual inspection of the tissue culture plates which is especially advantageous when working with hazardous viruses such as sars-cov. the strategy to use parallel counter-screening of chemical compounds on a porcine-specific member of the coronavirus family was employed to select drug candidates with high specificity for the human sars-cov. highly virus-specific compounds are more likely to exhibit a well-defined single viral target and binding site. this greatly facilitates structureactivity analysis and optimization of active compounds identified in an initial screening. thus, the platform of three parallel screening assays described here obtains more data from the potentially useful compounds at the initial screening step than simple infectivity assays, and therefore speeds up downstream drug development. it is, of course, conceivable that potent antiviral drug candidates can be developed from compounds targeting multiple coronaviruses: compounds active against other coronaviruses may be selected from the data obtained in this screening system and analyzed separately.analyzing a panel of reported antiviral compounds with different mechanisms of activity tested the screening system. the finding that an ace inhibitor showed selective activity against sars-cov is in line with the reported usage of ace-2 as a receptor for this virus (li et al., 2003) . ribavarin, although active against a wide range of viruses and used as sars therapy (so et al., 2003) , was shown in this study to be inactive against sars-cov in vitro at non-cytotoxic concentration, which is in line with previous reports (tan et al., 2004; cinatl et al., 2003; wu et al., 2004; yi et al., 2004) . the variation in results obtained in this study from novaron, glycirrihizin and s-nitroso-n-acetylpenicillamine as compared to previously published results may be due to assay conditions including virus strain, multiplicity of infection, detection method and compound concentration and handling (cinatl et al., 2003; keyaerts et al., 2004) . notably, other independent groups have also observed lack of anti-sars-cov activity of glycyrrhizin (hertzig et al., 2004; yi et al., 2004) . the table 4 screening activities for validation-, general antiviral-and chemical library compounds. assay system was also evaluated in the setting of a chemical library screen. compounds that were selectively active against sars-cov at non-cytotoxic compound concentrations were identified in the library screen. these compounds show a potential for further optimization into potent inhibitors of sars-cov and merit detailed characterization regarding mechanism of action.in conclusion, this report describes a robust screening system for identification of drug candidates selectively active against sars-cov. this screening system meets the requirements of a successful high-throughput assay such as minimal manipulation after assay set-up, low sample volume and automated detection of end-point. furthermore, this system offers considerable benefits from a first round of screening regard- fig. 4 . titration of the ace-2 antibody on veroe6 cells. the ace-2 antibody showed a concentration-dependent protection of the egfp signal after the sars-cov challenge. quadruple wells of infected and treated veroe6-egfp cells are shown and the numbers indicate the tested antibody concentration in g/ml. vc, virus control, cc, cell control, and mc, medium control. ing selectivity, specificity and toxicity of the compound, resulting in an improved data set from an initial screen in comparison with existing assays based on simpler observation such as plaque formation or analysis of cpe. this system, with its ease of handling and good level of containment is well suited to drug discovery against the sars-cov, and should be applicable to other emerging high-risk pathogenic viruses.the newly identified coronavirus (sars-cov-2) causes severe pneumonia (coronavirus disease 2019-covid- 19) and has rapidly spread across the world from the initial outbreak point in wuhan, china, in late 2019 [1] . it has become a global health emergency, and on march 11, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared a pandemic status of this novel coronavirus outbreak. since no approved drug that is specifically targeted to this virus exists at this point in time, drug repositioning/repurposing is thought to be the most effective and feasible approach toward this clear and present threat, and researchers have initiated studies by employing various means in order to find potential therapeutics [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] .the sars-cov-2 genome is very close to that of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) [1] . from the past efforts to cure rna virus infections, including the experiences from the sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) epidemics, several potential target proteins and drugs have been proposed [12, 13] . the 3c-like (main) proteinase, surface glycoprotein [8] , and rna-dependent rna polymerase are thought to be the most promising targets for anti-covid-19 therapeutics. for example, the anti-hiv drug lopinavir/ritonavir, which has been proposed to treat sars [14, 15] , is expected to be effective toward sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase [16, 17] . additionally, the antiviral drug remdesivir is expected to target the rna-dependent rna polymerase [18] .the recent studies on drug repositioning/repurposing involve a variety of computational methods, such as network analysis, text mining, machine learning, and structure-based drug repositioning (sbdr) [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . among these methods, sbdr is the most promising to find abbreviations ace2, angiotensin i-converting enzyme 2; mers, middle east respiratory syndrome; rbd, receptor-binding domain; sars-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; sbdr, structure-based drug repositioning; who, world health organization. specific drugs toward a defined target protein, and it prompted the quick structure analyses of sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase and surface glycoprotein [8, 25] .although structure analyses of many other sars-cov-2 proteins would soon follow, predictions of other protein structures with homology/knowledgebased (theoretical) methods would be required until structure analyses are completed, especially for the proteins currently out of focus as drug targets. in the presented study, therefore, the homology models of sars-cov-2 proteins and their ligand complexes were comprehensively constructed. also, the structural models of the complexes between sars-cov-2 proteins and potential drugs were proposed by comparing the ligand molecules of the proteins and approved, experimental, or natural drugs.the amino acid sequences of sars-cov-2 proteins (table 1) were retrieved from the refseq database at ncbi [26] , and structural modeling templates were sought with the sird system (http://sird.nagahama-i-bio.ac.jp/sird/), which accepted multiple query sequences and sought for similar sequences (more than 30% sequence identity to query) with known structures in the protein data bank (pdb) [27] by using blast [28] . this system also sought for the templates of protein complex structures, in which two or more proteins in the multiple query were associated or any ligand bound to query proteins. the coordinates of template structures were obtained from the pdb [27] and were rendered into the biological quaternary structures.initial structural models were constructed by using mod-eller [29] . in some cases, the resultant models contain residues with rare dihedral angles (ramachandran outliers), rare shape of side chains (rotamer outliers), and short atom-atom distances (atomic crashes). then, the models were further modified by iteratively applying molecular dynamics and geometry minimization procedures of phenix [30] to eliminate aforementioned outliers, and finally, manual model modifications with visual inspection on coot for resolving rotamer outliers or atomic crashes [31] . the model quality was evaluated with molprobity [32] . the percentages of rotamer outlier, ramachandran outlier, and crash score were monitored for each model to achieve less than 2%, 0.05%, and 5, respectively.modeling of sars-cov-2 protein complexes with potential drugsthe molecular formula of 8,085 drugs in total was retrieved from the kegg database [33] and the drugbank database [34] . the molecular formula of 5,780 metabolites in total, which have been used for natural medicines (natural drugs), was obtained from the knapsack database [35] . the structures of the ligand molecules in the known complex structures, as sought in the template search process, were exhaustively compared with that of the drugs by using complig [36] . complig matches molecular graphs and evaluates the similarity score of two molecules a and b as min{m selected drug molecules were built into the protein models by superposing drug molecules to known (original) ligand molecules with complig. according to the graph matching results, the dihedral angles in the drug molecules were adjusted toward the corresponding angles in the original ligand molecules, and corresponding atoms were superposed between drug and known ligand by fixing the coordinates of the latter. the models of protein-drug complexes were further modified with phenix and coot. the constraints for drug molecules were generated by using the elbow application in phenix. hydrogen bonds were evaluated with canonical parameters (constraints were relaxed by 0.4 å and 20 degrees) [37] by using chimera [38] . the protein-ligand complexes were also assessed by using the dsx score function [39] .the sars-cov-2 genome encodes 11 genes (open reading frames), and the polyprotein from orf1ab is processed into 16 proteins (polypeptides) through cleavages by the papain-like proteinase and 3c-like proteinase activities [1, 12, 40] . as a result of template search, the appropriate structural templates were found for 17 sars-cov-2 proteins among a total of 26, and their homology models were constructed ( table 1 ). the 9 unmodeled proteins included those from very short orfs, namely nsp11 (13 amino acid residues), orf7b (43 residues), and orf10 (38 residues) and probable membrane proteins (nsp6, orf3a, orf6, m, and orf8), which were annotated by the sosui server [41] .since a considerable amount of structural studies have already been done for sars-cov and mers-cov proteins, most of the available templates were from these viruses, and they had high-sequence similarity (more than 90%) to sars-cov-2 proteins. two proteins, namely papain-like proteinase (nsp3) and nucleocapsid phosphoprotein, could not be modeled into a single structural model. as a result of homology search, template structures covering the entire protein were unavailable. template structures were separated into 6 and 2 fragment/domain models, respectively. consequently, the coverages of structural model were 56% and 69% of total residues for papain-like proteinase (nsp3) and nucleocapsid phosphoprotein, respectively ( table 1) . the third region of papain-like proteinase (nsp3), nsp4, 3c-like proteinase, nsp9, endo-rnase, surface glycoprotein, envelope protein, and c-terminal region of nucleocapsid phosphoprotein was modeled into homo-multimer. as the hetero-multimeric models, nsp7 and nsp8 were modeled into hetero-16mer; rnadependent rna polymerase, nsp7, and nsp8 were modeled as hetero-tetramer (1:1:2 stoichiometry); 3'to-5' exonuclease and nsp10 formed hetero-dimer; 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase and nsp10 also formed hetero-dimer; and homo-trimer of surface glycoprotein was modeled in complex with human angiotensin i-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) ( table 1) .although the models of sars-cov-2 protein would be useful for structure-based virtual screening, potential drugs for these proteins were sought by rather simple knowledge-based method in the presented study. the ligand molecules that were complexed with the homologs of sars-cov-2 protein in the pdb were extracted, and structurally similar molecules to the ligands were sought among the approved/experimental drugs retrieved from the kegg database [33] and the drugbank database [34] . many of the approved drugs, such as morphine, aspirin, or penicillin, have been adapted from natural medicines [42, 43] . the molecules in the natural medicines are expected to serve as argent therapeutics. therefore, the ligand structures were also compared with the components of natural medicines (natural drugs) registered in the knapsack database [35] .the original ligand molecules and the detected drug molecules are summarized in table 2 . a total of 11 ligand molecules were matched to 21 approved/experimental and 5 natural drugs, and the complex models of the sars-cov-2 proteins with several promising drugs, those with high similarity score or placed in higher ranking, were constructed as follows.3c-like proteinase is involved in the processing of viral polyprotein [44] . this enzyme is one of the most extensively studied drug targets and thus analyzed in complex with various peptide mimetic inhibitors [45] [46] [47] [48] . unexpectedly, these ligands did not show very high similarity to known drug molecules ( table 2) . as a peptide mimetic drug, carfilzomib showed highest score to the template ligand (ligand code azp) of 3clike proteinase homolog (fig. 1a) . however, the similarity score between the ligand and the drug was only 0.754. carfilzomib is the irreversible proteasome inhibitor targeted to the subunits with chymotrypsin-like activity and has been approved for refractory multiple myeloma or waldenstr€ om's macroglobulinemia [49, 50] . a complex model of carfilzomib-sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase was constructed. in the model, carfilzomib formed a parallel b-sheet with his164-glu166, and side chains of his41, cys145, met165, leu167, phe185, and gln189 contributed major interactions (fig. 1b,c) . these residues were conserved between the template (sars-cov) and the model (sars-cov-2) proteins. carfilzomib covalently binds to active site threonine through epoxy moiety, and the epoxy moiety is also reactive with thiol group of cysteine. although a possible covalent linkage between carfilzomib and the catalytic cys145 of sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase was not explicitly modeled, the epoxy moiety was placed close to the catalytic residue in this model. the fitness of the ligand to sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase in the model was evaluated by the dsx function, and the score of carfilzomib, -139.6, was even better than that (à99.8) of inhibitor n3 in the complex crystal structure of sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase (pdb id 6lu7).surface glycoprotein is used for a viral entrance into the host cell, and its cell surface receptor is human angiotensin i-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [51] . ace, a homolog of ace2 sharing 44% amino acid sequence identity, is a major target of hypertension medicating drugs, and several ace-drug complexes have been reported [52] [53] [54] . lisinopril, enalaprilat, and captopril, which show similar structures to each other ( fig. 2a) , have been targeted toward ace and approved for hypertension treatments [55] [56] [57] [58] . in the structural complex models, these drugs were bound to the protein through a zn 2+ coordination with glu384, his356, and his360 (fig. 2b,c) . these residues were conserved between the template (ace) and the model (ace2) structures. the drug molecules also formed electrostatic interactions with arg255 and arg500 even though these residues were not conserved between ace and ace2 (gln259 and ser504 in ace). the sars-cov-2 surface glycoprotein interacted with ace2 through the receptor-binding domain (rbd), while the bound drugs had no direct interaction to the rbd (fig. 2c) , suggesting that those drugs would not directly interfere the host-pathogen interaction. the dsx scores for lisinopril, enalaprilat, and captopril in the models were à32.7, à43.6, and à25.0, respectively. these scores were considerably inferior to that (à74.6) of the specific inhibitor mln-4760 in the crystal structure of human ace2 complex (pdb id 1r4l) [59] .the complex of 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase (nsp16) and nsp10 is involved in the modification of the viral rna caps [60] . the structure of 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase subunit was determined in complex with sadenosyl-l-methionine (ligand code sam), 7-methylguanosine-5'-triphosphate-5'-guanosine (gtg), and sinefungin (sfg) [61] [62] [63] . among these ligands, sadenosyl-l-methionine is used for a therapeutic against depression, liver disorders, fibromyalgia, and osteoarthritis [64] , but also is an authentic substrate for this enzyme. sinefungin is a natural drug produced by streptomyces griseolus and experimentally used as antibiotics [65] [66] [67] (fig. 3a) .the residues of 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase, ser74, asp99, asn101, asp130, and met131, were involved in the major interactions with sinefungin (fig. 3b,c) . these residues were conserved among the template proteins (sars-cov and betacoronavirus) and sars-cov-2.as the drugs similar to these ligands, several investigational adenosine a1 receptor agonists, namely tecadenoson, selodenoson, and trabodenoson, were found (fig. 3a) . these molecules share adenosine moiety, and this moiety interacts with the aforementioned 5 conserved residues in the complex models. the dsx scores of sinefungin, tecadenoson, selodenoson, and trabodenoson were à75.6, à54.3, à70.0, and à55.3, respectively. the scores of sinefungin and selodenoson were comparable to that (à74.9) of the genuine substrate, s-adenosyl-l-methionine, in the complex crystal structure with mers-cov 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase (pdb id 5yni).in the presented study, knowledge-based models of sars-cov-2 proteins were constructed by homology modeling and comparison of the known ligands with drugs. since a considerable number of structure analyses have already reported for coronavirus proteins including those of sars-cov, 66% (17/26) of the sars-cov-2 proteins could be modeled based on highly similar (85% sequence identity and 89% coverage on average) templates (table 1) . several drugs were suggested to bind to the sars-cov-2 targets ( table 2 ). the procedure employed in the presented study should largely limit the extent of search (because it depends on the presence of ligands in known complex structures). however, it is noteworthy that the binding of suggested drugs to the homologous proteins of the sars-cov-2 targets would be probable because of the presence of structural evidences.the complex models were constructed for several high-scored and/or high-ranked drugs. unexpectedly, no drug was detected for one of the most promising drug targets, 3c-like proteinase, with a similarity score higher than 0.8. in the previous study, the score more than 0.8 was suggested to be required for highly similar interactions between ligand and protein [36] . it is implied that the inhibitors bound to the 3c-like proteinase in the known structures are considerably deviated from most of the approved protease-targeted drugs. for example, the anti-hiv drug lopinavir/ritonavir, which was expected to target sars-cov-2 3clike proteinase [16, 17] , showed only limited similarity (score 0.513) to the known ligand (ligand code axp) of sars-cov 3c-like proteinase ( fig. 2a) . one possible reason for the low similarity to drugs is that the protease inhibitors tend to have higher molecular weight and thus their molecular structures showed large variety. another reason would be that a majority of the protease inhibitory drugs are targeted toward serine or zinc proteases [68, 69] . also, the expected drug lopinavir/ritonavir has been designed for hiv protease, which is aspartic protease. these proteases are structurally distinct from 3c-like proteinase known to be a cysteine protease. this observation implies that structure optimizations would likely be required for repurposed drugs for sars-cov-2 3c-like proteinase. consequently, the presented study suggested carfilzomib, which has been targeted toward threonine protease and approved for multiple myeloma treatment [49, 50] , as a marginally resembling drug. the model showed, however, carfilzomib fits well (even better than the specific inhibitor n3, according to the dsx score) into the active site by forming considerable stabilizing interactions and no severe steric hindrance (fig. 1c) . another potential target is the complex of surface glycoprotein and ace2 to prevent virus entry into the cell [70, 71] . many hypertension drugs are targeted to ace, and the presented study highlighted the approved drugs, namely lisinopril, enalaprilat, and captopril, as potential ligands for ace2. an expectation in advance was to find a drug that bound to ace2 and also interfered the interactions between surface glycoprotein and ace2. however, as the models revealed, the drug-binding site of ace2 existed inside a deep cleft in the center of ace2 molecule, and the ligands do not interact directly with the surface glycoprotein (fig. 2c) .the human ace2 has been demonstrated to change its conformation from open to close forms (pdb ids 1r4l and 1r42, respectively) upon inhibitor binding [59] . thus, if this conformational change involves the interface to the rbd of surface glycoprotein, a drug bound to the drug-binding site might interfere with the binding between ace2 and surface glycoprotein indirectly. this allosteric inhibition mechanism, however, is not highly expected because no obvious conformational change was observed in the interface region when comparing the open and close conformations of ace2. most of the predicted drugs are targeted toward ace (not ace2), and ace and ace2 diverge considerably in their amino acid sequences (44% identity). the fitness of the drugs was evaluated to be lower than the specific inhibitor to ace2. therefore, effects of the predicted ace drugs on preventing surface glycoprotein-ace2 interactions would not be highly promising.another target presented results highlighted was 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase (nsp16)-nsp10 complex, which is less focused as a target of drug repurposing. 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase is required to finalize the cap structure, 7me gpppa 2'ome , of coronavirus rnas by transferring a methyl group to 2' oh group of ribonucleotide from s-adenosyl-l-methionine [72, 73] . the cap structure is essential for viral mrnas to be translated and escape from innate immune system in the host cell. thus, inhibition of this enzyme might prevent virus propagation. despite the overall sequence identities between templates (sars-cov or human betacoronavirus) and sars-cov-2 enzymes were relatively low (~66%), the residues interacting with the drugs were conserved. among the suggested drugs for this enzyme, sinefungin is a naturally occurring and verified inhibitor of 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase. since a toxicity was detected [74] , however, appreciation of this natural drug should be carefully considered. although tecadenoson has been examined in a clinical trial for atrial fibrillation, and passed phase ii test, final results were not formally reported at this point of time [75] . trabodenoson was designed for treating ocular hypertension and primary open-angle glaucoma [76], but had failed in the phase iii clinical trial test due to lack of superiority over placebo. selodenoson was designed to control heart rate [77] , and it seems still in a developmental stage. since tecadenoson and trabodenoson appeared to have cleared the phase i tests, these drugs would worth examining against covid-19. the dsx score suggested the fitness of sinefungin or selodenoson is comparable to the genuine substrate of the 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase.several structure determinations of sars-cov-2 proteins, for example, endo-rnase (pdb ids 6vww and 6vw01), nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (6vyo), and nsp12 (rna-dependent rna polymerase)-nsp7-nsp8 complex (pdb id 7bv2) have been reported after the modeling of the presented study was executed. although many of the other proteins should be under analyses undoubtedly, it would take considerable time before all structures of potential targets are experimentally elucidated. during the period until the structural determinations, theoretical models might be useful. the presented structural models are freely available from the binds webpage (https://www.bind s.jp/sars-cov-2/) and also deposited in the bsm-arc repository (bsm00015) [78] .this work was partly supported by the platform project for supporting drug discovery and life science mo, sk, and ts conceived and designed the study. ah, cs, sn, ms, and ts constructed the models. ah, cs, and ts wrote the manuscript. all authors commented on the manuscript.the classical concept is that the conversion of angiotensin i to the vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii (ang ii), as well as the degradation of the potent vasodilator bradykinin are catalyzed by the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace), which is an ectoenzyme that is particularly abundant on the endothelial surface of the lungs [1] . it is well known that ace plays a pivotal role in the renin-angiotensin system (ras) and consequently in the regulation of blood pressure, volume homeostasis, vascular function, and cell growth. investigators have been aware of ras for more than a century after the initial discovery of renin in 1898 by tigerstedt and bergman. in the classic ras paradigm, renin is released from juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney into the circulation where it converts angiotensinogen from the liver to angiotensin i. angiotensin i is subsequently hydrolyzed by ace from the lung to form ang ii. while ace has the potential to hydrolyze many proteins, it is most appreciated for its enzymatic processing of angiotensin i to ang ii, the cardiovascular effects of which have been extensively reported. in addition, ace mediates the hydrolysis of bradykinin, which is typically considered to have blood pressurelowering effects. bradykinin may also act as regulator of cardiac function [2] . interestingly, ace more readily hydrolyzes bradykinin than it does angiotensin i. therefore, the net physiological effect of ace is to increase the production of a vasoconstrictor and decrease the availability of a vasodilator. the involvement of endothelial factors, as nitric oxide and endothelial derived hyperpolarizing factor(s), produced as consequences of bradykinin receptor activation may by also considered [2] .over the last 2 decades, it has become increasingly apparent that despite providing initial benefits in hemodynamic support, continued ras activation may contribute to the progression and worsening of disease such as heart failure. on this respect, the finding that ace (tissue ace) is primarily localized (>90%) in various tissues and organs within endothelia and parenchyma as well as on inflammatory cells has gained pathophysiological importance.considering the rapid progress in understanding the molecular physiology of ras and its many complexities, it should not be surprising that details would continue to emerge. it was unexpected, however, that after 100 years of research major new concepts would surface requiring scientists and clinicians to rethink the system and its role in cardiovascular regulation. recently it has been discovered that a distinct isoform of ace is expressed in humans, in which is found almost exclusively in testis (tace) [1] .more recently, two major conceptual changes would have to be considered regarding ras, ace, and aceinhibitors in the cardiovascular system.the first surprising discovery occurred in 2000 with the discovery of ace 2 or aceh, which may produce factors with vasodilator properties [1] .the second new concept has been discovered by ingrid fleming group's [3] [4] [5] and has been termed "outside-in signaling" by the authors. by this mechanism bradykinin and ace-inhibitors activate several kinases that may regulate protein synthesis.before to review these two new concepts, an up to date section on tissue ace and cardiac hypertrophy is considered and emphasis is given to organ protection by ace-inhibitors.as said under physiologic conditions, very high levels of tissue ace are found in the capillary bed of the lungs [6, 7] , which is considered an integral part of the classic ras [6, 7] . on the other hand, some tissue sites, including the heart, express relatively low levels of ace at least under physiologic conditions [8] . within the normal heart, the density of ace in the right atrium is higher than that in the left atrium and the ventricles. the larger part of tissue ace is found in the endothelium of large and small coronary arteries and arterioles. immunohistochemical analysis revealed that only half the capillaries are immunoreactive for ace, and coronary venous vessels are almost completely devoid of the enzyme [8, 9] . other sites of cardiac tissue ace expression include the endocardial layer and the cardiac valves. very little, if any, ace is found in normal adult cardiomyocytes in situ [8] .pathologic activation of local ras, including tissue ace, can have several deleterious effects on cardiovascular functions [10] [11] [12] . tissue ace plays a critical role in endothelial function through the direct pleiotropic actions of ang ii and also through a bradykinindependent mechanism. as tissue ace is largely localized on the endothelium, endothelial dysfunction is often associated with activation of this tissue ace. this activation disrupts the balance of vasodilatation and vasoconstriction. moreover, vascular smooth muscle cell growth, and the inflammatory and oxidative state of the vessel wall are altered (fig. 1 ). endothelial dysfunction can occur in response to a number of risk factors or injury such as ischemia/reperfusion, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesteremia, and cigarette smoking.ang ii, produced by activated endothelial ace, impairs nitric oxide bioactivity, mainly because of oxidative stress through the ang ii-induced production of superoxide radicals (o − 2 ) that can scavenge nitric oxide and reduce endothelium-dependent vasodilatation [13, 14] . this action is independent of the effects of ace in degrading bradykinin and modulating the endothelial-dependent vasodilation in response to activation of the b 2 -receptor. there is evidence that ace expression is increased in atherosclerosis and that ang ii may contribute to disease progression by increasing oxidative stress, chemoattractant and adhesion molecule expression, leading to inflammation. ang ii can also favor proliferative, inflammatory and prothrombotic actions (fig. 1 ). in fact, there is substantial evidence that in atherosclerosis, plaque represents an important target of ace inhibitor action (see below).yet, ace upregulation by risk factors is not restricted to the vasculature [9] . myocytes and fibroblasts are also recruited for ace expression in injured hearts [9, 12, 15] . moreover, macrophages invade injured myocardium and bring high levels of ace activity to interstitial sites where ang ii accumulates [9, 16] . mast cells in cardiac tissue are also a source of ang ii through the action of chymase ( fig. 1 ) [17] . tissue ace upregulation has been described in virtually all models of cardiac injury including hypertrophy by pressure- [11] , or volume-overload [18] , myocardial infarction [10] and heart failure [12, 15] . because elevated enzyme levels were found exclusively in the affected ventricle, elevated wall stress is believed to be a critical factor for cardiac ace induction [19] . most notably, unstressed cardiomyocytes in cell culture have been reported to express ace. cardiomyocytes are thus able to generate ang ii locally, especially, but not only, in response to mechanical stretch [20] .the increased local formation of ang ii and increased bradykinin degradation favors unbalanced effects, which may favor cardiovascular disease progression. whereas cardiac ace increases in the failing heart, pulmonary ace decreases when pulmonary congestion complicates the condition [21] . these opposing regulatory steps may protect angiotensin i from conversion/degradation in the lung and increase ace substrates in the heart [21] . indeed, ace-inhibitors effectively reduce systemic high blood pressure, do not aggravate pulmonary congestion and exert organprotective actions.increasingly apparent is the contribution of tissue ace and ang ii, in concert with several factors, to the development and maintenance of left ventricular hypertrophy ( fig. 1) . angiotensin ii type 1 receptors (at 1 rs) are also upregulated in experimentally induced cardiac hypertrophy [22] and ang ii has been shown to cause hypertrophy by direct action on cardiomyocytes.pinto et al. [23] and ohmichi et al. [24] found that pathologic remodeling, early after myocardial infarction, occurs predominantly in those subjects with the ace dd genotype. the observations of these authors have attracted the attention on ace gene polymorphism. however, this genotype has not been consis-tently associated with hypertension or the prevalence or extent of coronary artery disease or myocardial infarction [25, 26] . thus, the role of the genetic variability of ace remains to be fully elucidated.as discussed above cardiac pressure/volume overload leads to hypertrophy with tissue ace as major player. even the at 1 r-stimulation by ang ii of isolated cardiomyocytes leads to the induction of a characteristic hypertrophic phenotype, including protein synthesis, cell growth and re-expression of a fetal gene programme in the absence of proliferation [27] .a great number of intracellular signaling pathways involved in the hypertrophic response have been characterized in the last decade. all of the involved molecules do not operate in isolation, but participate in a more orchestrated response that generates interdependent and cross-talking networks. this explains the fact that the mechanisms involved in cardiac hypertrophy are still not completely clear (e.g. [28] ). several pathways in which ang ii is linked to growth regulation of cardiac cells have been described [29] , among these "transactivation" of different receptor systems seems to play a pivotal role (fig. 2) .the hypertrophic effect of ang ii in cardiac and noncardiac cells is delayed (requires hours to days) and appears to involve the sequential and parallel activation of a variety of protein kinases that are normally associated with signaling pathways downstream of tyrosine kinase receptors. the kinases typically implicated in mediating cardiac growth include mitogen-activated protein kinases (mapks), such as extra-cellular signalregulated kinases 1 and 2 (erk1/2), the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (pi3k)-dependent signaling kinases, protein kinase b (pkb/akt) and the mtor/s6 kinase axis [30, 31] . activation of some of these pathways can be readily explained by 'classical' g protein-coupled receptor (gpcr) signaling, for example, protein kinase c (pkc)-dependent activation of erk1/2. yet, mobilization of additional growth-dependent kinases by the at 1 r has been more difficult to elucidate. the first evidence for a gpcr-mediated "transactivation" of the epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr), which lacks intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, has been provided by daub et al. [32] ; thus potentially explaining proliferation triggered by 'non-classical' gpcr signaling [32] . the above studies support the idea that at 1 r activation by ang ii will start a cascade that will lead to cardiac hypertrophy (fig. 2) . the proposed pathway starting from at 1 r-dependent transactivation of egfrs on cardiomyocytes may involve stimulation of membrane-bound metalloproteases (mmps), which in turn cleave egfr ligands such as heparin-binding egf (hb-egf) from a plasma membrane-associated precursor (pro-hb-egf). the mechanisms by which the at 1 r activates the mmps are unclear but may fig. 2 . schematic diagram depicting the signaling cascade activated by classical g protein-coupled receptor (gpcr) activation (side a) and long-term gcrp-mediated hypertrophy (side b). the 'classical' at 1 r signaling (side a), responsible for acute ang ii actions such as vasoconstriction, occurs via the g protein g q/11 , leading to activation of phospholipase c-ß (pcb) and the subsequent generation of second messengers diacylglycerol (dag) and inositol trisphosphate (ip3), which in turn stimulate protein kinase c (pkc) and mobilize intracellular calcium. on the other side (b), starting from dashed arrows is depicted long-term gcrp-mediated hypertrophy. this process may be dependent upon egfr 'transactivation', which has been termed 'triple membrane-passing signaling' (tmps). tmps is attributed to an intracellular signaling mechanism and to an epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) transactivation which require matrix metalloprotease (mmp)-dependent extracellular cleavage of pro-heparin-binding egf (pro-hb-egf), which liberate a soluble hb-egf that may activate the egfr. following, this activation several intracellular kinases are activated that may play a pivotal role in regulating cellular growth and proliferation. 'classical' gpcr signaling via pkc-activation can also concur to the activation of erk1/2. adam = a disintegrin and metalloproteinase, an inhibitor of metalloenzymes; (for other acronyms see also text).involve ca 2+ , tyrosine kinase src and proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (pyk2). subsequent activation of the egfr leads to the mobilization of signaling pathways, which include erk1/2, pi3k, akt and mtor/s6 kinase (fig. 2 ). all these kinases may play a pivotal role in regulating cellular growth and proliferation via an increase in translation efficiency and capacity [33] .finally, it must be kept in mind that the hypertrophic effects of ang ii, as well as those of adrenaline, have been seen to be mediated by an increased production of several endogenous factors, including endothelins (ets) and fibroblast growth factor (fgf) (fig. 1) . for instance, ang ii can upregulate the endothelin converting enzyme-1 and can increase the level of the precursor of et prepropeptide [34] ; in the absence of fgf, hypertension evoked by ang ii does not induce cardiac hypertrophy [35] .due to the crosstalk between et-1 and ang ii in contributing to cardiac hypertrophy and atherosclerosic plaques, attempts have been done to use endothelin receptor blockers in the treatment of some cardiovascular diseases. in spite of beneficial effect obtained in pulmonary hypertension, conflicting results have been obtained in congestive heart failure, in particular in terms of event reduction in heart failure [36, 37] .an antihypertensive treatment aiming at reducing blood pressure only is no more sufficient due to the present state of the art. there are no doubts that aceinhibitors are first-line antihypertensive substances due to their vascular and myocardial protective effects and their few side effects. it is well known that ace inhibition decreases the risk of myocardial infarction in a way that may be independent of its ability to decrease blood pressure. a recent meta-analysis of four clinical trials confirmed that ace inhibitor administration is also beneficial in acute myocardial infarction treatment [38] . even so, two trials among those included in the meta-analysis (the cooperative new scandinavian enalapril survival study ii and the third subanalysis of italian group for the study of streptokinase in myocardial infarction; gissi), queried the beneficial effect of ace-inhibitors in the very early phase of acute myocardial infarction. a possible explanation of this doubtful benefit resides on the fact that in the early phase an increase in the level of bradykinin (vasodilator and cardiodepressor) may be not appropriate [2, 39] .the europa [40] and hope [41] trials are also well planned and well executed studies, which showed the beneficial effects of ace-inhibitors in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with coronary heart disease. unfortunately the two studies as presented cannot be directly compared with each other. nevertheless, from these studies we learned many things about ace-inhibitors as organ protectors, confirming that a principal target of ace inhibitor ac-tion is at the tissue sites. we also learned that concentrations of ace-inhibitors that were in the past considered relatively high doses are, indeed, adequate doses.in heart failure, the early association of β-blockers and ace-inhibitors is also emerging as an adequate strategy [37, 42] . in humans and animals, aceinhibitors and at 1 r antagonists have been shown to prevent or regress the development of hypertrophy [12, [43] [44] [45] . underlying mechanisms of cardiovascular remodeling and relevant therapies aiming counteracting these mechanisms have been recently reviewed [37] . in particular, ace-inhibitors, β-blockers and aldosterone antagonists have proven to be effective in modulating the process of remodeling and in reducing the occurrence of adverse events in heart failure [37, 42] .pharmaco-kinetic properties of various aceinhibitors indicate that there are differences in their binding characteristics for tissue ace [46, 47] . because tissue ace is thought to increase inflammation and vasoconstriction and is thought to promote vascular remodeling and plaque stabilization, the decrease in myocardial infarction occurrence during ace inhibition treatment has been attributed to inhibition of local tissue ace in the vasculature [38] . however, a recent study examined this question and found no correlation between tissue ace affinity and risk of first nonfatal myocardial infarction in hypertensive patients. in this study ace-inhibitors were categorized into 2 groups based on their relative affinity for tissue ace [48] . higher-affinity tissue ace-inhibitors consisted of quinapril, benazepril, and ramipril, and lower-affinity tissue ace-inhibitors consisted of lisinopril, enalapril, fosinopril, and captopril. nevertheless, there is no universal definition in the literature of what constitutes a tissue-ace inhibitor [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] . undoubtedly, more comparative experimental and clinical studies should address the significance of these drug differences and their impact on clinical events. whatever will be the outcome of these studies they will increase our capacity to manage these highly beneficial tools.ace 2 is a "homologue" of ace capable of producing angiotensin peptides, which may have vasodilator properties [1] .a significant difference between ace and ace 2 genes is that ace gene gives rise to two isoforms, somatic ace and tace, while a single ace 2 protein species appears to be formed. in humans, somatic ace resides on chromosome 17 (chromosome 11 and 10 in mouse and rats, respectively) and consists of 25 exons. germinal tace, expressed only in testes, arises from a promoter located within intron 12 (downstream of the gene duplication) and makes a protein with only a single domain and catalytic site. the ace 2 gene is located in the region of the x chromosome in humans (xp22), mice (xf5) and rodents (xq32), which maps to quantitative trait loci (qtl) in hypertensive rats [1, [51] [52] [53] . in humans, ace 2 gene is highly expressed in the endothelium of the heart, in the tubular epithelia of the kidney, and in the gastrointestinal tract [1, 53, 54] . in mice, ace 2 has also been observed in lungs [55] . importantly, in humans two single nucleotide polymorphisms in the ace 2 -qtl were associated with cardiovascular disease [56, 57] . ace 2 , although structurally similar to ace, has a different catalytic profile. ace acts as a dipeptidylpeptidase generating ang ii from angiotensin i trough the removal of the c-terminal dipeptide his-leu, while ace 2 is a carboxypeptidase, which catalyses the conversion of the vasoconstrictor ang ii into angiotensin1-7 (ang 1-7) by removing the carboxyterminal amino acid, phenylalanine. moreover, ace 2 can cleave the c-terminal aminoacid of angiotensin i to a nonapeptide angiotensin1-9 (ang 1-9), which may be converted to ang 1-7 by ace ( fig. 3 ; table 1 ). the biological function of ang 1-7 and of ang 1-9 are still poor understood. while ang 1-9 may potentiate ang ii-induced vasoconstriction, ang 1-7 may play an important role as regulator of cardiovascular function, in- (ang 1-10) serves as substrate for ace to form ang ii, which is known to act as vasoconstrictor and pro-hypertrophic factor. angiotensin i can also be metabolized by ace 2 to form ang 1-9, which action is still not well understood. starting either from ang ii or from ang 1-9, ace 2 catalyzes the production of ang 1-7, which has opposing effect to ang ii via interaction with the mas/ (ang 1-7) receptor. it appears that ace and ace 2 ducing vasodilatation, apoptosis and growth arrest [58] [59] [60] . on the basis of ace 2 expression and of the physiological role of its substrates, it has been suggested that ace 2 may act as a tissue-specific negative feedback regulator of the activated ras [61] . thus, ace and ace 2 may ultimately have opposing physiological effects. in contrast with ace, ace 2 does not hydrolyze bradykinin and is not inhibited by typical aceinhibitors [1, 53] .while it is accepted that neither ace nor angiotensin deficient mice exhibit defects in heart development or are susceptible to heart disease [62] , recent studies on ace 2 knockout mice report apparently conflicting results on the importance of this enzyme in cardiovascular function [52, 63, 64] . a reduction in ace 2 levels would lead to a reduced degradation of vasoconstrictors and to a reduced formation of vasodilators, thus favoring a blood pressure increase. in fact, in a line of mice lacking ace 2 gene, allred et al. [64] reported elevated levels of baseline blood pressure. this last report seems also in agreement with the observation of reduced ace 2 levels in several rat models of hypertension such as sabra hypertensive-prone strain (sbh/y), spontaneously hypertensive rats (shr) and spontaneously hypertensive stroke-prone rats (shrsp) [51, 65] . however, it has been also reported that ace 2 deficient mice show a reduction in heart contractility and a significant decrease in blood arterial and ventricular pressure, both in awake and anesthetized animals, as compared with littermate controls [52, 63] . a possible reunification of these apparently conflicting results in the ace 2 knockout mice may derive from the fact that the reduction in blood pressure is accompanied to an impaired heart function [52, 63] . it may be thus argued that in the ace 2 knockout mice, initially excessive and uncontrasted ang ii-mediated effects occur, which lead to increased vascular tone and pressure. then, the long lasting ang ii action sustains a pathological cell growth, which leads to an impaired cardiac function that resembles a sort of cardiac stunning/hibernation, as observed by murphy et al. [66] . thus the heart stunning may be responsible of the reduction in blood pressure. it is intriguing that in the ace 2 knockout mouse the ablation of ace expression abolished the cardiac dysfunction phenotype of this mouse [52] . the observation that the double mutant mouse (ace/ace 2 knockout mouse) displays normal cardiac function supports the idea that the unopposed effects of ang ii may account for the cardiac dysfunction of single ace 2 knockout mouse. it has also been proposed that ace 2 function may not be limited only to ras. in fact, ace 2 can cleave the c-terminal residues from several other peptides such as apelins, ghrelin, des-arg bradykinin, ß-casamorphin, neurotensines and dynorphyn a1-13. physiological functions of these ace 2 substrates as well as functions of the formed products are summarized in table 1 [1, 52, [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] . in this mini-review the emerging role of apelins on cardiovascular system will be more extensively reviewed, as crosstalk between ras and these peptides exists.two forms of apelin (apelin-13 and apelin-36) were recently identified as endogenous ligands for the human apj orphan receptor, which has homologies with the at 1 r [68, 70, 74] . apelin displays diuretic effect and has been found in the supraottic nucleus of the hypothalamus, where it seems to inhibit the electrical activity of vasopressin-releasing neurons [71] . apelin exerts also nitric oxide-dependent vasodilator and positive inotropic activities. in apj-deficient animals the ang ii hypertensive response resulted enhanced; thus suggesting that, in spite of the similarity between at 1 rs and apj-receptors, the activation of the latter may counteract the pressor effect of the activation of the former receptors. it has been also proposed that ang ii may induce the release of apelin from vascular endothelial cells [75] . the positive inotropic activity of apelin has been demonstrated in both isolated preparations and intact animals [72, 73, 76] and has been related to pkc activation with consequent na + -h + exchanger phosphorylation/activation. the resulting increase of intracellular na + concentration can then activate the ca 2+ -na + exchanger leading to an increase in intracellular ca 2+ concentration, thus favoring the increase in contractility. it has been proposed that, due to its property, apelin could have a therapeutic use in heart failure [72, 73, 76] . although, it has been reported that after two weeks of apelin-treatment no signs of hypertrophy appear [76] , long-term studies aimed at ascertaining whether or not apelin may induce hypertrophy are required.as said ace 2 cannot be inhibited by ace-inhibitors [1, 53] . recently, novel ace 2 peptide inhibitors have been described [60] . the use of ace 2 antagonists should be useful in elucidation of ace 2 function in vivo.finally, ace 2 is unique among mammalian carboxypeptidases: it contains an hexxh zinc motif that resembles a bacterial enzyme, thermus aquaticus (taq) carboxypeptidase, and it is a functional receptor for the sars coronavirus [61, 77] .this new concept has been discovered by ingrid fleming group's [3] [4] [5] . using human umbilical vein endothelial cells or porcine aortic endothelial cells stably transfected with human somatic ace as a model, fleming and coworkers [3] [4] [5] demonstrated that ramiprilat and perindoprilat increased casein kinase 2 (ck2)-mediated phosphorylation of ace ser 1270 . coimmunoprecipitation studies revealed that ace associates with ck2, and that both inhibitors can increase ace-associated ck2 activity. interestingly, bradykinin, but not angiotensin i, increases ace ser 1270 phosphorylation and ck2 activity, suggesting that a naturally occurring signal transduction pathway for bradykinin that does not require its classical receptor exists. importantly, the possibility that the ck2-mediated phosphorylation is the result of crosstalk between signal transduction pathways was ruled out in control experiments by the use of porcine endothelial cells, which do not have at 1 r or bradykinin b 2 receptors.subsequently, two more ace-associated proteins, c-jun n-terminal kinase (jnk) and map kinase kinase 7 (mkk7), were identified in addition to ck2 (fig. 4) . the authors [3] [4] [5] not only reported the association of these proteins with ace, but they also provided convincing evidence that ace-associated jnk activity is increased in cells treated with ace-inhibitors or bradykinin. interestingly, jnk activation, but not its binding to ace, is dependent on the phosphorylation of ace ser 1270 . activation of jnk by ramiprilat results in the accumulation of phosphorylated c-jun in the nucleus, which has been reported to activate transcription of ace. ace increased in response to ramiprilat via a mechanism dependent on jnk activity in human umbilical vein endothelial cells in culture and in mouse lung in vivo. in other words, fleming and coworkers [3] [4] [5] clearly demonstrated that the binding of an ace inhibitor to ace results in the activation of jnk as well as the phosphorylation of c-jun and its translocation to the nucleus. this signaling pathway is therefore likely to affect the expression of several proteins and in particular the expression of ace itself. very recently, in lungs from mice and in primary cultures of human endothelial cells, fleming group's showed a ramiprilatinduced, ace-dependent increase in cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) expression and promoter activity, which was prevented by the inhibition of jnk [4] . the authors suggest that the ace signaling cascade involving the phosphorylation of ace ser 1270 , and the consequent ac- tivation of jnk, activator protein-1 and cox-2 can explain the enhanced production of prostacyclin, which is a well-documented consequence of ace inhibitory therapy [4] . importantly, the authors were able to demonstrate that the signaling pathway initiated by ace-inhibitors in cell culture can also be activated in the whole animal. this suggests that the intracellular signaling (termed "outside-in signaling" by the authors) mediated by ace-inhibitors and bradykinin may be an important physiological mechanism. the authors suggest [5] that ace can be added to the class of the so-called nonreceptor cell surface proteins. the identification of ace as a signaling molecule that can be activated by the binding of ace-inhibitors may account for some of the beneficial effects of these drugs on the cardiovascular system. of course, understanding the full spectrum of physiological events initiated by ace "outside-in signaling" will require additional studies.in summary, the evidence that important effects of ang ii are independent of classical g protein coupling and the counterbalancing roles of ace and ace 2 in the ras further suggest that the system clearly operates at physiological levels far beyond the simple regulation of vascular tone and body fluid homeostasis. it is remarkable that in a short period of time so many new concepts have been accumulated. the role of tissue ace and atrs in organ hypertrophy is revealing new aspects. these include, receptor mediate endocytosis, tyrosine phosphorylation signaling, map kinase activation and transactivation of egfr. ace 2 and its substrates are involved not only in the feedback regulation of the ras, but also in extra-ras systems. in fact, ace 2 can catalyze the conversion of opiods, apelins and other peptides. it is also intriguing that by an "outside-in signaling", bradykinin, an "old" substrate, may play a "new" role as gene regulator acting on ace itself. these new concepts, in particular "outside-in signaling", deviate from the original one, where ace-inhibitors are considered important because reduce ang ii levels. some ace-inhibitors may mimic the "new" effects of bradykinin. a further clarification of the physiological role of ace 2 , of "outside-in signaling" and of apelins may hopefully lead to the development of new therapeutics against heart failure and hypertension. the recent structural solutions of both ace and ace 2 could facilitate future design of more specific drugs with different affinity.it can be argued that from a therapeutic point of view these new concepts should be taken in account to choose between an ace inhibitor and an ang ii receptor antagonist. of course, more comparative experimental and clinical studies must address this topic on the light of these new concepts.we will not be surprised if from this rapidly evolving field further new concepts will emerge in the next future.recent media reports and publications question whether some medicines could worsen the novel coronavirus disease covid-19 that is caused by infection with the sars-cov-2 coronavirus. these reports mention angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which are commonly used drugs to treat patients with hypertension, heart failure, or kidney complications in diabetes mellitus, as well as ibuprofen, which is an over-the-counter drug prescribed or used to treat arthritis and rheumatic diseases among other indications. this article summarizes current evidence regarding the risk of these drugs during an unfavorable course of covid-19.the most common comorbidities reported in epidemiological studies of patients with covid-19 are hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease. a higher number of comorbidities, which increase with age, are correlated with poorer clinical outcomes (guan et al. 2020; yang et al. 2020; zhang et al. 2020) . epidemiological data show that the probability of dying from an infection with the sars-cov-2 virus increases with age, from 0.2 in patients ≤ 39 years old to 8% in patients aged 70-79 years and 15% in patients ≥ 80 years old (the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team 2020; world health organization 2020). therefore, it is not surprising to find an association between the use of drugs that are more commonly prescribed in older patients and poorer outcomes of covid-19. however, this association alone does not yet describe anything about causality.role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) in covid-19the reason for suspicion that some drugs might worsen the prognosis of covid-19 stems from current reports that, for example, ace inhibitors may lead to an increase in the number of ligands to which the sars-cov-2 coronavirus docks. this hypothesis was expressed in a commentary in nature reviews cardiology ) and a letter in the british medical journal (sommerstein and gräni 2020) . the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a membrane-bound aminopeptidase, serves as a receptor for the coronavirus and therefore an entry portal into cells. ace2 is also the entry receptor for sars-cov, which caused the 2002-2004 sars outbreak. during therapy with drugs, such as arbs or ace inhibitors, more ace2 receptors are formed, theoretically producing more docking sites for the new coronavirus . because an ace inhibitor (lisinopril) and an arb (losartan) are both among the 10 most commonly used drugs with a combined 152 million prescriptions per year in the usa alone (iqvia institute 2019), these patients would represent a substantial group of people at risk.among the coronaviral structural proteins, the spike (s) protein facilitates viral entry into the host cell. the s protein consists of two functional domains, the s1 domain and the s2 domain. the s1 domain mediates the attachment of the virus to surface receptors of the host cell, whereas the s2 domain mediates subsequent fusion between viral and host cell membranes and endocytic entry of the virus. hoffmann et al. have recently shown that the sars-cov-2 s protein engages ace2 as the crucial entry receptor and employs the host cell serine protease tmprss2 for s protein priming (hoffmann et al. 2020) . furthermore, the direct binding of the sars-cov-2 s protein to ace2 has been confirmed by recent cryo-em studies (walls et al. 2020) .ace2 is primarily located in the lungs, where it is mostly expressed in alveolar epithelial type ii cells. type ii cells secrete surfactant and hence are critical to the gas exchange function of the lungs. injury to these cells could explain the severe lung injury observed in covid-19 pneumonia. ace2 is also found in the heart, intestines, kidneys, and blood vessels and in soluble form in serum, which may explain why covid-19, in addition to pneumonia, can cause multiple organ failure in severe cases. ace2 as part of the renin-angiotensin system and its role in lung injury ace2 constitutes an important alternative renin-angiotensin system (ras) pathway that counterbalances the classical ras pathway (guignabert et al. 2018 ). in the classical ras pathway, angiotensin ii, which is formed from angiotensin i by ace1, induces aldosterone secretion, salt and water retention, inflammation, and severe arteriolar vasoconstriction via binding to the at1 receptor. in contrast, ace2 primarily hydrolyzes angiotensin ii into two other biologically active products of the ras cascade, angiotensin-(1-9) and angiotensin-(1-7), which promote vasodilation and also reduce cell growth and inflammatory responses (guignabert et al. 2018) .animal experiments in response to the 2002-2004 sars outbreak have shown that infection with sars-cov leads to dysregulation of ras with reduced ace2 expression and an increase in angiotensin ii, which increases lung damage (kuba et al. 2005) . notably, the injection of sars-cov s protein into mice worsened acute lung failure in vivo, but this effect could be attenuated by blocking the classical ras pathway (kuba et al. 2005 ). imai et al. observed that ace2 protected against severe acute lung injury in an experimental murine model of acute lung injury, whereas components of the classical ras pathway, including ace1, angiotensin ii, and the at1a receptor, promoted disease pathogenesis, induced lung edema, and impaired lung function. furthermore, recombinant ace2 protected the mice from severe acute lung injury .current evidence therefore suggests that ace2 serves both as an entry receptor of sars-cov-2 and to protect the lungs from injury, which may be the case with covid-19. interestingly, monteil et al. showed that human recombinant soluble ace2 (hrsace2), which has already been tested in phase 1 and phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of acute lung injury and pulmonary hypertension, can significantly block the early stages of sars-cov-2 infection in vitro (monteil et al. 2020) . as a result, a phase 2 clinical trial with hrsace2 for the treatment of covid-19 was recently initiated in europe (eudract number: 2020-001172-15).our knowledge about ace2 regulation in response to drugs is predominantly based on animal experiments. in rodents, treatment with ace inhibitors or arbs increased cardiac or renal ace2 expression and/or ace2 activity (ferrario et al. 2005; soler et al. 2009 ). in animal models of arterial hypertension, myocardial infarction, pressure overload, or diabetes mellitus, cardiac ace2 was downregulated compared with healthy control animals (ocaranza et al. 2006; tikellis et al. 2006; qiao et al. 2015; wang et al. 2016; zhao et al. 2019) .treatment with an arb, ibuprofen, or pioglitazone reversed the decrease in ace2 expression in diseased animals, whereas almost no effect on ace2 expression was observed in control animals (qiao et al. 2015; wang et al. 2016; zhao et al. 2019) . other cox-2 inhibitors and ppar-γ ligand have not been investigated, and the precise mechanisms were not established. thus, it remains unclear whether effects of ibuprofen and pioglitazone on ace2 expression are drug class effects.data in humans are scarce. for most patients with heart failure and during the acute phase of myocardial infarction, treatment with ras inhibitors showed an increase in cardiac or circulating ace2, which was explained by the severity of heart disease rather than ras inhibitor treatment (zisman et al. 2003; goulter et al. 2004; epelman et al. 2009 ). although animal data suggest that drugs such as arbs, ace inhibitors, ibuprofen, or pioglitazone can upregulate cardiac or renal ace2, the evidence from animal experiments is not fully consistent, and it remains unclear whether the results are transferable to humans. although the primary target of sars-cov-2 is ace2 on the cell surface of alveolar type ii cells, data on drug-induced changes in pulmonary ace2 are lacking. although there is evidence that comorbidities can have significant effects on ace2 expression, it is difficult to assess the net effect on ace2 expression in patients. moreover, it would have to be shown that a drug-induced increase in ace2 expression is sufficient to facilitate sars-cov-2 entry.the local inflammatory process in severe covid-19 can induce parenchymal injuries, such as damage to the alveolarcapillary unit (shi et al. 2020) . local inflammation involves the production of prostaglandins by inducible cyclooxygenase 2 (cox2) and the recruitment and activation of effector cells, such as polymorphonuclear neutrophils. this contributes to the development of pain and fever that occur during infection, which is the main reason why nsaids are so commonly used in infections. alternatively, cox2 also has a pivotal role in the resolution of inflammation, thereby preventing selfinflicted damage from the immune response (levy et al. 2001) .nsaids work by inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase enzymes (cox1 or cox2), thereby blocking the production of prostaglandins that are involved in the recruitment and activation of effector cells, such as polymorphonuclear neutrophils (pmns). given the dual role of cox2 in the inflammatory response, such as amplifying the initial acute phase and then promoting resolution, the question arises whether taking nsaids during sars-cov-2 infection could improve or complicate the course of the disease. the question becomes particularly important because of the two-phase immune response to sars-cov-2 infection: the first immune defensebased protective phase and the second inflammation-driven damaging phase leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), respiratory failure, and subsequent fatality (shi et al. 2020) . due to the current novelty of covid-19, data concerning the influence of nsaid use on covid-19 outcomes remain needed.a retrospective study of critically ill 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic patients did not show any evidence that nsaid use affects mortality (epperly et al. 2016) . following the sars outbreak caused by sars-cov, investigators discovered that the nsaid indomethacin had direct antiviral activity against sars-cov via blocking viral rna synthesis independent of cox inhibition (amici et al. 2006) . furthermore, antiviral activity has been confirmed in vivo in dogs infected with canine coronavirus (amici et al. 2006) , but no human studies have been performed to confirm a positive effect for indomethacin treatment on sars-cov or sars-cov-2 infections. notably, observational studies suggest an association between pre-hospital nsaid exposure and a protracted and complicated course of pneumonia (voiriot et al. 2019) . a survey by the french national agency of medicine and health products safety revealed that infections caused by varicella and some bacterial infections could be aggravated by the nsaids ibuprofen and ketoprofen. based on this report, the safety committee of the european medicines agency recently initiated a review of these drugs. the mechanisms by which nsaid use may lead to a complicated course of pneumonia are uncertain. it could be assumed that the intake of nsaids suppresses the main symptoms of inflammation, such as fever and pain, and therefore delays the timely detection of pneumonia and the subsequent start of appropriate therapy (voiriot et al. 2019) . accordingly, most nsaid drug labels warn that these drugs could mask the signs or symptoms of infection. another mechanism could be the immunological effects of nsaids, such as the impaired resolution of inflammation, thus resulting in prolonged disease (voiriot et al. 2019) .in summary, there is currently no scientific evidence establishing a clear link between arbs, ace inhibitors, or ibuprofen and the worsening of covid-19. in contrast, the experimental data support the idea that ace2 not only serves as an entry receptor for sars-cov-2 but also protects the lungs from acute injury. ras inhibitors may therefore even be beneficial in covid-19 infection.available information to date does not support interruptions or changes in ongoing chronic treatments with ibuprofen or ras blockers. recommendations are as follows:-based on the currently available evidence, effective treatment with ras blockers should not be discontinued or switched. the relatively hypothetical risk of worsening covid-19 does not justify discontinuing or switching arbs or ace inhibitors due to the specific risk of destabilizing blood pressure control, stroke, heart attack, or worsening heart failure (van der wardt et al. 2017; halliday et al. 2019) . insufficient control of concomitant diseases caused by drug discontinuation could make patients more susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection and complicate the course of disease. -currently, there is insufficient evidence to recommend patients who take ibuprofen for medically indicated reasons to change their anti-inflammatory medication in light of the covid-19 pandemic. nsaids should be used at the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible period. the choice of drug to treat fever or pain in covid-19 should be based on a benefit-risk assessment for known side effects (e.g., kidney damage, gastrointestinal ulceration) and the respective treatment guidelines that in most cases recommend paracetamol as the first treatment option for fever or pain associated with infections.author contribution statement oz, sh, and cqs screened the literature and contributed to the manuscript. all authors read and approved the manuscript.funding information open access funding provided by projekt deal.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.recent media reports and publications question whether some medicines could worsen the novel coronavirus disease covid-19 that is caused by infection with the sars-cov-2 coronavirus. these reports mention angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which are commonly used drugs to treat patients with hypertension, heart failure, or kidney complications in diabetes mellitus, as well as ibuprofen, which is an over-the-counter drug prescribed or used to treat arthritis and rheumatic diseases among other indications. this article summarizes current evidence regarding the risk of these drugs during an unfavorable course of covid-19.the most common comorbidities reported in epidemiological studies of patients with covid-19 are hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease. a higher number of comorbidities, which increase with age, are correlated with poorer clinical outcomes (guan et al. 2020; yang et al. 2020; zhang et al. 2020) . epidemiological data show that the probability of dying from an infection with the sars-cov-2 virus increases with age, from 0.2 in patients ≤ 39 years old to 8% in patients aged 70-79 years and 15% in patients ≥ 80 years old (the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team 2020; world health organization 2020). therefore, it is not surprising to find an association between the use of drugs that are more commonly prescribed in older patients and poorer outcomes of covid-19. however, this association alone does not yet describe anything about causality.role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) in covid-19the reason for suspicion that some drugs might worsen the prognosis of covid-19 stems from current reports that, for example, ace inhibitors may lead to an increase in the number of ligands to which the sars-cov-2 coronavirus docks. this hypothesis was expressed in a commentary in nature reviews cardiology ) and a letter in the british medical journal (sommerstein and gräni 2020) . the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a membrane-bound aminopeptidase, serves as a receptor for the coronavirus and therefore an entry portal into cells. ace2 is also the entry receptor for sars-cov, which caused the 2002-2004 sars outbreak. during therapy with drugs, such as arbs or ace inhibitors, more ace2 receptors are formed, theoretically producing more docking sites for the new coronavirus . because an ace inhibitor (lisinopril) and an arb (losartan) are both among the 10 most commonly used drugs with a combined 152 million prescriptions per year in the usa alone (iqvia institute 2019), these patients would represent a substantial group of people at risk.among the coronaviral structural proteins, the spike (s) protein facilitates viral entry into the host cell. the s protein consists of two functional domains, the s1 domain and the s2 domain. the s1 domain mediates the attachment of the virus to surface receptors of the host cell, whereas the s2 domain mediates subsequent fusion between viral and host cell membranes and endocytic entry of the virus. hoffmann et al. have recently shown that the sars-cov-2 s protein engages ace2 as the crucial entry receptor and employs the host cell serine protease tmprss2 for s protein priming (hoffmann et al. 2020) . furthermore, the direct binding of the sars-cov-2 s protein to ace2 has been confirmed by recent cryo-em studies (walls et al. 2020) .ace2 is primarily located in the lungs, where it is mostly expressed in alveolar epithelial type ii cells. type ii cells secrete surfactant and hence are critical to the gas exchange function of the lungs. injury to these cells could explain the severe lung injury observed in covid-19 pneumonia. ace2 is also found in the heart, intestines, kidneys, and blood vessels and in soluble form in serum, which may explain why covid-19, in addition to pneumonia, can cause multiple organ failure in severe cases. ace2 as part of the renin-angiotensin system and its role in lung injury ace2 constitutes an important alternative renin-angiotensin system (ras) pathway that counterbalances the classical ras pathway (guignabert et al. 2018 ). in the classical ras pathway, angiotensin ii, which is formed from angiotensin i by ace1, induces aldosterone secretion, salt and water retention, inflammation, and severe arteriolar vasoconstriction via binding to the at1 receptor. in contrast, ace2 primarily hydrolyzes angiotensin ii into two other biologically active products of the ras cascade, angiotensin-(1-9) and angiotensin-(1-7), which promote vasodilation and also reduce cell growth and inflammatory responses (guignabert et al. 2018) .animal experiments in response to the 2002-2004 sars outbreak have shown that infection with sars-cov leads to dysregulation of ras with reduced ace2 expression and an increase in angiotensin ii, which increases lung damage (kuba et al. 2005) . notably, the injection of sars-cov s protein into mice worsened acute lung failure in vivo, but this effect could be attenuated by blocking the classical ras pathway (kuba et al. 2005 ). imai et al. observed that ace2 protected against severe acute lung injury in an experimental murine model of acute lung injury, whereas components of the classical ras pathway, including ace1, angiotensin ii, and the at1a receptor, promoted disease pathogenesis, induced lung edema, and impaired lung function. furthermore, recombinant ace2 protected the mice from severe acute lung injury .current evidence therefore suggests that ace2 serves both as an entry receptor of sars-cov-2 and to protect the lungs from injury, which may be the case with covid-19. interestingly, monteil et al. showed that human recombinant soluble ace2 (hrsace2), which has already been tested in phase 1 and phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of acute lung injury and pulmonary hypertension, can significantly block the early stages of sars-cov-2 infection in vitro (monteil et al. 2020) . as a result, a phase 2 clinical trial with hrsace2 for the treatment of covid-19 was recently initiated in europe (eudract number: 2020-001172-15).our knowledge about ace2 regulation in response to drugs is predominantly based on animal experiments. in rodents, treatment with ace inhibitors or arbs increased cardiac or renal ace2 expression and/or ace2 activity (ferrario et al. 2005; soler et al. 2009 ). in animal models of arterial hypertension, myocardial infarction, pressure overload, or diabetes mellitus, cardiac ace2 was downregulated compared with healthy control animals (ocaranza et al. 2006; tikellis et al. 2006; qiao et al. 2015; wang et al. 2016; zhao et al. 2019) .treatment with an arb, ibuprofen, or pioglitazone reversed the decrease in ace2 expression in diseased animals, whereas almost no effect on ace2 expression was observed in control animals (qiao et al. 2015; wang et al. 2016; zhao et al. 2019) . other cox-2 inhibitors and ppar-γ ligand have not been investigated, and the precise mechanisms were not established. thus, it remains unclear whether effects of ibuprofen and pioglitazone on ace2 expression are drug class effects.data in humans are scarce. for most patients with heart failure and during the acute phase of myocardial infarction, treatment with ras inhibitors showed an increase in cardiac or circulating ace2, which was explained by the severity of heart disease rather than ras inhibitor treatment (zisman et al. 2003; goulter et al. 2004; epelman et al. 2009 ). although animal data suggest that drugs such as arbs, ace inhibitors, ibuprofen, or pioglitazone can upregulate cardiac or renal ace2, the evidence from animal experiments is not fully consistent, and it remains unclear whether the results are transferable to humans. although the primary target of sars-cov-2 is ace2 on the cell surface of alveolar type ii cells, data on drug-induced changes in pulmonary ace2 are lacking. although there is evidence that comorbidities can have significant effects on ace2 expression, it is difficult to assess the net effect on ace2 expression in patients. moreover, it would have to be shown that a drug-induced increase in ace2 expression is sufficient to facilitate sars-cov-2 entry.the local inflammatory process in severe covid-19 can induce parenchymal injuries, such as damage to the alveolarcapillary unit (shi et al. 2020) . local inflammation involves the production of prostaglandins by inducible cyclooxygenase 2 (cox2) and the recruitment and activation of effector cells, such as polymorphonuclear neutrophils. this contributes to the development of pain and fever that occur during infection, which is the main reason why nsaids are so commonly used in infections. alternatively, cox2 also has a pivotal role in the resolution of inflammation, thereby preventing selfinflicted damage from the immune response (levy et al. 2001) .nsaids work by inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase enzymes (cox1 or cox2), thereby blocking the production of prostaglandins that are involved in the recruitment and activation of effector cells, such as polymorphonuclear neutrophils (pmns). given the dual role of cox2 in the inflammatory response, such as amplifying the initial acute phase and then promoting resolution, the question arises whether taking nsaids during sars-cov-2 infection could improve or complicate the course of the disease. the question becomes particularly important because of the two-phase immune response to sars-cov-2 infection: the first immune defensebased protective phase and the second inflammation-driven damaging phase leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), respiratory failure, and subsequent fatality (shi et al. 2020) . due to the current novelty of covid-19, data concerning the influence of nsaid use on covid-19 outcomes remain needed.a retrospective study of critically ill 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic patients did not show any evidence that nsaid use affects mortality (epperly et al. 2016) . following the sars outbreak caused by sars-cov, investigators discovered that the nsaid indomethacin had direct antiviral activity against sars-cov via blocking viral rna synthesis independent of cox inhibition (amici et al. 2006) . furthermore, antiviral activity has been confirmed in vivo in dogs infected with canine coronavirus (amici et al. 2006) , but no human studies have been performed to confirm a positive effect for indomethacin treatment on sars-cov or sars-cov-2 infections. notably, observational studies suggest an association between pre-hospital nsaid exposure and a protracted and complicated course of pneumonia (voiriot et al. 2019) . a survey by the french national agency of medicine and health products safety revealed that infections caused by varicella and some bacterial infections could be aggravated by the nsaids ibuprofen and ketoprofen. based on this report, the safety committee of the european medicines agency recently initiated a review of these drugs. the mechanisms by which nsaid use may lead to a complicated course of pneumonia are uncertain. it could be assumed that the intake of nsaids suppresses the main symptoms of inflammation, such as fever and pain, and therefore delays the timely detection of pneumonia and the subsequent start of appropriate therapy (voiriot et al. 2019) . accordingly, most nsaid drug labels warn that these drugs could mask the signs or symptoms of infection. another mechanism could be the immunological effects of nsaids, such as the impaired resolution of inflammation, thus resulting in prolonged disease (voiriot et al. 2019) .in summary, there is currently no scientific evidence establishing a clear link between arbs, ace inhibitors, or ibuprofen and the worsening of covid-19. in contrast, the experimental data support the idea that ace2 not only serves as an entry receptor for sars-cov-2 but also protects the lungs from acute injury. ras inhibitors may therefore even be beneficial in covid-19 infection.available information to date does not support interruptions or changes in ongoing chronic treatments with ibuprofen or ras blockers. recommendations are as follows:-based on the currently available evidence, effective treatment with ras blockers should not be discontinued or switched. the relatively hypothetical risk of worsening covid-19 does not justify discontinuing or switching arbs or ace inhibitors due to the specific risk of destabilizing blood pressure control, stroke, heart attack, or worsening heart failure (van der wardt et al. 2017; halliday et al. 2019) . insufficient control of concomitant diseases caused by drug discontinuation could make patients more susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection and complicate the course of disease. -currently, there is insufficient evidence to recommend patients who take ibuprofen for medically indicated reasons to change their anti-inflammatory medication in light of the covid-19 pandemic. nsaids should be used at the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible period. the choice of drug to treat fever or pain in covid-19 should be based on a benefit-risk assessment for known side effects (e.g., kidney damage, gastrointestinal ulceration) and the respective treatment guidelines that in most cases recommend paracetamol as the first treatment option for fever or pain associated with infections.author contribution statement oz, sh, and cqs screened the literature and contributed to the manuscript. all authors read and approved the manuscript.funding information open access funding provided by projekt deal.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) and ace2 share homology in their catalytic domain and provide different key functions in the renin-angiotensin system (ras). ace cleaves angiotensin i (ang i) to generate angiotensin ii (ang ii) [1, 2] , whereas ace2 reduces angiotensin ii levels [3, 4] and is a negative regulator of the system. the importance of the ras in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) has recently re-emerged owing to the identification of ace2 as a receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (sars-cov) [5] . in 2003, sars spread throughout the world causing more than 800 deaths due to ards [6] . our studies demonstrated that ace2 protects mice from acute lung injury [7] as well as sars-mediated lung injury [8] . in this article, we review the role of the ras, in particular ace2, in the pathogenesis of ards. the possible applications of modulating the ras for the treatment of ards are also discussed.ards is the most severe form of acute lung injury. multiple predisposing factors for ards have been reported and include sepsis, acid aspiration, trauma or infections with viral pathogens such as sars-cov. moreover, very recently h5n1 avian influenza virus has caused high lethality due to ards [9] . despite recent progress, the mortality associated with ards remains very high, and there is no pharmacological therapy that has been shown in large-scale trials to impact mortality in ards [10] .factors predicting the onset or severity of ards are poorly understood, but the low incidence of ards in the relatively large group of patients at risk has been shown. also, there are large differences in plasma ace concentrations between individuals but such concentrations tend to be similar within families [11] . these suggest the involvement of genetic components in the pathogenesis of ards. the human ace gene (dcp1) is located on chromosome 17q23 and contains a restriction fragment length polymorphism defined by the presence (insertion, i) or absence (deletion, d) of a 287-bp alu repeat sequence in intron 16. nearly 50% of the variance in plasma ace activity can be accounted for by this ace insertion/deletion (i/d) polymorphism, the d allele being associated with higher ace activity [12] . importantly, recent cohort studies of ards showed a significant association between an ace i/d polymorphism and the susceptibility and mortality of ards [13] . the d/d genotype frequency was increased in patients with ards compared with the control cohort. ninety-six patients fulfilling the criteria for ards were genotyped for the ace polymorphism together with individuals from three comparison groups: 88 patients with non-ards respiratory failure ventilated in the intensive care unit (icu), 174 icu patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting and 1906 individuals from a general population group. dd genotype frequency was increased in the patients with ards compared with the icu (p = 0.00008), coronary artery bypass grafting (p = 0.0009) and the general population group (p = 0.00004). in addition, the ace d/d allele significantly correlated with mortality in the ards group. another study showed that patients carrying the ace i/i genotype have a significantly increased survival rate [14] . in that study, the 28-day mortality rates were significantly different in the three ace genotypes (42%, 65% and 75% for i/i, i/d and d/d, respectively; p = 0.036) in the ards group. taken together, these data suggest a potential role for ras in the pathogenesis of ards and implicate genetic factors in susceptibility and progression of this syndrome.in addition to genetic correlation studies, substantial clinical studies suggest the possible activation of ras in patients with ards. for instance, in patients with ards, an elevation of ace levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid has been observed despite a reduction in circulating ace [15] . reduced circulating ace levels may reflect loss of enzyme release from a damaged pulmonary vascular endothelium and may not be representative of activity in the lung compartment. also, it has been reported that the pulmonary capillary endotheliumbound (pceb) ace activity correlates with the severity of lung injury in the patients with acute lung injury [16] . these data suggest the possible activation of ras in patients with ards. interestingly, recent retrospective epidemiological studies demonstrated that the prior outpatient use of an ace inhibitor was associated with decreased mortality in patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia, although further studies are needed to examine whether ace inhibitors are protective when used in an inpatient settings for patients lacking traditional indications for the use of these medications [17] .in 2000, a novel homologue of ace was cloned, termed ace2 [3, 4] . ace and ace2 share homology in their catalytic domain and provide different key functions in the ras. ace cleaves angiotensin i to generate angiotensin ii [1, 2] , whereas ace2 reduces angiotensin ii levels [3, 4] . the biological effects of ang ii are mediated through two specific receptors, ang ii receptor type 1 (at 1 r) and ang ii receptor type 2 (at 2 r) [1, 2] . the targeted disruption of murine ace2 resulted in increased ang ii levels, impaired cardiac contractility in aged mice, upregulation of hypoxia-induced genes in the heart [18] and worsened heart failure following aortic banding [19] . loss of ace on an ace2 background or pharmacological inhibition of the ras can at least partially reverse the cardiac phenotypes [18] . these genetic data demonstrate that ace2 counterbalances the function of ace and negatively regulates ang ii levels within the ras (fig. 1) .our group has investigated the role of ace2 in ards using ace2 knockout mice [7] . in acid aspiration-induced ards, endotoxin-induced ards, as well as peritoneal sepsisinduced ards, ace2 knockout mice exhibited very severe disease compared with control mice that express ace2. loss of ace2 expression in mutant mice also resulted in enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, neutrophil accumulation and worsened lung function. of note, these pathologic manifestations occurred without apparent changes in heart contractility or pulmonary vascular tone among the experimental groups. mechanistically, the negative regulation of ang ii levels by ace2 accounts, in part, for the protective function of ace2 in ards. for example, at 1 inhibitor treatment or additional ace gene deficiency on an ace2 knockout background rescues the severe phenotype of ace2 single mutant mice in acute lung injury. in addition, ace knockout mice and at 1 r knockout mice, but not at 2 r knockout mice, showed improved symptoms of acute lung injury. therefore, in acute lung injury, ace, ang ii and at 1 r promote acute lung injury, whereas ace2 and the at 2 r figure 1 . current view of the renin-angiotensin system. angiotensin i serves as a substrate for both ace and ace2. angiotensin ii is known to act as vasoconstrictor as well as mitogen for smooth muscle cells or fibroblasts, mainly through the angiotensin ii type 1 receptor. the function of angiotensin 1-9 is not well understood. both ace and ace2 are involved in the production of the vasodilator peptide angiotensin 1-7. protect from lung injury [7] . importantly, the treatment with catalytically active, but not enzymatically inactive, recombinant ace2 protein improved the symptoms of acute lung injury in wild type mice as well as in ace2 knockout mice, suggesting ace2 protein as a possible novel therapeutic target for ards (fig. 2) .within a few months following the publication of the sars-cov genome, ace2 was identified as a potential receptor in cell line studies in vitro [5] . ace2 binds sars-cov spike and supports 'syncytia formation', the fusion of spike-protein expressing cells into large multinucleated cells that can be also seen in 'real' sars infections. using a mouse sars infection model with ace2 knockout mice, our group then provided evidence that ace2 is indeed essential for sars infections in vivo [8] . when ace2 knockout mice are infected with the sars coronavirus, they were resistant to virus infection. virus titers from the lung tissues of infected ace2 knockout mice were 10 5 -fold lower than that isolated from the lungs of sars-cov-infected wild type mice. thus, without excluding a second functional sars-cov receptor, ace2 is an essential receptor for sars infections in vivo.despite many studies on sars-cov, one mystery of sars-cov is why, in contrast to the other coronaviruses, infections with the sars-cov trigger severe lung disease with such high mortality. accumulating evidence further indicates that severe sars infections are dependent on the burden of viral replication as well as on the immunopathologic consequences of the host response. our studies have implicated the involvement of the ras in sars pathogenesis. intriguingly, wild type mice infected with sars-cov showed markedly downregulated ace2 expression in lungs. similarly, treatment with recombinant sars-spike protein, in the absence of any other virus components, downregulates ace2 expression in vitro and in vivo. thus, sars-cov-infected or spike protein-treated wild type mice resemble ace2 knockout mice, and, similar to ace2 mutant mice, spike-treated wild type mice show markedly more severe pathology in acute lung injury. in addition, in spike-treated mice, ang ii peptide levels were increased and the worsened ards symptoms could be partially reversed by at 1 r blocker treatment. thus, the downregulation of ace2 expression in sars-cov infections might play a causal role in sars pathogenesis, especially in disease progression to ards.pulmonary circulation is a potentially important target for the ras activation in the lung. for instance, ang ii via its type 1 receptor (at 1 r) induces pulmonary vasoconstriction in response to hypoxia, suggesting important roles of at 1 r in elevating pulmonary vascular tone that can result in pulmonary edema [20] . also, infusion of ang i [21] or ang ii [22] can produce pulmonary edema independent of catecholamine release. these data suggest an important role for the ras in regulating pulmonary vascular tone, which might also contribute to the pathogenesis of ards.in addition to increased vascular tone and a subsequent hydostatic edema formation, accumulating data suggest that ang ii also increases vascular permeability via at 1 r, whereas stimulation of at 2 receptors exerts an opposite effect [23] . several mediators have been implicated in ang ii regulated vascular permeability changes, including eicosanoids (i.e. leukotriene c 4 , prostaglandin e 2 and i 2 ), and vascular permeability factor. however, relatively few studies have addressed whether the ras is involved in the increased vascular permeability observed in ards. our study demonstrated that loss of ace2 results in increased vascular permeability using evans vol. 3, no. 2 2006 drug discovery today: disease mechanisms | immuno-disorders and autoimmunity figure 2 . schematic diagram of the proposed role of the reninangiotensin system in development of ards. in ards induced by sars-cov infections, acid aspiration, pneumonias, sepsis or other pathogenic conditions, the generation of ang ii from ang i is mediated by ace. ang ii contributes to acute lung failure through stimulation of the angiotensin ii type 1 receptor (at 1 r), whereas ace2 and angiotensin ii type 2 receptor (at 2 r) negatively regulate this pathway and protect from acute lung failure. however, additional ace2regulated, but ang ii-independent pathways seem to also contribute to ards.www.drugdiscoverytoday.comblue dye injections as an in vivo indicator of albumin leakage in mice. this vascular permeability was significantly attenuated in the lungs of at 1 r mutant mice. these data indicate that loss of ace2 expression and increased ang ii levels can trigger leaky pulmonary blood vessels through at 1 r stimulation in ards [7] .both ace and ace2 are unspecific proteases and can cleave additional substrates that might also play important roles in ace/ace2-regulated ards independent of ang ii. one of the ace and ace2 targets is bradykinin and its peptide metabolites. bradykinin is the key effecter in the kallikrein-kinin system and also functions as a major proinflammatory mediator. bradykinin is degraded by two main kinases, which are ace (also known as kinase ii in this system) and neutral endopeptidase. the biological effects of bradykinin are mediated by b1 receptor (b 1 r) and b2 receptor (b 2 r). b 2 r mediate most the known effects of bradykinin, including antiproliferative, antioxidant and antithrombotic effects [24] . the in vivo effects mediated via b 1 r or b 2 r are still poorly characterized. a recent study suggests that expression of b 1 r is induced by cytokines during inflammation in rats [25] , albeit the role of bradykinin in ang ii-induced inflammation remains unclear. ace2 can remove in in vitro assays the c-terminal residue from apelin and other vasoactive peptides such as neurotensin and neurotensin-related peptide kinetensin. moreover, the opioid peptides dynorphin a (1-13) and b-casamorphin are also substrates of ace2. in contrast to ace, ace2 does not metabolize bradykinin, but catalytically inactivates both [des-arg 9 ]-bradykinin and lys[des-arg 9 ]-bradykinin [3, 26] . thus, although many ace2 functions have been attributed to the regulation of ang ii levels, ang ii itself is probably only part of the ace2 story and other ace2 substrates might play a major role in understanding ace2 functions. importantly, our own preliminary results suggest that inhibition of the bradykinin receptor can also alleviate ards (y.i. and j.m.p., unpublished).recently, the critical importance of ras in the pathogenesis of ards has been established in genetic animal models. ace2 protects murine lungs from acute lung injury induced by acid aspiration, endotoxin shock and peritoneal sepsis [7] . in addition, ace knockout mice and at 1 r knockout mice, but not at 2 r knockout mice, showed improved symptoms of acute lung injury [7] , consistent with other experimental studies [17, 27, 28] . also, ace2 has been identified as a key sars-cov receptor [5, 8] and importantly, ace2 plays a protective role in sars-cov-mediated lung injury [8] . therefore, in acute lung injury, ace, ang ii and at 1 r promote acute lung injury, whereas ace2 and the at 2 r protect from lung injury. these findings might provide the opportunity to develop recombinant ace2 as a novel drug in ards along with at 1 r inhibitor or ace inhibitor to possibly treat emerging infectious lung diseases such as avian influenza a (h5n1) and other diseases that affect lung function ( table 1 ). in addition, as ace2 is an unspecific protease, it would be also interesting to investigate the role of ace2 and its metabolites including angiotensin-(1-7), des-arg(9)-bradykinin, apelin or dynorphin in ards. we look forward to the use of angiotensin system-modulating agents/molecules, in particular ace2, as novel therapeutic agents to treat severe acute lung failure, a syndrome that affects millions of people without any yet effective drug treatments. reported studies and referencesin vivo mouse [7, 8] angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at 1 r) inhibitorhuman [28] in vivo mouse [7, 8] in vivo rat [27] angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitorin vivo mouse [7] in vivo rat [28] coronaviruses (cov) have long been recognized as causative agents of diseases that negatively impact production in livestock, poultry and companion animals (holmes, 2003) . bovine coronavirus (bcov) is classified in the order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, subfamily coronavirinae, genus betacoronavirus, and species betacoronavirus 1. it is prevalent worldwide and antibodies can be detected in the majority of cattle . host-shifting events involving in cross species transmission in bcov have been described in the past involving captive wild ruminants (alekseev et al., 2008) , dogs (kaneshima et al., 2006) and humans (holmes, 2003) . enteric infections associated with bcov have been recognized in alpaca crias (cebra et al., 2003) and has been detected in intestinal tissue from adult alpacas suffering hemorrhagic enteritis (genova et al., 2008) . this article reports the occurrence of a betacoronavirus similar to bcov in fecal samples from 1 to 3 week old alpaca crias in the high peruvian andes, based on partial nucleotide sequencing of rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene.between february and march 2009, 60 fecal samples with normally consistency from 1 to 3 week old asymptomatic crias, of six farms of the la raya experimental research station in melgar province, puno department, peru, which is located at 4200 m above sea level, were used in this study. three of these farms, alpacas and cattle shared the same pastures. the method of sampling from animals complied with the principles of ethical committee in the use of animals of the school of veterinary medicine and animal science of university of são paulo.total rna of fecal samples was extracted using trizol reagent tm (invitrogen ® ), and cdna synthetized using 50 ng of random primers (invitrogen ® ) and 200 u of moloney murine leukemia virus (m-mlv) reverse transcriptase (invitrogen ® ) following the manufacturer's recommended protocol. detection of cov was performed using a pancoronavirus nested pcr reaction with specific primers targeting the rdrp gene (chu et al., 2011 taq dna polymerase (invitrogen ® ) was used for pcr and nested according to the manufacturer's protocol.amplicons of cov were purified using exosap-it pcr product cleanup (affymetrix ® ), and sequenced with an abi prism 3500 genetic dna analyzer (applied biosystems ® ). the maximum likelihood tree using gtr as substitution model was constructed using mega v. 6.06 software (tamura et al., 2013) .eleven of the 60 fecal samples were positive for coronavirus. these positive samples came from crias on two different farms, located approximately 100 m from each other, both with mixed alpaca-cattle pastures. phylogenetic analysis of the generated sequences (393 nt) all segregated within the species betacoronavirus 1 (fig. 1) .the majority of the sequences obtained in this study (genbank kp893231, kp893232, kp893233, kp893234, kp893235, kp893236, kp893238, kp893240, all from farm 1, and kp893237, from the farm 2) were identical to ab354579 (kakegawa strain bcov) and af220295 (quebec strain bcov) in the area under analysis, while kp893239 and kp893241 (both from farm 1) had a similarity of 99.5% and 99.7%, respectively.when compared to the previously reported rdrp sequence of an alpaca betacoronavirus from the usa (dq915164) the nucleotide identities of the peruvian partial sequences were 98.4% (kp893239), 98.9% (kp893241) and 99.2% (kp893231, kp893232, kp893233, kp893234, kp893235, kp893236, kp893237, kp893238, and kp893240).the nested-pcr detected cov in 11/60 fecal samples, was further characterized as betacoronavirus 1 (fig 1) . betacoronavirus 1 includes strains of covs, which are very similar to bcov found in domestic and wild ruminants, as well as to strains found in canines, porcines and humans, that very probably originated from a common ancestor similar to bcov (perlman and netland, 2009) .the peruvian sequences were more closely related to the kakegawa, mebus and quebec strains of bcov (100% of identity), but less related to the usa isolate of alpaca cov (99.2%). this could be due to the geographical isolation of these farms maintaining a strain of virus in circulation in the population, unlike the north american alpaca cov strain (jin et al., 2007) .new world camelids co-located with cattle for over 500 years in south america and, although the identification of coronavirus infection and diarrhea in alpacas is recent, it is possible that the virus crossed between species during earlier interspecies contact (primo, 1992; cebra et al., 2003) . the genetic analysis of the s gene would help to the better understand the nature of the interspecies transmission event that could led to the origin of the alpaca coronaviruses (perlman and netland, 2009; bidokhti et al., 2013) .to our knowledge this is the first detection of a bcov-like coronavirus in fecal samples from peruvian alpaca crias, despite the clinical significance of the bcov-like coronavirus identified in this study remains to be determined due to this study design.the current coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic is associated with unprecedented morbidity and mortality 1 , and recent publications in the transplant literature report varying rates of mortality from 6-28% [2] [3] [4] [5] . early reports from china and italy have shown that co-existing conditions, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and coronary artery disease, are more common among patients who developed severe symptoms of covid-19 [6] [7] [8] [9] . conventional medical management of these comorbidities often includes the use of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors. interestingly, coronaviruses interact with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) to facilitate entry into target cells 10 , raising concerns in several published commentaries that preexisting use of raas inhibitors may increase the risk of developing severe manifestations of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection [11] [12] [13] [14] . citing preclinical studies that demonstrated the correlation between increased levels of circulating ace2 and raas inhibitors, some in the medical community suggested preemptive discontinuation of raas inhibitors during covid-19, as these medications might theoretically promote viral entry 12 .given the common use of raas inhibitors among solid organ transplant recipients with cardiovascular disease or polycythemia, we sought to review the raas cascade, the mechanism of sars-cov-2 entry, and pertinent data related to the effect of raas inhibitors on ace2 to guide management of solid organ transplant recipients during the covid-19 pandemic.the raas is a cascade of vasoactive peptides that orchestrate key physiological processes, including blood pressure regulation, fluid and electrolyte balance, and cardiac and renal function 15, 16 . in the classical view of the cascade, renin cleaves angiotensinogen and generates angiotensin (ang) i, which is cleaved by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace), generating ang ii ( figure 1a ). ang ii is the active form of angiotensin that binds to receptors in the adrenal cortex, releasing aldosterone. ang ii also induces arterial vasoconstriction and promotes fibrosis. a parallel pathway mediated by ace2, a homolog of ace, generates ang (1-9) from ang i and ang (1-7) from ang ii ( figure 1b ). ang (1-7)this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved has organ-protective properties which oppose the vasoconstrictive, inflammatory, sodium retaining, and remodeling properties of ang ii.while ace2 is predominantly a membrane-bound enzyme, its membrane anchor can be cleaved by a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (adam17), releasing ace2 into blood, urine, and other body fluids. membrane-bound ace2 (found on pneumocytes) along with transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) is required to facilitate sars-cov-2 entry into target cells 17 . on the other hand, soluble ace2 has been shown to significantly block early stages of sar-cov-2 infections in in vitro experiments and represents a potential therapeutic intervention 18 ( figure 2 ).although ace2 shares significant homology with ace (40% identity and 61% similarity), its substrate-binding pocket site is distinct from ace; therefore, classical ace inhibitors (acei) do not directly affect ace2 enzymatic activity 19 . in addition, acei use may be protective as it reduces ang ii which increases alveolar permeability and would potentiate acute lung injury. several animal studies have reported mixed findings on the effect of acei on ace2 mrna expression or enzymatic activity in cardiac 20-23 and renal tissues 24 . in comparison, angiotensin ii type i receptor blockers (arbs) more consistently upregulate ace2 mrna or protein level in cardiac tissue 20,25-27 and renal vasculatures 28 , though the effect varies across study models and requires high doses of arbs. the upregulation of ace2 by arbs may be protective against lung injury via ang-(1-7), a vasodilatory peptide 29 .in contrast, there are very few studies in humans to assess the effect of raas inhibitors on ace2 expression [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] . it is important to note that all these studies reported the level of ace2 activity in blood or urine, as quantifying membrane-bound ace2 in vivo in human cardiac and kidney tissue would be technically challenging and invasive. there is no evidence to support that soluble ace2 is a reliable surrogate for membrane-bound ace2. interestingly, membrane-bound ace2 protein expression was found to be decreased in human autopsy hearts that were positive for sars-cov during the toronto sars outbreak in 2009 36 . hypothetically, if the animal data can be extrapolatedthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved to humans, increased membrane-bound ace2 in human myocardium associated with pre-existing use of raas inhibitors may be potentially protective against covid19-associated myocarditis.kidney transplant recipients with cardiovascular disease and post-transplant erythrocytosis are commonly prescribed acei and arb 37, 38 . studies on raas blockade in kidney transplant patients have been mixed with regards to patient and graft survival [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] . interestingly, a rare condition that calls for the use of arb post-transplant is antibody-mediated rejection related to angiotensin ii type i receptor (at1r), a g protein-coupled receptor expressed at the endothelial cell surface 46 from italy found a 25% mortality rate 5 . contrary to these higher mortality rates a single center cohort study out of spain found a 6% mortality rate among 33 patients infected with covid-19 from thethis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved onset of the pandemic to mid-april of 2020 54 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved potential but unconfirmed risk factors for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in adults and children may include hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and chronic kidney disease, as well as the medications commonly prescribed for these conditions, ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors, and ang ii (angiotensin ii) receptor blockers. coronavirus binding to ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), a crucial component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, underlies much of this concern. children are uniquely impacted by the coronavirus, but the reasons are unclear. this review will highlight the relationship of covid-19 with hypertension, use of ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers, and lifetime risk of cardiovascular disease from the pediatric perspective. we briefly summarize the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and comprehensively review the literature pertaining to the ace 2/ang-(1-7) pathway in children and the clinical evidence for how ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers affect this important pathway. given the importance of the ace 2/ang-(1-7) pathway and the potential differences between adults and children, it is crucial that children are included in coronavirus-related research, as this may shed light on potential mechanisms for why children are at decreased risk of severe covid-19.ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), covid-19, and ace inhibitor and ang ii (angiotensin ii) receptor blocker use during the pandemic: the pediatric perspectivepotential but unconfirmed risk factors for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in adults and children may include hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and chronic kidney disease, as well as the medications commonly prescribed for these conditions, ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors, and ang ii (angiotensin ii) receptor blockers. coronavirus binding to ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), a crucial component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, underlies much of this concern. children are uniquely impacted by the coronavirus, but the reasons are unclear. this review will highlight the relationship of covid-19 with hypertension, use of ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers, and lifetime risk of cardiovascular disease from the pediatric perspective. we briefly summarize the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and comprehensively review the literature pertaining to the ace 2/ang-(1-7) pathway in children and the clinical evidence for how ace inhibitors and ang ii receptor blockers affect this important pathway. given the importance of the ace 2/ang-(1-7) pathway and the potential differences between adults and children, it is crucial that children are included in coronavirus-related research, as this may shed light on potential mechanisms for why children are at decreased risk of severe covid-19.ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), covid-19, and ace inhibitor and ang ii (angiotensin ii) receptor blocker use during the pandemic: the pediatric perspectivea new coronavirus sars-cov-2 (covid-19) has been identified as the cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), a severe form of viral pneumonia associated with high mortality. this virus spread from china to the rest of the world into a real short period and with an important severity, leading the world health organization (who) to consider a "global emergency". sars-cov-2 is a rna virus sharing about 80% of the viral genome with sars-cov (responsible for the 2003 outbreak) (wu, 2020) .several studies confirmed that the virus is able to penetrate into human cells by binding to ace-2 protein, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, which is part of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) (guoping et al, 2020) and considered as a possible membrane receptor. it has also been noted that patients infected by this virus, during the sick days, have functional variations in the concentrations of enzymes components of the ras zhou et al, 2020) . this is a defense mechanism of the human host that helps against the infection or is responsible for a worsening of clinical conditions and, as consequence, to be corrected pharmacologically? (gurwitz, 2020) the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is a physiological mechanism able to regulate different functions of the body, in particular the most important are the regulation of blood pressure, the volume of circulating plasma (volemia) and the tone of the arterial muscles through different mechanisms. ras is an enzymatic cascade; the main enzyme pathway (classical) is renin which converts the angiotensinogen, released by the liver, into angiotensin i (ang i). ang i is subsequently converted to angiotensin ii (ang ii) by the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace). there is also another (non-classical) enzyme pathway, mediated by ace-2 (atlas, 2007) , in this pathway ace-2 converts ang ii to angiotensin 1-7 (ang 1-7) and ang i to angiotensin 1-9 (ang 1-9).ace-2 is a type i membrane metallocarboxypeptidase with high ace homology, the functions are distinct and the two enzymes are also expressed differently in tissues. for example, ace-2 is most expressed in renal, cardiovascular, pulmonary and gastrointestinal tissues, ace activity is highly expressed in the lungs, brain and kidneys. (nehme et al, 2019 ) some aspects on the correlation between the various stages of sars-cov-2 infection and the ras variation remain to be clarified. sars-cov-2 infection has been divided into three phases: the first asymptomatic or slightly symptomatic, the second and the third more severe, characterized by hyperinflammatory state. in the second and third phase it seems that the worst damage is caused by a generalized inflammatory state, caused by a "cytokine storm" and responsible for severe lung injury and multi-organ dysfunction (watkins, 2020) .several studies have shown that variation in the ras can be very related to sars-cov-2 infection, and involved in all stages.ace-2 has been identified as an input membrane receptor for sars-cov-2 in epithelial lung cells; this evidence may suggest that increased expression of ace-2 is related to an increased risk of sars-cov-2 infection. in addition, as described above, variations in ras were noted during the various stages of sars-cov-2 infection; in particular, the evidence showed increased activation of the system in the early stages, and then decreased in subsequent stages, although the data showing these variations are conflicting and not entirely clear (zheng et al, 2020 and fang et al, 2020) . certainly, the activation of ras is known to change in conditions such as copd, asthma, during viral infections and in smokers, demonstrating that the system is related to correct lung and airway function. the evidence suggests that the physiological balance of the ras system and especially between ace/ace-2 is likely to be altered by sars-cov-2 viral infection. this ras imbalance is likely to play a role in lung lesion and inflammatory state activation, but these aspects have yet to be clarified. in this direction, the pharmacological approach to regulated the concentration of ace/ace-2 could be a way to moderate severe lung damage virus-induced (bavishi et al, 2016 and ferrario et al, 2005) . in addition, ace-2 has been shown to play a role in fibrogenesis and inflammation of different organs, including the lungs. studies in patients infected with sars-cov-2 showed that ace-2 expression has a rapid increase in the first hours of viral infection, then begins rapid down-regulation in the lung tissue when the patient enters stage two and three of the infection. however, it can be possible that ace-2 has a protective effect and when it decreases there is a worsening of the lungs inflammatory state. in addition, specific studies show that ace-2 expression is decreased in respiratory diseases, such as pulmonary fibrosis or copd. it should also be noted that ang ii, ang 1-7 and ang 1-9 have different biological effects. in fact, the biological effects of ang ii are vasoconstrictor and aldosterone release stimulant; but can cause also myocardial hypertrophy, interstitial fibrosis, endothelial dysfunction, increase of inflammation state, oxidative stress and increased of coagulation, biological effects that, if altered, can cause serious complications in a patient with sars-cov-2 infection . ang ii can cause increased inflammation through production of il-6, tnf (tumor necrosis factor) and other inflammatory cytokines (recinos et al, 2006 , yamamoto et al, 2011 and lee et al, 2002 .however, it is important to note that all these biological effects are mediated by at-1 receptors (at-1r). ace-2 can reduce the negative effects of ang ii through several mechanisms, for example by the conversion of ang ii to ang 1-7. ang1-7 has opposite biological effects to ang ii through the mas receptor (masr) and type ii receptors of ang ii (at-2r). the masr are expressed on the surface of bronchial muscle and alveolar epithelium of the lungs (magalhaes et al, 2015) , and the ang 1-7 has anti-inflammatory and antifibrosis effects by masr agonist effect meng et al, 2014) .in addition, masr are expressed on platelets, and ang 1-7 mediates the antiaggregant effects (fang et al, 2013 , pai et al, 2017 and fraga-silva et al, 2011 because it is able to increase prostacyclines (fraga-silva et al, 2008) . this description suggest that pharmacological modulation of ras at different stages of sars-cov-2 infection could be a beneficial and effective therapy.a pharmacological approach modulating ras could be of clinical benefit to fight sars-cov-2 infection.agents acting on ras can be distinguished as angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis), angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) and direct renin inhibitors (dris) (bavishi et al, 2020) .these agents are currently indicated for the treatment of various cardiovascular diseases with excellent clinical efficacy.aceis are able to reduce blood pressure by acting with ace inhibition which converts ang i to ang ii. arbs are ang ii antagonists on the type 1 receptor (at-1r), finally, dris block plasma renin activity and inhibit the conversion of angiotensinogen to ang i. the three different classes described above have different effects on the regulation and enzymatic expression of ras. in fact, on the basis of in vitro studies, it seems that the use of aceis, with a blockade of the enzyme ace, increases the expression of the enzyme ace-2 (stimulating other synthesis pathways), although these data are not fully confirmed and at the moment very contradictory (vaduganathan et al, 2020) . the use of arbs seems to be linked to a slight increase in the expression of both ace and ace-2. finally, the use of dris, by inhibiting the upstream ras cascade, seems to inhibit expression and consequently decrease ace and ace-2 concentrations. this shows that there are available agents able to act with a different modulation of ras expression and its components.these evidences suggest that ras could be modulated with a pharmacological approach to avoid complications of viral infection. there is a scientific debate (still ongoing) for several months as to whether increased ace-2 using aceis or arbs could be a risk factor for covid-19 infection, at the moment epidemiological data do not show any correlation between the use of aceis or arbs and increased likelihood of infection or complications of sars-cov-2. however, an increase in ace-2 in the more severe stages of viral infection could be beneficial. an increase in ace-2 synthesizes more ang 1-7 and ang-1-9 with vasodilating, antinfiammatory and antifibrotic properties (schindler et al, 2007 and imai et al, 2005) . in addition, the use of arbs, increases the stimulation of at-2r by ang ii, with vasodilating antifibrotic and antioxidant effects.in conclusion, there is currently no evidence which demonstrate that the use of aceis or arbs should be discontinued in treated patients, because they do not represent a risk factor that increases the likelihood of sars-cov-2 infection (mancia et al, 2020) , however it has been shown that the activation of the ang ii-at-1r axis can promote lung damage, while increasing ace-2 and activating the ang 1-7/masr axis may protect against lung damage (kuster et al, 2020 and european society of hypertension, 2020). ras modulating agents may be beneficial in combating sars-cov-2 infection, clinical studies are necessary to confirm these hypotheses.more extensive epidemiological studies should be designed to investigate the real correlation between ras and covid-19, in particular to clarify whether an increase of ace-2 with aceis or arbs can be considered an important risk factor of sars-cov-2 infection, and whether an increase of ace-2 in the most severe stages of infection can play a protective role, we believe based on current evidence in the literature that modulating the ras system at the right time and correctly could be of enormous clinical benefit to avoid serious complications from covid-19. o all authors read and approved the final manuscript.coronaviruses (covs) have a single-stranded rna genome (size range between 26.2 and 31.7 kb, positive sense), covered by an enveloped structure.[1] the shape is either pleomorphic or spherical, and it is characterized by bears club-shaped projections of glycoproteins on its surface (diameter 80–120 nm).[1] among all the rna viruses, the rna genome of cov is one among the largest.[2] the number of open reading frames (orfs) in the cov genome ranges from six to ten.[2] cov genetic material is susceptible for frequent recombination process, which can give rise to new strains with alteration in virulence.[3] there are seven strains of human covs, which include 229e, nl63, oc43, hku1, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov, and 2019-novel coronavirus (ncov), responsible for the infection with special reference to the involvement of the respiratory tract (both lower and upper respiratory tract), e.g., common cold, pneumonia, bronchiolitis, rhinitis, pharyngitis, sinusitis, and other system symptoms such as occasional watery and diarrhea.[45] among these seven strains, three strains proved to be highly pathogenic (sars-cov, mers-cov, and 2019-ncov), which caused endemic of severe cov disease.[5] the reservoir of sars-cov is unknown, but bats and subsequent spread to himalayan palm civets are hypothesized.[6] mers-cov also has a zoonotic origin in the middle east, and the transmission is through camels.[7] among these, the sars-cov outbreak started in 2003 in guangdong province of china and the second outbreak of the mers-cov outbreak in 2012 in saudi arabia.[146] previous to these two attacks, cov was known to cause milder disease, and these two outbreaks highlighted their adaptive potential to the changing environmental conditions and they are classified under “emerging viruses.” knowledge about the structure, metabolic pathways of cov, and pathophysiology of cov-associated diseases is important to identify possible drug targets.[8]the most important structural proteins of cov are spike (s) protein (trimeric), membrane (m) protein, envelop (e) protein, and the nucleocapsid (n) protein. some of the viruses such as beta-covs also have hemagglutinin esterase (he) glycoprotein.[3] the rna genome of cov has seven genes that are conserved in the order: orf1a, orf1b, s, oef3, e, m, n in 5' to 3' direction. the two-third part of the rna genome is covered by the orf1a/b, which produces the two viral replicase proteins that are polyproteins (pp1a and pp1ab).[9] sixteen mature nonstructural proteins (nsps) arise from further processing of these two pps. these nsps take part in different viral functions including the formation of the replicase transcriptase complex. the remaining genome part of the virus encodes the mrna which produces the structural proteins, i.e., spike, envelope, membrane, and nucleocapsid, and other accessory proteins.[9] another important envelop-associated protein which is expressed by only some strains of cov is the he protein.[10] the rna genome of cov is packed in the nucleocapsid protein and further covered with envelope.[11]in case of sars-cov, transmission is through droplet infection (respiratory secretions) and close person-to-person contact.[1112] it can also spread through sweat, stool, urine, and respiratory secretions.[13] when virus enters into the body, it binds to the primary target cells such as enterocytes and pneumocytes,[1112] thereby establishing a cycle of infection and replication. other target cells of cov are epithelial renal tubules, tubular epithelial cells of kidney, immune cells, and cerebral neuronal cells.[1112]cov attaches to the target cells with the help of spike protein–host cell protein interaction (angiotensin converting enzyme-2 [ace-2] interaction in sars-cov[14] and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 [dpp-4] in mers-cov[15]). after the receptor recognition, the virus genome with its nucleocapsid is released into the cytoplasm of the host cells. the viral genome contains orf1a and orf1b genes, which produce two pps that are pp1a and pp1b,[16] which help to take command over host ribosomes for their own translation process.[17] both pp1a and pp1b take part in the formation of the replication transcription complex.[16] after processing of pp by protease, it produces 16 nsps. all nsps have their own specific functions such as suppression of host gene expression by nsp1 and nsp2, formation of a multidomain complex by nsp3, nsp5 which is a m protease which has role in replication,[17] nsp4 and nsp6 which are transmembrane (tm) proteins,[18] nsp7 and nsp8 which act as a primase,[16] nsp9 – a rna-binding protein, the dimeric form of which is important for viral infection. induction of disturbance to the dimerization of nsp9[19] can be a way to overcome cov infection.[20] nsp10 acts as a cofactor for the activation of the replicative enzyme.[21] nsp12 shows rna-dependent rna polymerase activity, nsp13 shows helicase activity, nsp14 shows exoribonuclease activity, nsp15 shows endoribonuclease activity, and nsp16 has methyltransferase activity.[18] all nsps have an important role in replication and transcription.[18]synthesized proteins such as m, e, and s are entered into the endoplasmic reticulum (er)-golgi intermediate compartment (ergic) complex and make the structure of viral envelope.[22] on the other hand, the replicated genome binds to n protein and forms the ribonucleoprotein (rnp) complex. the outer cover is formed by the m, e, and s proteins.[22] finally, the virus particle comes out of the ergic by making a bud-like structure.[23] these mature virions form a vesicle, which fuses with the plasma membrane and releases the virus particles into the extracellular region.[2324] the detailed structure of cov and its life cycle is depicted in figures 1 and 2. on infection, the sars-cov and mers-cov cause a surge of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which cause damage to lung tissue,[13] deterioration of lung function, and then finally lung failure in some cases.[25]currently, there is no specific antiviral drug for the treatment of cov-associated pathologies. most treatment strategies focus on symptomatic management and supportive therapy only.[2627] some therapeutic agents that are under development or being used off-label are ribavirin, interferon (ifn)-α, and mycophenolic acid.[7] there are many newspaper articles citing effectiveness of anti-hiv drugs: ritonavir,[2829] lopinavir,[29] either alone or in combination with oseltamivir,[29] remdesivir, and chloroquine;[28] and among these, ritonavir, remdesivir, and chloroquine showed efficacy at cellular level[28] which further need experimental support and validation.as there is no well-defined therapy available, which specifically targets cov, in this article, we have reviewed the possible protein structures, which could be potential targets for the development of a therapeutic approach for the treatment of cov.we screened pubmed and rcsb database with the keywords hcov, ncov, corona virus, sers-cov, mers-cov, 2019-ncov, crystal structure, x-ray crystallography structure, nmr structure, target, and drug target till feb 3, 2020. the database files were extracted using endnote, and title and abstract screening was done using rayyan qcri. full texts of these screened articles were further screened for possible inclusion in the systematic review. articles that evaluated different druggable targets of cov and evaluated different therapeutic measures against some identifiable target were included for further review.the main components of the s1 domain are the n-terminal domain (ntd) and the c-terminal domain (ctd). the s1 domain acts as a major antigen on the surface of the virus[40] and has a receptor-binding domain (rbd).[25] the 18 residues of ace-2 interact with the rbd (contain 14 amino acids) of sars-cov spike protein,[45] and for this contact, k341 of ace-2 and r453 residue of rbd play the most important role. if point mutated on the d454 or r441 of rbd, it disturbs the binding activity with ace-2.[25] the s1 domain interacts with the ace-2 or dpp-4 receptors of the host. anti-ace-2 antibody blocked viral entry and replication in vero e6 cells.[1445] one another mechanism of virus for binding to host cell is using dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3 grabbing non-integrin (dc-sign receptor) or l-sign in lymph nodes or in liver.[4647] s protein has seven (109, 118, 119, 158, 227, 589, and 699) glycosylation asparagine-linked sites, which is pivotal for both l-sign- or dc-sign-based virus entry into the host.[48]the s2 subunit has two heptad repeat regions (hr 1 and 2) and hydrophobic fusion peptide.[25]the rbd is targeted in many drug designing studies.[25] a peptide sequence with sequence similarity to the rbd of s protein hampered s1-rbd: ace-2 interaction and prevented entry of sars-cov into vero cells (ic50 around 40 μm).[254950]a sars-cov rbd-specific antibody (fm6) failed to inhibit the occurrence of infection.[39]oc43-hr2p, a peptide derived from heptad repeat 2 regions of s2 domain of hcov-oc43 and its optimized form ek1, showed pan-cov fusion inhibition property.[39] the structure (protein data bank [pdb] id 5zuv and 5zvm) shows a stable 6-helix bundle structure with α-hcov and long β-hcov-hr1 domain.[39]chloroquine, an antimalarial agent, inhibits sers-cov by elevation of endosomal ph and alters the terminal glycosylation of ace-2, which ultimately interferes with the virus receptor binding.[51]other inhibitors ssaa09e2 block the s-ace2 interaction, ssaa09e1 inhibits the host protease cathepsin l (which is important for viral entry), and ssaa09e3 prevents fusion of host and viral cell membrane.[52]kao et al. identified 18 small molecules that targeted the s-ace-2-mediated entry of virus into human cell.[53] in 293t cells expressing ace-2, one of these agents (ve607) showed a significant inhibition of sars-pseudovirus entry.[53] in vero e6 cells, two other molecules tetra-o-galloyl beta-d-glucose and luteolin also inhibited sars-pseudovirus and sars-cov infection.[53] in virus-infected vero e6 cells, a sirna against the s sequences of sars-cov inhibited sars-cov replication.[2554]the s230 antibody (origin: memory b-cells of sars-cov-infected persons) neutralizes wide spectrum of isolates of sars-cov.[55] s230 antibody fab fragment binds to the sars-cov complex to neutralize it, and their structures are also available (pdb ids: 6nb6, 6nb7, and 6nb8.[55] the monoclonal antibody, m396, has a competitive role for rbd binding (pdb id: 2dd8).[56]monoclonal antibody can be generated by immunizing the spike protein of sers-cov (transgenic mice) or from the b-cells of cov-infected persons.[25] spike-specific monoclonal antibodies 80r and cr301 block the s-ace-2 interactions and thus neutralize infection by human sars-cov (hku39849 and tor2) and palm civet strain (sz3).[25]mice vaccinated with sars-n dna showed t-cell immune response (both induction and proliferation),[57] and cytotoxic t-cell response was seen against sars-dna-transfected alveolar epithelial cells.the e protein is the smallest (8.4–12 kda size) tm structural protein of cov.[5859] two distinct domains comprise the e protein: the hydrophobic domain and the charged cytoplasmic tail. however, the structure is highly variable among different members of the cov family.[59]the e protein has a special role in viral morphogenesis, especially during assembly and egress.[59] covs lacking e protein show lower viral titer, immature, and inefficient progenies.[5860] oligomerization of e proteins leads to the formation of ion channels.[61] however, the importance of these ion channels is still not clear. many other studies infer that the e protein acts in coordination with other intracellular proteins and modulates the activity of those proteins.[59] e protein also acts as a virulence factor.[59] e protein has an important role in cov assembly and budding formation.[24] apart from this, e protein found around the er and golgi body regions.[60] hexamethylene amiloride blocks this e protein-associated ion channel activity in the mammalian cells expressing sers-cov envelop protein.[62]maintenance of the shape of the viral envelope is the most important function of the m protein,[60] and the m protein performs this job by interacting with other cov proteins,[63] incorporation of golgi complex into new virions,[60] and stabilization of nucleocapsid protein.[60]the m protein is characterized by three tm domains[64] with c-terminal inside (long) and n-terminal (short) outside.[63] the details of the protein structure is available in uniprot.[65] through multiple protein–protein interactions, the m protein plays a crucial role in viral intracellular homeostasis.[60] interaction between m–m, m–s, and m–n proteins takes a special part in viral assembly.[60] the m–s interactions are necessary for the interaction of spike protein in the ergic complex, also known as the golgi complex, which is later incorporated into new viral progenies.[60] the m–n interactions are crucial for the stabilization of the rnp complex (nucleocapsid–rna complex), which forms the viral core.[60] the m protein and the n protein are the major viral envelope proteins, defining viral shape, but it also takes part in the formation and release of virus-like particles.[60]m protein also takes part in the sensitization of the host by the virus.[66] the m protein of sars-cov activates the nuclear factor kappa pathway and ifn-beta pathway, through a toll-like receptor-dependent mechanism. again, a mutated m protein (v-68) failed to illicit an ifn-beta response.[66]mice vaccinated with sars-m dna showed t-cell immune response (both induction and proliferation),[57] and cytotoxic t-cell response was seen against sars-dna-transfected alveolar epithelial cells.the structure of nucleocapsid protein (n protein) is conserved across different members of the cov family. the three characteristic intrinsically disordered regions (idrs) of the nucleocapsid (n) protein are the n-arm, central linker (cl), and the c-tail.[4] the ntd and the ctd are the major structural and functional domain of the nucleocapsid protein. the most important function of the n protein ntd is rna binding, while the primary job of the ctd is dimerization.[49] as the cl region is rich in arginine and serine residue content, it also contains a large number of phosphorylation sites.[26] the c-terminal idrs take an important part in nucleocapsid protein oligomerization and n–m protein interactions.[67]formation and maintenance of the rnp complex are the most important functions of the n protein.[9] it also regulates the replication and transcription of viral rna, and in the host, it inhibits protein translation through ef1α-mediated action,[9] alteration of host cell metabolism, host cell cycle (n proteins are reported to inhibit cdk4), and apoptosis.[39] in human peripheral blood, n protein inhibits cell proliferation through the inhibition of cytokinesis.[68]the ntd contains sites for rna binding. the rna-binding sites on the ntd of n protein were identified by observing its interactions with ribonucleoside 5'-monophosphates (amp, ump, cmp, and gmp).[26] using the information about interaction between amp and ump binding to the ntd of nucleocapsid protein, inhibitors of rna binding were designed. three-dimensional structure with all complex can see from pdb that is 4lmc, 4lm9, 4lm7, and 4li4, respectively.[26] one such molecule which was designed with this strategy is n-(6-oxo-5,6-dihydrophenanthridine-2-yl) (n, n dimethyl amino) (pj34), which was designed using the hcov-oc43 model.[26] binding of pj34 on ntd affects the genome binding and replication process of cov.[26] the crystal structure of cov-oc43 n-ntd with inhibitor pj34 complex is given in pdb id: 4kxj.[26] on the basis of interactions between pj34 and ntd of nucleocapsid protein, another inhibitor was designed that is h3 (6-chloro-7-(2-morpholin-4-yl-ethylamino) quinoxaline-5,8-dione), which also inhibits rna binding.[2669] this highlights the importance of ntd in rna binding. some of the herbal products, such as catechin gallate and gallocatechin gallate (both are polyphenolic compounds), have shown the inhibitory action against sars-cov.[70]the ctd of n protein has a primary role in oligomerization, especially the c-terminal end. a c-terminal tail peptide sequence n377–389 competes with the oligomerization process and significant inhibition of viral titer was seen at 300 μm concentration.[71]n220, which is a nucleocapsid protein peptide, showed a high binding affinity to human mhc-1 in t2 cells, and the peptide sequence was successful in activating t-cells (cytotoxic). in transgenic animals, the peptide further showed potential to selective killing of nucleocapsid protein expressing cells and is a potential candidate for dna vaccine.[72] other n protein-targeted peptides of importance are np111, np331, and np351.[7273]the 3clpro is present in homodimer form and has cys-his dyad on active site which shows protease activity.[27] if mutated on the ser139 and phe140 positions, it abolishes the dimerization of 3clpro (pdb id: 3f9g).[76] this protease can cleave 11 sites in the p1 position of pp1a and pp1ab and can produce a mature protein that anchors the replication/transcription complex[377] and also releases the mature nsps.[78]n-(benzo[1,2,3]triazol-1-yl)-n-(benzyl) acetamido) phenyl) carboxamides are also found to be important inhibitors of clpro. the structure of clpro inhibitor is with ml188 (ic50 1.5 μm) is reported (cid: 46897844, pdb id: 3v3m).[7980] another structure with clpro inhibitor ml300 (pdb id: 4mds, ic50: 6.2 μm) is reported.[79] some metal-conjugated and peptidomimetic compounds showed inhibitory activity against 3clpro.[77] some of the small molecules also act as an inhibitor that is arylboronic acids, quinolinecarboxylate derivatives, thiophenecarboxylate, and phthalhydrazide-substituted ketoglutamine analogs.[77] some flavonoids are also reported to inhibit mpro.[75] gc376 also has protease inhibitor activity.[81] a crystal structure of mpro with small molecule inhibitor n3 is also reported (pdb id: 2amq).[82] lopinavir and ritonavir, which are the inhibitors of hiv protease, also inhibit mpro.[83] in silico studies directed that among commercially available drugs, colistin, valrubicin, icatibant, bepotastine, epirubicin, epoprostenol, vapreotide, aprepitant, caspofungin, and perphenazine also bind to the lopinavir/ritonavir-binding site on cov.[83]the plpro cleaves the n-terminal region of the pp to generate three nsps (nsp 1, 2, and 3).[374] plpro has a catalytic core domain that contains 316 amino acid, which is responsible for cleaving replicase substrates, and a consensus sequence lxgg was required for cleavage.[78] higher doses of zinc and zinc conjugates were found to inhibit both types of sars protease (clpro and plpro).[84] benzodioxole can inhibit the plpro enzyme. the crystal structure of interaction is shown in pdb id: 4ovz, 4owz.[31] through in silico approach, another new lead was identified (6577871) which was further optimized, and compound 15h (s configuration, enzyme ic50 =0.56 μm, antiviral ec50 =9.1 μm) and 15g (r configuration, enzyme ic50 =0.32 μm; antiviral ec50 =9.1 μm) were found to be the most important inhibitors.[32] the crystallized structural details of these interactions can be visualized in the pdb database (pdb id: 2fe8 and 3e9s).[32]many of the protease inhibitors are being used in the treatment of covid-19, e.g., lopinavir–ritonavir combinations.[85]this he enzyme is present in the envelope of cov, more specifically among beta-coronaviridiae.[86] the he is a marker of cov and influenza virus evolution.[86] he mediates reversible attachment to o-acetylated-sialic-acids by acting both as lectins and as receptor-destroying enzymes.[86] interactions between he in complex with sialic acid can be visualized in pdb id: 3cl5.[86]ntpase/helicase plays an important role in the central dogma of the virus.[87] sars-cov helicase enzyme is a member of the sf1. this enzyme prefers atp, datp, and dctp as substrates; it also hydrolyzed all ntps.[88] toxicity issues are main obstacles in the development of inhibitors of helicase, and nonspecificity of inhibitors may cause serious toxicity.[87] however, despite theoretical limitations, helicase is being increasingly recognized as a druggable target for different disease conditions.[89]once entered into the host cell, the subsequent life cycle of sers-cov requires low ph.[90] inhibitors of ph-sensitive endosomal protease block cov infection.[9091] several different small compounds and molecules have been reported against virus infection. amiodarone gets accumulated in the acidic organelles. vacuoles on exposure to amiodarone shows alteration in intracellular organelles especially enlargement of late endosomes. in in-vitro environment, amiodarone inhibited coronavirus infection in vero cells.[92] at priori trypsin, cleavage of s protein is essential for a successful viral entry. however, trypsin cleavage also does not affect the efficacy of amiodarone.[92]in the rcsb database, only one pdb (pdb id: 6lu7) is there on the 2019-ncov which is in complex with n3 (inhibitor). the complete sequence of the 2019-ncov is available.[93] however, it is only 95% similar to bat-sl-covzc45 and 88% to sirs cov-zsc (nucleotide blast, ncbi). this highlights the amount of recombination processes or changes that occurred in the 2019-ncov and changes in protein structural and functional levels.a total of 233 trials are registered till date in the chinese clinical trial registry[94] (dated feb 24, 2020, keywords 2019-ncov and covid-19). among the pharmacotherapeutic agents evaluated, some of the highlighted agents, which are being evaluated, are high-dose vitamin c, favipiravir, adalimumab, dihydro-artemisinin piperaquine, leflunomide, dipyridamole, chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, suramin sodium, lopinavir/ritonavir and arbidol (umifenovir) tablets, and ifn-alpha 2b. other important agents being evaluated are huo-shen particles, xiyanping injection, shen-fu injection, etc., many of which are from traditional chinese medicines background. use of stem cells is also evaluated frequently.[94]nil.there are no conflicts of interest.physiologic homeostasis of blood pressure and electrolyte balance. abnormal activation of the ras has been associated with the pathophysiology of cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, myocardial infarction, or heart failure [1] [2] [3] . for many years, the angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace) has been known as the key enzyme in the regulation of the ras [4, 5] .in the year 2000, a novel homologue of ace was cloned, termed angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [6, 7] . despite the sequence similarity in their metalloprotease catalytic domains, ace and ace2 differ in their substrate specificity. this difference has important physiological consequences. whereas ace cleaves the decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i) into an octapeptide angiotensin ii (ang ii) [4, 5] , ace2 functions as a carboxypeptidase, cleaving a single residue from ang i, generating angiotensin-(1-9) [6, 7] , and a single residue from ang ii to generate angiotensin-(1-7) [7] [8] [9] (fig. 1) . targeted disruption of murine ace2 resulted in increased systemic ang ii levels, impaired cardiac contractility in aged mice, and upregulation of hypoxia-induced genes in the heart [10] . these genetic data for the first time demonstrated that ace2 functions as a negative regulator of ang ii levels within the ras in the heart.recently, ace2 has been identified as a functional receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-coronavirus (sars-cov) in vitro [11, 12] and in vivo [13] . during several months in 2003, a newly identified illness, termed sars, spread rapidly throughout the world, causing more than 800 deaths and disrupting travel, economics, and social life [14] [15] [16] . a novel coronavirus, termed sars-cov, was identified as the causative sars pathogen [17, 18] . the death rate following infection was ∼10% due to the development of atypical pneumonia characterized by high fever and the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [19] [20] [21] . ards is the most severe form of acute lung injury, characterized by pulmonary edema, accumulation of inflammatory cells, and severe hypoxia [19] [20] [21] . ards has a very high mortality rate of 30-50% and affects nearly one million individuals worldwide/year. ards can be triggered by various diseases such as sepsis, trauma, aspiration, acute pancreatitis, or pneumonias including infections with sars-cov or avian and human influenza viruses [19, 20, 22, 23] .the sars-cov receptor ace2 is expressed in the lungs of healthy and diseased humans [24] , and our recent studies definitely showed that ace2 is indeed an essential receptor for sars infections in mice in vivo [13] . in the pathogenesis of ards, ang ii is upregulated by ace and drives severe lung failure via the ang ii type 1 (at1) receptor [25] . on the other hand, ace2 and the ang ii type 2 receptor regulate opposing effects and have protective roles against lung injury. in addition, sars-cov-mediated down-regulation of ace2 appears to play a causative role in severe acute lung injury in sars through enhanced activation of at1 receptors [13] .the beneficial effects of ace inhibitors or at1 receptor blockers on hypertension in the clinics have been functionally proven by in vivo models using mice deficient in ace, angiotensinogen, or the ang ii type 1a receptor, all of which mice show lower blood pressure [9, 26, 27] (fig. 1) . the in vitro activity of ace2 to cleave ang ii to angiotensin-(1-7) encouraged researchers to propose that ace2 is also a major regulator of blood pressure homeostasis. after our initial study showing reduced ace2 expression in different hypertensive rat strains [10] , the upregulation of ace2 expression is reported in the under-nutrition programmed hypertension rats [28] and at1 receptor blocker-treated [29] or all-trans retinoic acid-treated [30] hypertensive rats, accompanied by a reduction in blood pressure. on the other hand, it was surprising to find that ace2 knockout mice per se show apparently normal blood pressures [10] . however, it is likely that mouse-strain-specific background genes might influence the effects of ace2 on blood pressure. despite both ace and ace2 are involved in the production of the vasodilator peptide angiotensin 1-7 (drvyihpf). red arrowheads ace cleavage site; blue arrowheads ace2 cleavage sites. it should be noted that ace2 is an unspecific protease and can cleave multiple additional substrates, such as apelin no direct correlation between essential hypertension and ace2 polymorphisms in an earlier clinical study [31] , two recent chinese population studies indicated that the ace2 g8790a polymorphism is associated with cardiac incompetence in essential hypertension patients or with hypertension in metabolic syndrome patients [32, 33] . these findings implicated the significance of the ace2 g8790a polymorphism in cardiovascular diseases. of note, all of these studies investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) located in the introns of the ace2 gene; the effects of these snps on the activity and/or expression of ace2 are still unknown. nevertheless, the data of hypertensive rats and human ace2 snps implicate the possible significance of ace2 in blood pressure regulation, and further studies are awaited.initially, ace2 was identified and cloned from human failing heart tissue [7] . in line with this, increased ace2 expression in the failing heart has been reported independently [34] [35] [36] [37] , and the protective role of ace2 in pressure-overload-induced heart failure was recently shown in a transverse aortic constriction model using ace2 knockout mice [38] . furthermore, the function of ace2 in basal condition was defined by the echocardiography measurements showing a progressive impairment of heart contractility in aged ace2-gene-deficient mice without histological changes in the heart [10] . the observed phenotype of ace2 mutant mice resembles the defective heart found in patients with cardiac stunning/hibernation [39] . cardiac stunning and hibernation reflect adaptive responses to prolonged states of tissue hypoxia that can occur in coronary artery disease or following bypass surgery [39, 40] . pathologically, chronic hypoxic conditions can lead to compensatory changes in myocyte metabolism [41] , upregulation of hypoxia-induced genes [42, 43] , and possibly resembling myocyte-specific vascular endothelial growth factor mutant mice [44] . the link between cardiac stunning/hibernation and the heart defect observed in ace2 knockout mice has to be further investigated.interestingly, additional deletion of ace gene on an ace2 mutant background rescued the cardiac contractility phenotype of ace2 single knockout mice and also reversed the increased ang ii peptide levels [10] . the normal cardiac functions of ace/ace2 double-mutant mice suggest that ace's catalytic products account, at least in part, for the observed contractile impairment of old ace2 single-mutant mice [10] . these observations for the first time demonstrated, at the genetic level, that ace2 counterbalances the enzymatic actions of ace. it seems that increased local cardiac ang ii might have been the cause for the cardiac abnormalities in ace2-deficient mice. nevertheless, it remains unclear why the elevated heart ang ii levels do not induce cardiac hypertrophy in the ace2-deficient mice. for instance, in experimental models, it is well established that cardiomyocytes express ang ii receptors and undergo hypertrophy and fibrosis in response to ang ii stimulation [45] . thus, it is important to note that ang ii-independent pathways could also play an important role in ace/ace2regulated heart functions.the major sites of ace expression in our body are vascular endothelial cells in the lungs, and thus, it has been proposed that systemic ang ii is mainly generated in the lung [4, 5, 46] . experimentally, a possible role of ang ii in lung disease has been implied from animal models of pulmonary fibrosis elicited by bleomycin or irradiation-mediated lung injury. in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats or mice, ace inhibitors or at1 receptor blockers can attenuate epithelial apoptosis, interstitial fibrosis, and collagen deposition [47] [48] [49] [50] . those reports implicated ace inhibitors or at1 receptor blockers as possible therapy for pulmonary fibrosis seen in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis [51] , sarcoidosis [52] , irradiation-induced pneumonitis [47] , or fibrosis that develops as a side effect of chemotherapy in cancer patients [53] . however, there are not enough published clinical studies to make any firm conclusion whether these inhibitors indeed show beneficial effects. a recent cohort study of ards showed the significant association between ace insertion/deletion (d) polymorphism and the susceptibility and outcome of ards [54] . the d allele of the human ace gene confers increased ace activity in plasma, and the dd genotype frequency was increased in the patients with ards compared with the control groups [54] . moreover, the dd allele was significantly associated with mortality in the ards group. thus, based on inhibitor experiments in rodents and ace allelic correlation studies in humans, it has been suggested that the ras could have a role in acute lung failure and pulmonary fibrosis.our group investigated the role of ace2 in ards by using ace2 knockout mice. in three different ards models, acid-aspiration-induced ards, endotoxin-induced ards, and peritoneal sepsis-induced ards, ace2 knockout mice show very severe disease compared with wild-type mice [25] . loss of ace2 expression in mutant mice resulted in enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, neutrophil accumulation, and worsened lung function. importantly, treatment with catalytically active recombinant ace2 protein improved the symptoms of acute lung injury in wild-type mice, as well as in ace2 knockout mice [25] . thus, ace2 plays a protective role in acute lung injury. mechanistically, the negative regulation of ang ii levels by ace2 accounts, in part, for the protective function of ace2 in ards. for example, at1 inhibitor treatment or additional ace gene deficiency on an ace2 knockout background rescues the severe phenotype of ace2 singlemutant mice in acute lung injury [25] . in addition, ace knockout mice and at1a receptor knockout mice showed improved symptoms of acute lung injury [25] . therefore, in acute lung injury, ace, ang ii, and at1 receptor function as lung-injury-promoting factors, while ace2 protects from lung injury [25] . however, similar to the heart, we also have evidence that ace2-regulated, but ang iiindependent, pathways [8, 55] might play a critical role in controlling ards following acute lung injury (fig. 2) .within months of publication of the sars-cov genome [56, 57] , ace2 was identified as a potential receptor using in vitro cell line studies [11] . ace2 has been demonstrated to bind sars-cov spike and to support "syncytia formation," the fusion of spike-protein-expressing cells into large multinucleated cells that can also be seen in "real" sars infections [11] . after the identification of ace2 as a sars receptor in vitro, liver-specific icam3-grabbing nonintegrin (l-sign) (also known as cd209l) was reported as a second receptor for sars-cov infection [58] (fig. 2) . certainly, both receptors seem functional for in vitro viral entry, but it was unclear whether those receptors are required for in vivo sars infections.using a sars infection model in ace2 knockout mice, our group was able to show that ace2 is indeed essential for sars infections in vivo [13] . when ace2 knockout mice are infected with sars-cov, they were resistant to virus infection [13] . no lung histology from ace2 knockout mice challenged with sars-cov showed signs of inflammation [13] , whereas some (but not all) sars-infected wild-type mice displayed mild inflammation with leukocyte infiltration [13, 59, 60] . thus, ace2 is an essential receptor for sars infections in vivo. moreover, the importance of l-sign in sars infection has been recently highlighted by the genetic analyses of a polymorphism that determines different numbers (3-9) of tandem repeat domains in exon 4 of the human l-sign protein [61] . individuals homozygous for these tandem repeats (i.e., the same number of tandem repeats in both alleles) are less susceptible to sars infections than ones heterozygous for the repeats (i.e., the different number of tandem repeats in each allele) [62] . it would be interesting to further investigate the functional importance of l-sign in vivo sars infections using in acute lung injury, such as acid aspiration, pneumonia, or sepsis, the generation of ang ii from ang i is enhanced by ace, and ang ii induces acute lung failure through stimulation of the at1 receptor, while ace2 and ang ii type 2 receptor negatively regulate this pathway and protect from acute lung failure. on the other hand, sars-cov infection is mediated through binding of the sars-spike protein to ace2 or l-sign and downregulates the protective molecule ace2, and thus leads to severe lung injury and acute lung failure model systems such as l-sign transgenic mice, and to genetically compare the role of l-sign to that of ace2 in ace2-gene-deficient mice. one mystery of sars-cov is why, in contrast to the other coronaviruses infecting humans, infections with the sars-cov trigger severe lung disease with such high mortality. accumulating evidence further indicates that severe sars infections are dependent on the burden of viral replication, as well as on the immunopathologic consequences of the host response in sars pathogenesis (see reviews [63, 64] ). moreover, our own studies have implicated the involvement of the ras in sars pathogenesis: first, ace2 is a critical sars receptor in vivo and, second, ace2 and other components of the ras play a central role in controlling the severity of acute lung failure once the disease process has started [13] . intriguingly, before the identification of ace2 as a sars receptor, it has been reported that some sars patients develop impaired heart contractility using echocardiograhic measurements [65] . certainly, the observed decrease in left ventricular performance during the acute infection phase may be related to a systemic inflammatory condition [66] , which is not unique to sars. nevertheless, it is interesting to contemplate a possible link of the impaired heart function of sars patients and the reduced heart contractility in ace2 mutant mice. in line with this idea, wild-type mice infected with sars-cov showed markedly downregulated ace2 expression in lungs [13] , as well as in hearts (unpublished). moreover, treatment with recombinant sars-spike protein, without any other virus components, down-regulates ace2 expression in vitro and in vivo [13] . thus, spike-treated wild-type mice resemble ace2 knockout mice, and, similar to ace2 mutant mice, spiketreated wild-type mice show enhanced ras signaling, leading to markedly more severe pathology in acute lung injury. therefore, the down-regulation of ace2 expression by spike in sars-cov infections might be a possible explanation for sars pathogenesis, especially in disease progression to ards. although the enhanced ras signaling is unique in sars-cov infection, the downregulation of virus receptor by interaction with virus ligand is also seen in other viruses. for instance, cd4, a receptor for hiv, internalizes with hiv gp120, resulting in the disruption of immune cell functions [67] , and cd46, a measles receptor, is down-regulated by measles hemagglutinin, leading to the impairment of complement pathways and immune systems [68] . on the other hand, any consequences of the down-regulation of sialo-glycoconjugate receptor by influenza a virus [69] are yet unknown. the finding of enhanced ras signaling and severe acute lung injury as consequences of ace2 down-regulation by sars-cov might possibly implicate that other emerging infectious lung diseases, like h5n1 avian flu, may also utilize the receptor down-regulation system to impair host immune/inflammatory systems and induce severe lung diseases. thus, it is interesting to investigate the consequences of down-regulation of other virus receptors upon virus infection.ace2 has now been identified as a key factor for protection from ards/acute lung injury, and ace2 functions as a critical sars receptor in vivo. since sars spike-protein-mediated ace2 down-regulation appears to contribute to the severity of lung failure, these findings may explain how the sars-cov has turned into a lethal virus. in addition, in an acid aspiration ards mouse model, strong down-regulation of ace2 protein in the injured lung was observed, while ace expression remained unchanged. thus, recombinant ace2 protein could not only be a treatment to block the spreading of sars but also to protect sars patients from developing lung failure. furthermore, those findings could apply to investigating the therapeutic efficacy of ace2 in ards that develops in other emerging lung infectious diseases, like avian influenza a (h5n1) [70] or other diseases that affect lung function [71] . in addition to recombinant ace2 protein therapy, ace2 gene therapy would be another candidate. recently, lentivirus-mediated gene delivery of ace2 into rat hearts was shown to successfully attenuate ang ii-induced cardiac hypertrophy [72] . however, especially for the acute phase of ards, tissue-specific delivery of exogenous recombinant ace2 protein might be the first line of choice while avoiding systemic adverse effects. we look forward to the further elucidation of the pathophysiological role of ace2 and to the use of ace2 as a therapeutic target.angiotensin-i converting enzyme (ec number 3.4.15.1) or ace as it is more commonly known, is an extensively glycosylated integral membrane protein wei et al. 1991; ripka et al. 1993) which functions as a zinc dependent dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase to remove the c-terminal dipeptide from its peptide substrates in a zinc dependent manner (cushman and cheung 1971; das and soffer 1975) .ace is a key component of the renin angiotensin aldosterone system (raas), an essential hormone system responsible for the homeostasis of blood pressure in mammals. ace processes the precursor peptide angiotensin i to give angiotensin ii which is a potent vasoconstrictor. it also destroys the vasodilating properties of a second peptide, bradykinin (skeggs et al. 1954; zaman et al. 2002; acharya et al. 2003; gonzalez-villalobos et al. 2013) . ace therefore functions to increase blood pressure, and, as such, has long been targeted in the treatment of hypertension and other cardiovascular ailments through the use of ace inhibitors (turner and hooper 2002) .there are two isoforms of mammalian ace; somatic (sace) and testicular (tace) ace (soubrier et al. 1988 ). both are integral membrane proteins transcribed from the same twentysix exon gene. sace consists of two homologous domains (the n-domain and the c-domain) arranged in tandem, each with its own functional active site. tace expression is driven from an intragenic promoter, giving rise to a single domain protein identical to the c-domain of sace, as illustrated in fig. 1 (ehlers et al. 1989; hubert et al. 1991; wei and clauser 1992; corvol et al. 1995) . whilst sace is widely expressed, tace is expressed solely by developing spermatids and is thought to have a role in reproduction (caldwell et al. 1976; langford et al. 1993; sibony et al. 1993 sibony et al. , 1994 fuchs et al. 2005) . male mice lacking tace are infertile (krege et al. 1995; hagaman et al. 1998 ). however the mechanisms behind this are not yet clear. a 2011 study by bernstein and co-workers demonstrated that tace knockout mice produce normal amounts of motile sperm but which is unable to fertilise eggs. re-introducing tace rescues this phenotype, but, interestingly, is unable to rescue effects such as decreased blood pressure resulting from the knockout of the sace c-domain. this suggests that tace could be targeted in producing a male contraceptive without affecting the function of sace (bernstein et al. 2011) .in addition to the proposed role of tace in reproduction, it is becoming increasingly clear that sace is also involved in other physiological processes outside of blood pressure regulation . the relationship between tace and sace strongly suggests that the latter arose as the result of a gene duplication event, which would have enabled the enzyme to evolve and acquire new functions (hubert et al. 1991) .the two domains of somatic ace share greater than 60 % overall sequence identity, rising to circa 80 % in catalytic regions, yet they display some markedly different biophysical and biochemical properties. for example, the n-domain is significantly more thermally stable and resistant to proteolysis than the c-domain (sturrock et al. 1997; voronov et al. 2002) .important differences have also been observed in the catalytic properties of the two domains. the c-domain is able to process angiotensin i to angiotensin ii much more efficiently than the n-domain, whilst both domains are equally able to hydrolyse bradykinin. the c-domain alone appears sufficient for in vivo regulation of blood pressure (georgiadis et al. 2003) .a number of substrates have also been identified which are hydrolysed more efficiently by the n-domain compared to the c-domain. these include gnrh (gonadotropin-releasing hormone), a-beta42 (amyloid beta peptide), angiotensin 1-9 and acsdkp (n-acetyl-seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline) (rousseau et al. 1995; deddish et al. 1998; anthony et al. 2012; masuyer et al. 2012) . this is further evidence that the n-domain has, by divergent evolution, become involved in other physiological processes.the activity of the n-domain towards the peptide acsdkp is particularly interesting as acsdkp is involved in regulating the proliferation of fibroblasts in response to injury. a recent detailed study by bernstein et al. showed that in mice treated with the chemotherapy drug bleomycin to induce lung injury, the level of lung damage was much greater in mice with a mutated sace n-domain compared to in wild-type mice or those with sace c-domain mutations. there is strong evidence therefore that the n-domain plays an important role in preventing lung injury, likely due to its role in regulating the proliferation of acsdkp (bernstein et al. 2011) .the involvement of ace in processes outside of blood pressure regulation, and in particular the differences in substrate specificity of the two domains of sace highlight the growing need for a new generation of ace inhibitors. the current ace inhibitors were designed with no structural information and are instead based on peptides isolated from the venom of the brazilian pit viper bothrops jararaca (ferreira 1965; ferreira et al. 1970; ondetti et al. 1971; cushman et al. 1977; patchett et al. 1980) . most inhibit both domains of sace equally. structural studies will be crucial in understanding the reasons for these observed differences and in achieving the goal of a new generation of ace inhibitors.the initial discovery and partial purification of ace occurred in the 1950s yet it was not until 2003 that the first human ace structure, of tace, was reported . one of the main reasons for the 50 years that elapsed between the discovery of ace and the report of the first structure is the extensive glycosylation, estimated at 30 % of the weight of the enzyme ) but shown to be essential for expression and function (gordon et al. 2003; corradi et al. 2007 ). ultimately, the structure of tace was determined using a minimally glycosylated, truncated construct, lacking the transmembrane domain .the structure of tace is predominantly helical, with twentyseven α-helices and only six short β-strands, which combine to form an ellipsoid shaped molecule ( fig. 2a and b) . the structure shows six glycosylation sites, all located on the surface of the protein. key features of the molecule include a large central channel and an n-terminal lid. the channel stretches approximately 30 å across almost the entirety of the molecule, effectively dividing it into two subdomains. the channel narrows at the centre, where the catalytic zinc ion is found. as shown in fig. 2c , the n-terminal lid is formed by the three n-terminal fig. 1 schematic representation of the domain structures of sace and tace. sace consists of two homologous domains: the n-and c-domains. both contain a functional active site, illustrated here by the hexxh zinc binding motif. the two domains are joined by a short linker sequence (lr) which is unique to sace. the n-domain and most of the c-domain are extracellular. there is a transmembrane (tm) domain towards the cterminus of sace followed by the c-terminus (ct) which is intracellular. in contrast, tace is a single domain protein with only one active, shown here by a single hexxh zinc binding motif. the 36 residues at the nterminus (nt) of tace are unique, taking the place of the linker region (lr) in sace. like sace, most of tace is extracellular with a transmembrane domain (tm) and the c-terminus (ct) is positioned inside the cell helices; α1; α2 and α3 and appears to prevent the enzyme from hydrolysing large, folded substrates .in 2006, the structure of the n-domain of sace was determined, providing the first opportunity for the two domains of sace to be compared. the overall structure of the ndomain is essentially identical to that of the c-domain; a predominantly helical, ellipsoid shaped molecule with a long channel that narrows at the centre where the catalytic zinc ion is found. in total it comprises 27 helices, of which 18 are αhelices and only 6, relatively short, β-strands ( fig. 3a and b) .comparing the structures of the n and c-domains provides some insight into the observed differences in substrate specificity. the structures of both domains were solved with lisinopril, an inhibitor that is slightly selective for the cdomain, bound. although lisinopril is bound in broadly the same conformation in both structures, minor differences, mainly concentrated in the s 1 ' binding pocket help to explain the selectivity. for example, asp140 in the n-domain takes the place of glu162 in the c-domain. glu162 forms electrostatic interactions with the lysyl side chain of lisinopril, which asp140 is unable to replicate ( fig. 3c ) (corradi et al. 2006) .by studying the structures of the n-and c-domains of sace significant progress has already been made towards the design of domain specific inhibitors. rxpa380 was developed from a phosphinic peptide library and is highly selective for the c-domain, with a k i three orders of magnitude lower than for the n-domain ). the structure of the cdomain bound to rxpa380 was reported in 2007 (corradi et al. 2007 ) and provides an insight into the reasons for the specificity of this inhibitor (fig. 4) .in the c-domain phe391 in the s 2 subsite makes an aromatic interaction with phe at the p 2 position of rxpa380. in the n-domain phe391 is replaced by tyr369, which would not be able to replicate this aromatic interaction. furthermore, the structure suggests that the hydroxyl group of tyr369 would be within 2 å of the p 2 phe, preventing the inhibitor from binding in the same conformation (fig. 4d) .further relevant differences are observed in the s 2 ' subsite. during the development of rxpa380 it was suggested that pro and trp at the p 1 ' and p 2 ' positions respectively were important determinants of c-domain selectivity. the s 2 ' subsite of the cdomain is lined by two valine residues (val379 and val380) which create a hydrophobic environment for the pro and trp. in the n-domain, these valines are replaced by ser357 and thr358, destroying the hydrophobic environment (fig. 4d) .a second phosphinic peptide, rxp407, has been developed which selectively inhibits the n-domain ( fig. 5a and b). the structure of the n-domain in complex with fig. 2 the structure of human tace. (a) and (b) cartoon representation of the tace structure with helices shown in cyan, β-strands in magenta and loops in pink. the catalytic zinc ion is shown as a grey sphere at the centre of the long substrate binding channel which effectively divides the molecule into two subdomains. also visible in the active site is the inhibitor lisinopril and the two chloride ions shown as orange spheres. three n-terminal helices form a "lid" over the substrate binding channel and this is shown more clearly by viewing the molecule from the angle used in (b). the role of the lid in capping the substrate binding channel is highlighted in (c), where the three n-terminal helices which form the lid are shown in purple with the rest of the molecule shown as a cyan surface representation. the lisinopril and zinc are shown bound in the active site. in (c) the molecule is viewed from the same angle as in (b) rxp407 was reported in 2010 (anthony et al. 2010) . it shows twelve hydrogen bonds from nine residues forming between the enzyme and inhibitor (fig. 5c ). all but two of these would be conserved in the c-domain. interestingly, the two residues that differ; arg381/glu403 and tyr369/phe391 are located in the s 2 subsite (fig. 5d ), further illustrating that interactions between the enzyme and inhibitors at this site are an important determinant of domain selectivity.structural studies of inhibitor binding to ace have been able to provide essential information relating to the subtle differences in the substrate binding pockets of the two domains. this will be able to be exploited in the design of new, domain specific ace inhibitors. these may include not only c-domain specific inhibitors for use in the treatment of hypertension, but also n-domain specific inhibitors targeting the roles of ace in other physiological processes.in addition to the increasing understanding that mammalian ace is involved in a range of processes outside of blood pressure regulation, in recent years a number of other homologues of ace have been identified which further emphasise the diverse range of functions of these enzymes. . the overall fold is identical save for an additional region at the c-terminus of the n-domain structure which serves as a linker region between the two domains. at the centre of the substrate binding channel the inhibitor lisinopril is visible as well as a zinc ion (grey sphere) and a single chloride ion (orange sphere). (c) lisinopril binding to tace and the n-domain. although all of the residues forming direct interactions with lisinopril are conserved between tace and the n-domain, some differences are seen in the subsites particularly in the s 1 ' binding pocket. the subsite residues are show as cyan (tace) and magenta (n-domain) sticks and labelled following the same colour scheme. the lisinopril bound to tace is shown in light blue and from the n-domain in light pink. important differences include the orientation of glu162 in tace compared to asp140 in the n-domain which prevent interactions with the lysyl side chain of lisinopril in the ndomain at this position, and the position of the backbone at thr372/ arg350 which prevents the long, positive side chain of arginine coming into contact with and repelling the lysyl side chain of lisinoprilin the year 2000, a study aiming to find novel genes involved in heart failure identified a cdna coding for a human homologue of ace (tipnis et al. 2000) . this was the first evidence of an ace homologue in humans, and the protein was appropriately named ace2 (angiotensin converting enzyme 2, ec number 3.4.17.23). like ace, ace2 is a type i integral membrane protein. it has a single catalytic domain that includes a zinc binding site. ace2 and each domain of sace share 33 % sequence identity, so it appears that the two enzymes have arisen following a gene duplication event which then allowed considerable divergence in ace2 sequence (krege et al. 1995) .in contrast to the widespread expression of sace, ace2 expression appears to be confined to the heart, kidneys and testis. furthermore, ace and ace2 have quite distinct biochemical properties. there is no evidence of ace2 having dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase activity as is routinely found in ace. instead it removes a single residue from the c-terminus of its peptide substrates, which include neurotensin and kinetensin. bradykinin is not a substrate for ace2, although it is able to cleave angiotensin i, but removes only a single c-terminal residue to give the nonapeptide ang1-9. ace2 is not inhibited by the ace inhibitors captopril, lisinopril and enalaprilat (tipnis et al. 2000; donoghue et al. 2000; crackower et al. 2002) . fig. 4 binding of the c-domain specific inhibitor rxpa380 to tace. (a) and (b) the structure of the c-domain specific inhibitor rxpa380. (c) key residues of the tace active site interacting with rxpa380. rxpa380 is shown as sticks with carbon atoms in green, the side chains of tace residues are also shown as sticks with cyan carbon atoms. the active site zinc ion is shown as a grey sphere. rxpa380 binds in a similar conformation to lisinopril (fig. 3) . (d) two key differences between tace (cyan) and the n-domain (magenta) likely to decrease the affinity of rxpa380 for the ndomain. the phe391/tyr369 substitution eliminates the interaction with the phenyl moiety of the inhibitor whilst the val379/ser357 and val380/ thr358 substitutions destroy the hydrophobic environment around the tryptophan group. (e) the s 2 ' binding pocket with side chains in close proximity to rxpa380 shown as sticks illustrates that the inhibitor does not fill this subsite and interactions here could potentially be increased to improve the efficacy of rxpa380the structure of ace2, reported in 2004, provides explanations both for the function of ace2 as a zinc dependent carboxypeptidase and for many of the observed differences between ace and ace2 (towler et al. 2004 ). the extracellular portion of ace2 was shown to consist of two distinct domains. the first (residues 19-611) is a zinc metallopeptidase sharing 42 % sequence identity with the catalytic domains of ace. the second (residues 612-740) is 48 % identical to human collectrin. poor electron density was observed for the "collectrin-like" domain (towler et al. 2004 ).the first, "ace-like" domain is, like ace, predominantly helical. it consists of two subdomains (i and ii) forming the sides of a cleft stretching 40 å along and 15 å across the molecule, with a depth of 25 å. at the base of this cleft is the catalytic site. it is located approximately halfway along the length of the molecule towards one side, as illustrated in fig. 6a . the location of the active site is marked by the presence of the catalytic zinc ion. as in ace, and characteristic of zinc dependent proteases, the catalytic zinc ion is coordinated by two histidines and a glutamic acid: his374, his378 and glu402. in the absence of the inhibitor a water molecule completes the co-ordination of the zinc ion.the location of the catalytic site means that is shielded in the cleft that separates the two subdomains (fig. 6a) . a similar effect is achieved in ace with the catalytic site being located at the centre of the long substrate binding channel capped by the n-terminal lid. like ace, ace2 is extensively glycosylated with electron density observed at six n-linked glycosylation sites. there are three disulphide bonds in the ace2 structure, all of which are conserved in ace. shown as sticks with their carbon atoms in magenta. rxp407 is also shown as sticks, with green carbon atoms and the essential zinc is shown as a grey sphere. (d) two key differences between the n-and c-domain active sites which are likely to affect rxp407 binding. in the c-domain arg381 (magenta) is replaced by glu403 (cyan) resulting in the loss of an interaction with the inhibitor. similarly, phe391 (cyan) in the cdomain is unable to hydrogen bond with rxp407 as tyr369 (magenta) is in the n-domain an interesting feature of ace2, which has not been seen in ace, is a large conformational change on inhibitor binding. the two subdomains move relative to each other to close in around the inhibitor in the active site, illustrated in fig. 6 .differences in the subsites of ace2 compared to ace help to explain the observed differences in substrate specificity and catalytic properties. in ace2 the s 1 subsite is defined by four residues with large, bulky side chains, (tyr510, arg514, phe504 and thr347) likely to restrict the size of residues that can be accommodated at the p 1 position of substrates. bradykinin and angiotensin, both substrates of ace but not ace2, have phenylalanine and tyrosine respectively at the p 1 position the side chains of which are unlikely to be accommodated by the restricted s 1 subsite fig. 6e .another significant difference between the two enzymes is observed in the s 2 ' subsite, where a glutamine residue in ace is replaced in ace2 by arg273. the large arginine side chain effectively blocks the s 2 ' subsite, prohibiting ace2 from acting as a dipeptidyl peptidase as ace does (fig, 6e) . this also explains why ace2 is not inhibited by classical ace inhibitors (captopril, lisinopril and enalaprilat) which make contacts with the s 2 ' subsite (crackower et al. 2002) . the catalytic zinc ion also moves and its positions are also shown in green and purple. the inhibitor is shown as sticks with orange carbon atoms bound in the active site. (e) some key differences between tace (cyan) and ace2 (purple) which restrict the size of the s 1 binding pocket, probably restricting space such that ace2 can only remove the terminal residue from the c-terminus of peptide substrates whilst ace removes the c-terminal dipeptide ace2 is an exceedingly important enzyme to study. it has been shown to have an important role in heart failure (crackower et al. 2002; luft 2012; kuba et al. 2013; santos et al. 2013 ) and it has also been identified as a receptor for the coronavirus which was linked to the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) (li et al. 2003) . the structural details of this recognition have been characterised and were reported in 2009 (wu et al. 2009 ). it is also important to study ace2 to improve our understanding of ace homologues. the diverged properties of ace2 highlight the range of processes that ace homologues may be involved in and the potential benefits that may come from studying them further.for many years it was thought that ace was confined to mammals, where it has a critical role in blood pressure homeostasis. more recently, it has become apparent that ace has many other substrates in addition to angiotensin i and bradykinin, and that it is involved in a large number of physiological processes outside of the raas. furthermore, the discovery of ace2 illustrates how homologues of ace could have arisen from gene duplication events and then evolved to have different, but equally important functions.in 1994, the first ace homologue outside of mammals was identified in the housefly musca domestica (lamango and isaac 1994) . since then, ace homologues have been found in every insect genome sequence to date ). this conservation among insects is indicative of an essential role for ace homologues. yet, given that insects lack any form of circulatory system resembling that found in mammals, significant questions remain as to the exact nature of this role or roles.one of the first insect ace homologues to be studied in detail was ance from drosophila melanogaster. first identified in 1995, ance shares 45 % sequence identity with human tace and, as such, has been used successfully as a model for studying the structural basis of inhibitor binding to human ace (cornell et al. 1995; tatei et al. 1995) .although ance is able to hydrolyse angiotensin i and bradykinin, two of the major substrates of mammalian ace, no insect homologues of these peptides have been identified. a lot of research has been performed to try and elucidate the physiological function of ance and thus insect ace homologues in the wider sense.ance mutant embryos develop normally but die during the early larval stages. this indicates that ance has an essential role in a physiological process critical for survival ). high levels of ance expression are observed in the gut epithelium and amniosera, suggesting that ance may be involved in processing peptides required for contraction of the heart and gut muscle (cornell et al. 1995; tatei et al. 1995) .ance expression is also concentrated around the reproductive organs of both male and female flies, suggesting a role in reproduction. further evidence for this was obtained in a 1999 study using insects with hypomorphic ance alleles. male flies homozygous for the hypomorphic ance alleles were infertile as a result of sperm failing to develop properly, suggesting that ance may be required for processing a peptide involved in spermatogenesis schoofs et al. 1998) .further investigation in 2007 showed that ance expression is concentrated in the secondary cells of the accessory glands of the testis. the accessory glands produce a number of peptides that mix with the sperm and the seminal fluid and induce physiological and behavioural changes in the female insect after mating. it is reasonable to suggest then that ance is not only involved in spermatogenesis in the male, but may also have a role in the female after mating .with this in mind, dup99b was suggested as a potential ance substrate. dup99b can induce egg laying in females, but in order to be functional the basic c-terminal dipeptide must be removed from the propeptide. in theory, this would make dup99b a good substrate for ance. as yet it has not been possible to investigate this hypothesis further, as ance is already expressed by the female reproductive organs (rylett et al. 2007 ). in order to understand any effect of ance on the female after mating tissue specific ance knockdowns in female flies would need to be performed.ance is not the only insect ace homologue which has been implicated in reproduction and it seems increasingly likely that this is a conserved function of these enzymes (wijffels et al. 1996; hurst et al. 2003; ekbote et al. 2003a , ekbote et al. 2003b macours and hens 2004; vercruysse et al. 2004) . for example, ace has been shown to be necessary for egg laying by female anopheles stephensi mosquitoes, where it has been suggested that it may be required to process a myotropic peptide needed for contractions of the oviduct .drosophila also produces a second ace homologue; acer. acer cdna was first identified in 1996, and from the outset it has been clear that ance and acer code for distinct proteins with unique physiological roles. unlike ance, acer is found neither in the amniosera nor the midgut, but it is found in developing heart cells where it has been shown to be necessary for heart development (taylor et al. 1996; houard et al. 1998 ). additionally, acer is involved in heart function in adult flies. rnai was used to specifically knockdown acer in adult drosophila and resulted in age-associated changes in heart contraction, leading to a decreased life span. as yet, the mechanisms behind this remain to be determined (liao et al. 2014) .acer has also been implicated in the regulation of circadian rhythms, with the suggestion that its expression is temporally regulated by the expression of clock. flies lacking active acer display decreased night-time sleep and increased fragmentation of the sleep that they do get. the mechanisms behind this are unclear, but it has been suggested that acer processes peptides involved in metabolism, with the resulting metabolic changes upon losing acer causing behavioural changes leading to the observed effects on sleep, rather than acer being involved in circadian rhythms per se (carhan et al. 2011; ishimoto et al. 2012 ).based on the evidence obtained so far, it is clear that ance and acer have distinct physiological roles; it is therefore not surprising that they have different substrate and inhibitor specificities. for example, unlike ance and mammalian ace, acer is unable to cleave angiotensin i and also has a much lower affinity for bradykinin. on the basis of these differences, one would predict that there must be some variations between the active sites of these two enzymes (taylor et al. 1996; coates et al. 2000; bingham et al. 2006) .the structure of ance was first published in 2003 at 2.4 å resolution (kim et al. 2003) . this was followed in 2010 by higher resolution (~2.0 å) structures, in a different crystal form, of the native enzyme and a number of enzyme inhibitor complexes (akif et al. 2010 (akif et al. , 2012 . the overall architecture of ance is conserved from human ace and the molecule is also heavily glycosylated, with three n-linked glycans visible in the structure at asn53, asn196 and asn311. no structure has yet been determined for acer, however in 2005 bingham and co-workers proposed a model for the three dimensional structure of acer based on the ance structure reported by kim et al. in 2003 (kim et al. 2003 bingham et al. 2006) . by comparing this model with the ance structure, some explanations have been offered as to the observed differences in substrate specificity of these two homologous enzymes.in ance the negatively charged side chains of asp360 and glu150 are likely to form electrostatic interactions with the cterminal arginine of bradykinin. based on the acer model, asp360 is replaced by his368, which would be unable to replicate this interaction, explaining the decreased affinity for and rate of hydrolysis of bradykinin by acer compared to ance.ance and acer also behave differently towards the cdomain selective inhibitor rxpa380. acer is inhibited by rxpa380 with a k i of 4.8 μm whereas no inhibition is observed for ance. the c-domain selectivity of rxpa380 has been partially attributed to two valine residues in the s 2 ' pocket. one of these is conserved in acer but replaced by a threonine in ance. this mutation would decrease the hydrophobicity of this pocket which accommodates the tryptophan moiety of rxpa380 hence decreasing the affinity of the inhibitor for ance compared to acer and the c-domain (kim et al. 2003; bingham et al. 2006) .these are just some of the potentially interesting features of the acer active site proposed based on the modelled structure (bingham et al. 2006 ). such small differences can have significant implications on substrate and inhibitor specificity. whilst there remains a great deal more to be learnt about the in vivo functions of acer, and indeed ance, it is clear that like mammalian ace, both of these enzymes are involved in a number of important physiological processes. it follows then, that studying these enzymes, particularly from a structural perspective, can only increase our understanding of the diverse range of functions of ace homologues.anopheles gambiae is one of the mosquito vectors responsible for the transmission of plasmodium falciparum, a causative agent of malaria. this makes a. gambiae an exceedingly important organism to study.it transpires that a. gambiae is also a particularly interesting organism to study in terms of ace. there are ten a. gambiae ace homologues (anoaces); the largest number to be found in any insect genome so far (holt et al. 2002) . the reasons for there being so many anoace homologues are not yet clear, but understanding the different functions of these enzymes will surely help us to understand more about the biological roles of other insect ace homologues, and indeed of mammalian ace outside of blood pressure regulation. furthermore, one of these, anoace9, appears to consist of two catalytic domains arranged in tandem, as seen in sace. this is the first instance of a two domain ace homologue to be reported in insects (burnham et al. 2005) and indicates that this two domain arrangement has been selected for on more than one occasion and so must surely be in some way advantageous. studying anoace9 may help us to understand the benefits of such an arrangement.in 2005 burnham and co-workers investigated the gene expression patterns of the different anoace homologues to try and infer more about their potential physiological roles. one of their key observations was that the expression of anoace3, 7 and 9 was upregulated for 48 h following a blood meal (burnham et al. 2005) . a similar observation was previously reported for the a. stephensi mosquito , suggesting that insect ace homologues may have a conserved role in processing peptides involved in metabolism.the anoace expression levels were also observed to alter in response to challenging the immune system of the mosquitoes. anoace7 was upregulated on infection with salmonella typhimurium and anoace1 on infection with staphylococcus aureus. conversely, anoace9 expression was reduced when the mosquitoes were challenged with beauveria bassiana (burnham et al. 2005) . these observations alone are of course not enough to conclude that anoace homologues have an important role in the immune response, but they do indicate that this area should be investigated further.given the evidence for mammalian tace and other insect ace homologues being involved in reproduction, the likelihood of some or all of the anoace homologues having a similar role cannot be ignored. at this early stage there is no indication as to which, if any of the anoace proteins may fulfil this role and further studies, likely knock down studies, will be required to investigate this further. identifying an enzyme with such a role could be highly significant, with the possibility of designing a. gambiae specific ace inhibitors for use in insecticides.of the nine anoace genes, six (anoace2, 3a, 3b, 4, 5, 6 and 7) are clustered together on the same chromosome and are likely to have arisen from relatively recent gene duplication events. indeed anoace5 and 6 are predicted to share 97 % sequence identity whilst anoace3a and 3b are coded for by the same gene and are identical save for the first exon (burnham et al. 2005) .anoace2-6 share many common features with each other and d. melanogaster ance and acer. all six of these anoace proteins were successfully modelled based on the structure of ance (pdb code 2x8y) (akif et al. 2010 ) using the automated mode of swiss-model (arnold et al. 2006; kiefer et al. 2009 ). as would be predicted given the high sequence identity, the crucial active site residues from ance were conserved in all of the models. there were though differences in the subsites, indicating probable differences in substrate preference. these differences are summarised in table 1 .the s 2 subsite has been identified as a crucial region conferring inhibitor and substrate binding specificity on the n-and c-domains of human sace (hubert et al. 1991; gordon et al. 2003; dive et al. 2004; corradi et al. 2006 corradi et al. , 2007 kröger et al. 2009; anthony et al. 2010) . for example, the substitution of tyr369 in the n-domain for phe391 in the c-domain is crucial for the c-domain selectivity of rxpa380, with phe391 forming an aromatic interaction with the phenyl moiety at the p 2 position of rxpa380 that tyr369 is unable to replicate (gordon et al. 2003; corradi et al. 2007 ). both the anoace5 and 6 models have a phenylalanine at the position of c-domain phe391, suggesting that they could form an interaction with an aromatic group at p 2 . anoace5 and 6 also have a conserved negative charge at the position of glu403 of the c-domain, which is replaced by arg381 in the n-domain fig. 7a . these two observations suggest that anoace5 and 6 and the c-domain of sace may accommodate substrates with similar functionalities at the p 2 position.in contrast, the anoace2-4 models have a tyrosine at the position of n-domain tyr369, indicating that they would not tolerate an aromatic group at p 2 , and may instead have a preference for a group to which they could form a hydrogen bond. unlike the n-domain anoace2-4 do not have a large positive side chain at the position of arg381. like the cdomain anoace2, 3a and 3b have a glutamate, whilst anoace4 has a serine fig. 7b . the models therefore suggest that anoace2-4 share some features of both the n-and cdomains of human sace at the s 2 subsite and this may well be reflected in their substrate and inhibitor binding properties.based on the models of anoace2-6, there appear to be some potentially significant differences in the s 1 subsite compared to the two domains of sace. for example, the n-and c-domain have a conserved phenylalanine reside (phe490 and phe512 respectively) which is replaced by tyrosine in anoace2-6 fig. 7c . this could have potentially significant consequences on inhibitor and substrate interaction, as the stacking interaction between the phenyl moiety at p 1 of both rxpa380 and rxp407 would not be maintained. interestingly, a tyrosine is conserved at this position in d. melanogaster ance.there are also interesting substitutions at the position equivalent to the c-domain glu143. the negative charge here is retained in ance and the anoace2 model. in the ndomain and anoace3a, 3b, 5 and 6 it is lost and replaced by serine (n-domain) or glutamine. most significantly though, in anoace4 lys133 occupies this position fig. 7c . the large positive lysine side chain is likely to have a significant effect on the type of groups that anoace4 can accommodate in the s 1 subsite.the anoace2-6 models also all have a conserved positive charge (either lysine or arginine) in the s 1 subsite, which, although conserved as lys62 in ance, is replaced by gln54 and leu81 in the n-and c-domains respectively fig. 7c . the introduction of these large positive side chains into what is in both domains of sace quite a large pocket of space is likely to influence the size and charge of functionalities that can be accommodated by anoace2-6 in the s 1 subsite.based on our models, anoace5 and 6 have an additional negative charge in their s 1 subsites compared to ance, the two domains of sace and anoace2-4. both have glu54, which takes the place of a small, non-polar side chain in the other subsites fig. 7c . overall, the models suggest that the s 1 subsites of anoace2-6 are quite polar environments compared to sace. the models presented here are not sufficient to determine the effect that this may have on binding properties, further work will be needed to investigate this.there is comparatively little variation in the s 1 ' and s 2 ' subsites of the anoace2-6 models compared to in the other subsites. a potentially significant difference is at the position of c-domain val380. this residue has been implicated in the selectivity of rxpa380 for the c-domain. it contributes to a hydrophobic environment for the tryptophan moiety of the inhibitor that is lost in the n-domain as val380 is replaced by thr358. interestingly; the valine at this position is conserved only in anoace2 and is replaced by a threonine in anoace3-6. this small difference, which has such a significant effect in determining the domain selectivity of rxpa380, highlights how subtle variations in the subsites of these enzymes can have significant effects on their biochemical properties. table 1 comparison of the amino acid residues comprising the binding pockets of the n-and c-domains of human sace, drosophila melanogaster ance and the models of the anopheles gambiae ace homologues; anoace2-7 c-n-ance ano2 ano3a ano3b ano4 ano5 ano6 ano7   y62  s35  e43  q59  t58  a47  a52  g50  g50  n302  a63  v36  t44  t60  t59  t48  s53  t51  t51  v303  n66 s39 t352 t358  n374 n373  n362  t368 t364 t365 t621  d377 q355 q361 e377 d376  d365  q371 q367 q368 d624  v380 t358 t364  v380 t379  t368  t374 t370 t371 t627  t282 s260 q266 t282 t281  t270  g275 d272 k273 anoace2-7 are clustered together on the same chromosome and thought to have arisen from a relatively recent gene duplication event. anoace1 is predicted to be considerably different to the other anoace homologues, belonging to a different functional grouping, and is likely to have acquired highly diverged functions (burnham et al. 2005; akif et al. 2012) . it is perhaps not surprising then that anoace1 was much more challenging to model and so an experimentally determined crystal structure will surely be needed to study the mechanism of action of this enzyme in more detail. it seems that this enzyme will make an exceedingly interesting case study and could reveal more unknown roles of ace homologues, aiding our understanding of this increasingly complex enzyme.the discovery of the anoace9 gene which appears to code for a protein with two homologous catalytic domains arranged in tandem provided the first evidence of a two domain ace homologue in insects. this now means that this domain arrangement, also seen in sace has been selected for on three separate occasions (burnham et al. 2005) . this organisation must surely then be in some way advantageous. studies of human sace have resulted in the suggestion that there may be some negative co-operativity between the two domains (georgiadis et al. 2003; binevski et al. 2003; andújar-sánchez et al. 2004; burnham et al. 2005; corradi et al. 2006 ) however more evidence is required before a conclusion can be reached. studying the structure and function of anoace9 could potentially yield a lot of information about the benefits of this organisation.angiotensin converting enzyme has been known of and studied for half a century; however it is only in the last decade that we have truly begun to understand the diverse range of physiological functions of this enzyme and its homologues. we now appreciate that ace and its homologues have extensive functions outside of blood pressure regulation. structural studies have greatly improved our understanding of the different biochemical properties of ace homologues. the elucidation of the human tace structure in 2003 was a huge breakthrough in the study of ace and was followed by the report of the n-domain structure in 2006. the structure of the d. melanogaster homologue ance is also frequently used as a model of human ace.the discovery and subsequent study of ace homologues from other organisms, most significantly d. melanogaster, has highlighted the diverse range of functions of this enzyme. ace homologues are conserved in insects, where, amongst other proposed roles, there is substantial evidence for them having an essential role in reproduction.studying insect ace homologues has already greatly improved our understanding of the mammalian enzyme, but these enzymes are also important to study in their own right. nowhere is this more evident than in the a. gambiae ace homologues. the a. gambiae genome codes for more ace homologues than has been seen in any other insect genome thus far and includes a two-domain enzyme comparable to sace.initial genomic studies have indicated that these enzymes may be involved in metabolism, the immune response and reproduction, however much more evidence is required to confirm this. this could potentially be achieved by treating the mosquitoes with ace inhibitors and observing the effect that this has. a similar approach has previously been taking with a. stephensi, which indicated that ace homologues were involved in reproduction . however this is unlikely to distinguish between the functions of the different anoace homologues, hence a better approach may be to use rnai to selectively knockdown the individual genes. liao et al. recently used this approach successfully in their work on acer (liao et al. 2014 ). fig. 7 features of the active sites of the anoace2-6 models compared to the n-and c-domains of human sace. in all images the n-domain selective inhibitor rxp407 is shown as sticks with green carbon atoms and the c-domain selective inhibitor rxpa380 as sticks with orange carbon atoms. the catalytic zinc ion is a grey sphere. (a) the s 2 subsite of anoace5 and 6. key residues of anoace5 and 6 are shown as grey sticks using anoace5 numbering. the c-domain is shown as cyan sticks and the n-domain magenta. anoace5 and 6 share a conserved phenylalanine (phe381) with the c-domain which is replaced by a tyrosine in the n-domain. this residue makes important contacts with the domain selective inhibitors and so suggests that anoace5 and 6 may share some binding preferences with the c-domain. there is also a conserved negative charge, asp393 which is replaced by positive arg381 in the n-domain, and a conserved valine, val508, replaced by thr496 in the n-domain. there is some similarity with the n-domain though, for example ser566 which is replaced by phe570 in the cdomain. (b) the s 2 subsite of anoace2-4. the s 2 subsites of the anoace2-4 models are very similar and so are represented here by anoace3a, shown as light orange sticks. there are some features shared with both the n-and c-domains of sace; tyr390 is conserved in the n-domain, but replaced by phe391 in the c-domain, whilst glu402 is conserved in the c-domain but replaced by the positive arg381 in the n-domain. these residues are likely to have significant effects on substrate and inhibitor binding properties. (c) the s 1 subsite of anoace2-6. common features of the anoace2-6 models are represented by anoace3a in light orange, with unique features of anoace4 and anoace5 and 6 shown as violet and grey sticks respectively. the anoace2-6 models share a conserved tyrosine at tyr511 which is replaced by phenylalanine in both the n-and cdomain. all of the models have a unique positively charged residue not found in the n-or c-domains, shown here by lys71 in anoace4 and arg77 in anoace3. anoace4 has a further positively charged residue, lys133, which is replaced by neutral or negatively charged residues in the n-and c-domains and the other models. in contract anoace5 and 6 have an additional negative charge introduced by glu54. these substitutions of charged residues are likely to have a significant effect on substrate and inhibitor binding properties as we have discussed, d. melanogaster ance has been successfully used as a model for inhibitor binding to human ace. it is not unreasonable to consider that it may be possible to use anoace9 in a similar way as a model for human sace in order to learn more about the rationale for the presence of two homologous domains arranged in tandem.here we have modelled the active sites of the a. gambiae ace homologues based on the structure of d. melanogaster ance and compared them to the human and d. melanogaster enzymes. whilst this is of course no substitute for experimentally determined crystal structures, it has indicated some key differences that could potentially be exploited in the design of insect specific ace inhibitors; perhaps targeting their role in reproduction. in the longer term such inhibitors could be designed for use in insecticides, which would be particularly useful when considering a. gambiae as a vector for the transmission of the malaria causing parasite p. falciparum.lipid-lowering therapy and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors in the era of the covid-19 pandemicthe novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 -sars-cov-2) disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic has been associated with severe respiratory disease incidence and increased mortality [1] . angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) 2 is a homologue of ace, but also a receptor for the coronaviruses [2] . ace2 is highly expressed in the lungs, heart, gastrointestinal (gi) tract and kidney, thus affecting the cardiovascular system (cv) and the immune system [3] . the overexpression of ace2 was reported to enhance viral entry and replication intracellularly [4] . covid-19, also called sars-cov-2, may also use ace2 as a receptor to initiate infection, leading to severe complications from the heart (acute coronary syndrome (acs) and fulminant myocarditis), lungs (pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards)) and gi tract (diarrhoea syndrome) [5] .ace2 gene expression is affected by several factors, including gender (ace2 gene is x-linked), ace2 gene polymorphisms, comorbidities (increased in the presence of cvd, hypertension, diabetes), and drug therapy [6] . with regard to drugs, angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (mra) have been reported to raise ace2 activity in human and animal studies [7] . there are only a few animal studies available showing that statins may also increase ace2 activity [8, 9] . in the era of the covid-19 pandemic, such a drug effect may be considered as potentially worrying [10] . in this context, it was recently even suggested that arbs could be replaced with ace inhibitors and that statin treatment may be discontinued during the pandemic, particularly in primary prevention settings [11] .however, before implementing such strategies, we should consider several issues. firstly, as the covid-19 infection progresses, ace2 is downregulated, thus potentially generating an inflammatory response leading to impaired cardiac contractility and acute lung injury [5, 7, 12] . therefore, reduced ace2 expression is linked to worse outcomes. on the other hand, ace2 overexpression has been associated with several beneficial effects, i.e. prevention of adverse cardiac remodelling and fibrosis, improvement of vascular endothelial dysfunction, reduction of blood pressure, and protection from ards [7, 12] . both statins and arbs were reported to exert these benefits.secondly, a combination of statins/arbs were used during the 2014 ebola virus disease epidemic in sierra leone, leading to improved outcomes and increased survival [13] . these drugs can affect the host response to infection, not the virus, especially by preventing endothelial dysfunction, a shared feature of several virus infections [14] . their combination seemed to promote a return to homeostasis, allowing patients with ebola virus infection to recover on their own [15] .third, patients with cardiovascular disease (cvd) were shown to be more prone to covid-19 infection and with worse prognosis [16, 17] . elevated inflammatory markers, such as c-reactive protein (crp) and interleukin-6 (il-6), have been recognised as predictors of covid-19 infection severity and mortality, suggesting a virus-activated "cytokine storm syndrome" [18, 19] . therefore, as well as immunomodulation, covid-19 treatment should also target reduction of inflammation. in this context, statins have been consistently reported to exert immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] . also, it was previously suggested that statins could enhance host defence and suppress inflammation, thus representing a practical and inexpensive adjunctive or alternative host-directed treatment for infections by viruses, fungi, protozoa, and bacteria [31] . similarly, there are data supporting an anti-inflammatory role for arbs [32] [33] [34] .fourth, statins may also prevent a viral-induced acute coronary syndrome (also in covid-19 positive patients) by stabilising atherosclerotic plaques [35] , as well as prevent acute kidney injury (aki) [36] . both acute cardiac injury and aki are predictors of covid-19-induced mortality [37] ; statin therapy may prevent these complications and thus increase survival. of note, statins can protect against contrast-induced aki (ci-aki) [38] [39] [40] [41] . this is of clinical importance, especially in hospitalised patients who undergo diagnostic or therapeutic procedures involving the administration of contrast media (e.g. computed tomography of the lungs).fifth, effective lipid-lowering therapy (llt) and significant cholesterol reduction might significantly suppress coronavirus infection. it was show that for infectious bronchitis virus (ibv) coronavirus, drug-related cholesterol reduction disrupts lipid rafts (an important element for the cellular entry of coronavirus) that enable the binding of the coronavirus with the host cells and, consequently, further infection [42] . it was also observed, in the studies with porcine deltacoronavirus (pdcov), that cholesterol present in the cell membrane and viral envelope (coronaviruses are positive-sense enveloped rna viruses) contributes to pdcov replication by acting as a key component in viral entry. thus, the pharmacological sequestration of cellular or viral cholesterol with effective llt significantly blocked both virus attachment and internalisation [43] . all these mechanisms might suggest a critical role of statins and llts in the inhibition of coronavirus infection.in covid-19-positive patients, the majority of baseline cvd is of atherosclerosis origin, with the worst prognosis for patients being at the high, and especially very high and extremely high, risk of cvd [16] ; thus, intensive llt with statins and/or fixed combination with ezetimibe and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (pcsk9) inhibitors seems to be critical. indeed, we should do our best to maximally improve therapy adherence and thus have a better prognosis for the infected cvd patients [44, 45] . in this context, there are no premises that pcsk9 inhibitors, because they are monoclonal antibodies (in relation to the above-mentioned high cytokine storm during infection), should be discontinued. in contrast, pcsk9 inhibitors should be continued to achieve further low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ldl-c) lowering (based on "the lower, the better" principle), because then we might significantly stabilise atheroma plaque, reduce the risk of cvd events, and reduce inflammation [46] [47] [48] . recent available data have confirmed the role of pcsk9 inhibition in reducing the process of inflammation via decreasing main vascular inflammatory markers, reducing infiltration of monocytes into the subendothelial layer, and inhibiting monocyte migration. apart from the reduction of pro-inflammatory mediators, pcsk9 inhibitors could ameliorate vascular inflammation [47] . finally, a direct local anti-inflammatory action of pcsk9 inhibitors, independent of ldl-c reduction, has been shown in animal models; however, it still merits further investigation [47, 48] .it is of special interest now (due to the fact that coronavirus might also use different receptors to enter the host cell) that treatment with pcsk9 inhibitors has beneficial effects on ldl-c lowering via inhibition of ldl-receptors (ldl-r). this might exert an antiviral effect, among others, on hepatitis c viral (hcv) infection through down-regulation of the surface expression of ldl-r and cluster of differentiation (cd) 81 on hepatic cells, and a positive association with increased inflammatory responses, as well as with septic shock [48] . in a recent paper, we confirmed that there is no association between pcsk9 levels and resistance to antibiotics or the condition of patients hospitalised in intensive care units, a finding of clinical importance in the covid-19 infection era [49] .sixth, there are conflicting results regarding the possible effects of statins on ards development and outcomes [50, 51] . it was suggested that statins act beneficially in 'hyper-inflammatory' ards patients (defined by increased biomarkers of inflammation, coagulation and endothelial activation) [52] , but not in 'hypo-inflammatory' patients [53, 54] . a potential benefit of arbs on survival in ards patients has also been reported [55, 56] . nevertheless, there is a paucity of data on this field, and thus further research is needed to elucidate the association between statin therapy, arbs, and acute lung injury.of note, drug-drug interactions should also be considered. in this context, simvastatin and lovastatin are contraindicated in patients on lopinavir/ ritonavir therapy due to an increased risk of rhabdomyolysis [57] . atorvastatin, rosuvastatin and other statins can be used at the lowest possible dose, based on the instructions included in the summary of product characteristics (spc) [58] . taking this into account, we should be careful while treating covid-19 disease patients with statins being on antiviral drugs and some antibiotics (including macrolides), because they might increase the risk of statin-associated muscle symptoms (sams) [59, 60] . therefore, their careful monitoring is highly recommended to avoid unnecessary drug-related side effects, and at the same time optimising llt therapy to achieve the individual's ldl-c goal. in this context, in patients at very high cvd risk, requiring intensive llt, it is reasonable to initiate therapy with polypills/fixed combinations of statins (at lower doses) and ezetimibe, with or without pcsk9 inhibitors (as available), aimed at reducing the risk of sams [59, 60] .a position statement of the european society (esc) council (on 13 march 2020) (as well as of other national and international societies) highlights the lack of evidence on harmful effects of ace inhibitors and arbs on the incidence and progression of covid-19 infection and strongly supports the continuation of usual antihypertensive therapy [6, 61] . regarding statins, their beneficial effects on inflammation, vascular, heart, and lung function strongly support the continuation of their use. due to their significant effect on cvd prevention, pcsk9 inhibitors should also be continued, as available. physicians should wait for strong evidence and recommendations from international scientific societies before altering their patients' drug therapy in the covid-19 era.dr niki katsiki and maciej banach contributed equally to this paper.nk has given talks, attended conferences, and participated in trials sponsored by angelini, astra zeneca, bausch health, boehringer ingelheim, elpen, mylan, novonordisk, sanofi, and servier. mb -speakers bureau: abbott/mylan, abbott vascular, actavis, akcea, amgen, biofarm, krka, msd, polpharma, sanofi-aventis, servier and valeant; consultant to abbott vascular, akcea, amgen, daichii sankyo, esperion, freia pharmaceuticals, lilly, msd, polfarmex, resverlogix, sanofi-aventis; grants from sanofi and valeant. dpm has given talks and attended conferences sponsored by amgen, novonordisk, and libytec.r e f e r e n c e sthe zinc metallopeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is the only known human homologue of the key regulator of blood pressure angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace). since its discovery in 2000, ace2 has been implicated in heart function, hypertension and diabetes, with its effects being mediated, in part, through its ability to convert angiotensin ii to angiotensin- (1 -7) . unexpectedly, ace2 also serves as the cellular entry point for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) virus and the enzyme is therefore a prime target for pharmacological intervention on several disease fronts.it is approaching 50 years since the discovery of the dual role of the zinc metallopeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) in the production of the vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii (ang ii) and the destruction of the vasodilator bradykinin [1, 2] . it is perhaps surprising, therefore, that the discovery of its homologue, ace2, did not take place until almost half a century later. it took the application of two independent genomics-based approaches to reveal the presence of ace2 in the human genome [3, 4] . given the widespread use of ace inhibitors (aceis) in the treatment of hypertension and other cardiovascular conditions, there was immediate interest in ace2 as a potential therapeutic target. this possibility was emphasized by the relatively high levels of ace2 expression in the human heart and kidney [3, 4] . the first surprises emerged from the basic characterization of the nature of ace2 activity. despite its close similarity to ace and conservation of many of the key active site features, ace2 displayed a distinct preference for substrates, operating exclusively as a carboxypeptidase, removing single amino acids, unlike ace, which removes dipeptides from the c-terminus of a peptide [3, 4] . hence, ace2 could not convert angiotensin i (ang i) to ang ii and was unable to inactivate bradykinin. furthermore, ace2 was not susceptible to inhibition by any aceis tested. what has been revealed about the pharmacology of ace2 in the subsequent three years?a key role for ace2 is emerging in the conversion of the octapeptide ang ii to its metabolite angiotensin-(1 -7) (ang 1 -7 ). for example, a compensatory increase in ang 1 -7 levels in failing human heart ventricles has been correlated with upregulation of ace2 [5] , and cardiac myocyte ang 1 -7 levels are increased in ischaemic cardiomyopathy [6] . the physiological role of ang 1 -7 has been controversial but it generally appears to oppose the pressor, proliferative and pro-fibrotic actions of ang ii [7] , and acts through its own g-protein-coupled receptor. this would suggest that ace and ace2 might act as counterbalances in the reninangiotensin system (ras) (figure 1 ). the successful production of ace2 null (ace2 2/2 ) mice supports this hypothesis [8] . ace2 knockout mice show major cardiac contractility defects and increased levels of ang ii [8] and, overall, studies in these mice suggest that ace2 is a key regulator of cardiac function, although the mechanism by which this is mediated is unclear. however, double knockouts, in which both ace and ace2 genes have been deleted, do not show the cardiac defects of the ace2 knockout alone [8] , emphasizing the yin-yang nature of ace and ace2 expression. when ace2 is transgenically overexpressed in mouse heart, cardiac defects are again observed, most notably a lethal ventricular arrhythmia, which is associated with disruption of gap junction formation [9] . the high incidence of sudden death in these mice correlated with the levels of ace2 transgene expression. surviving older mice showed a spontaneous downregulation of the transgene and restoration of normal figure 1 . the counter-actions of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) in angiotensin metabolism. in the classical renin-angiotensin pathway, the decapeptide ang i (i.e. ang 1 -10 ), derived from angiotensinogen via the action of renin, is converted by ace to the vasoactive ang ii (ang 1 -8 ) through the removal of the c-terminal dipeptide his-leu [1, 2] . there is increasing evidence that ang 1 -7 can counterbalance some of the actions of ang ii [7] , being formed from ang ii by the action of ace2, or possibly from ang i by the action of neprilysin (nep). although ace2 can convert ang i to ang 1 -9 , which can in turn be converted to ang 1 -7 by ace or nep, this pathway is unlikely to occur at significant levels in vivo because the metabolism of ang i by ace2 is kinetically unfavourable compared with its conversion of ang ii (g.i. rice. et al., unpublished) and hence is not shown.ang i cardiac function. there are also indirect associations of ace2 expression with hypertension. in particular, crackower et al. [8] noted that, in the rat, the ace2 gene maps to a defined quantitative trait locus associated with hypertension and, additionally, two single nucleotide polymorphisms in the ace2 gene locus have been associated with human cardiovascular disease [10] . another disease model in which ace2 expression has recently been studied is diabetes. in streptozotocin-induced diabetes in the rat, expression of renal tubule ace2 mrna and protein was substantially reduced whereas an increase in ace2 protein expression was seen in the diabetic glomeruli [11] . the significance of these changes, and the underlying mechanisms involved, remain to be elucidated. clearly, searches for possible correlations of ace2 mrna and protein over-or under-expression with human cardiovascular and renal disease are warranted to determine whether these correlations mirror the effects observed in rodent models. several potent and relatively selective inhibitors of ace2 have been described [12, 13] , and the modelling of the active site of ace2 [14] , based on the recently reported structure of human ace [15] , will facilitate the development of new classes of specific inhibitors. the active site model also provides an explanation for the differences in substrate specificity and inhibitor sensitivity between ace and ace2 [14] .ace2 as a gateway to sars during several months of 2003, the virus that caused the newly identified illness severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) spread rapidly from china throughout asia to canada and beyond, causing almost 800 deaths and disrupting travel, economics and even scientific conventions. the death rate following infection approached almost 10%. almost as mysteriously as it appeared, perhaps as a result of public health measures, the disease faded away only to re-emerge in china this year. the speed with which the infection spread and the severity of the symptoms led to a massive effort to identify the agent responsible. within months it had been identified as a positive strand rna virus, classified as a member of the coronavirus family (sars-cov); its genome was sequenced [16, 17] and the search was underway to identify the cellular receptor for the virus. as with other coronaviruses, it is the n-terminal portion (s1 domain) of the viral spike (s) glycoprotein that mediates the initial high-affinity binding to a receptor on the surface of susceptible cells. the spike sits in the viral envelope and projects outwards to give a 'corona'-like appearance to the virus, hence its name. the replication strategy of the virus is summarized in figure 2 , and figure 3 depicts the coronavirus-infected cell.michael farzan and colleagues [18] demonstrated that the s1 domain of the sars-cov s protein bound to the african green monkey kidney cell line vero e6, which is permissive for viral replication. they were then able to coimmunoprecipitate the protein responsible for viral binding and entry. this sars-cov receptor, a glycoprotein of m r 110 000, was identified by mass spectrometry as ace2. its identity was confirmed by showing that, when ace2 was overexpressed in human cells non-permissive for viral infection, sars-cov entry and replication were facilitated; this process was blocked by an ace2 antibody [18] . the tissue distribution of ace2 also appears to show some correlation with the sites of sars-cov infection and disease pathology. independently, xiao et al. [19] confirmed that ace2 was a sars-cov receptor and showed that the receptor-binding domain was probably located between residues 272 and 537 of the spike glycoprotein. farzan's group [20] has now established the recognition region within a 193 amino acid sequence (residues 318 -510) and smaller fragments were unable to bind ace2. a crucial aspartic acid in this region was essential for binding with ace2. modelling of the ace2 structure based on the known structure of ace has provided another approach to predicting potential binding contacts between ace2 and the sars-cov s protein [21] but ultimately experimental studies are essential to identify the nature of the interactions between these two proteins. the recent solution of the structure of ace2 [22] , which supports much of the earlier modelling of the active site of the enzyme [14] , should facilitate studies of ace2 and s protein interactions. two unexpected features of ace2 inhibitor binding arise from the structural studies [22] . first, inhibitor binding induced a large conformational change in the enzyme that the replicase attaches to the 3 0 end of the input genome and begins (e) replication of a full-length anti-genome and (f) synthesis of negative strand subgenomic rnas that serve as templates for the synthesis of (g) new genomic rna and (h) viral subgenomic mrnas (sgrnas), respectively. all coronavirus mrnas have conserved 5 0 ends (dark blue box) and are 3 0 co-terminal and polyadenylated. there are thought to be eight sgrnas produced in sars-cov infected cells; (i) some of these encode the viral structural proteins (shown here). (j) release of virus occurs after processing and assembly of virus particles in the golgi apparatus and rough endoplasmic reticulum. although primary replication occurs in the cytoplasm, recent evidence suggests that coronaviruses and related viruses use nuclear factors to facilitate the replication process [27] .nucleus cytoplasm aligns crucial residues for catalysis. second, the inhibitor binds to the enzyme in an inverse orientation from that predicted from the binding of the acei lisinopril to the active site of ace [22] . another zinc peptidase, aminopeptidase n (apn), acts as the receptor for several other coronaviruses [23] . again, with this receptor, its distribution can be correlated with sites of infection. however, apart from the zinc-binding region, apn and ace2 bear no discernible sequence homology and show a different membrane topology. several features probably facilitate the usurping of plasma membrane peptidases as viral receptors. they exist as ectoenzymes in which the bulk of the protein, including the catalytic domain, faces the extracellular space, and they are heavily glycosylated. they are also abundantly expressed on certain cell types: for example, apn constitutes . 5% of the membrane protein of the kidney brush border. the catalytic domain itself is not responsible for coronaviral interaction in either ace2 or apn because mutations of key active site residues do not affect viral infection. this probably reflects the fact that the catalytic site of ace2 is buried deep in a narrow cleft within the protein and is accessible only to the oligopeptide substrates of the enzyme.in a relatively short space of time, ace2 has gained prominence in several disease states and not just those of cardiovascular origin as originally predicted from its close similarity to ace. other physiological correlations for ace2 are also appearing. recently, for example, ace2 immunoreactivity in the kidney has been shown to double during pregnancy in rats, leading to the suggestion that ace2 might contribute to the localized overproduction of ang 1 -7 in the kidney observed in pregnancy, which might protect against rises in blood pressure [24] . it is therefore conceivable that deficient expression of ace2 might underlie pathological conditions of pregnancy such as pre-eclampsia.perhaps too much attention to date has focused on the ability of ace2 to produce ang 1 -7 from ang ii. future analysis of the physiological roles of ace2 needs to bear in mind that it can metabolize a range of biologically active peptides other than angiotensin-related peptides [14, 25] . for example, it can hydrolyse (des-arg9)-bradykinin, which is the endogenous ligand of the bradykinin b 1 receptor. in this context, the availability of potent and selective inhibitors of ace2 [12, 13] will provide valuable pharmacological tools for exploring the physiology and pathology of the enzyme. the therapeutic potential of ace2 inhibitors in cardiovascular-related diseases, however, is questionable given the apparent cardioprotective nature of ace2 activity; much further study is needed in this area. indeed, mechanisms for selectively increasing cardiac or renal ace2 levels might be desirable in some conditions; this will require an understanding of the factors that regulate its tissue-specific expression.the biggest surprise, however, was the identification of ace2 as a viral receptor [18] and, although current data are consistent with ace2 as a sars-cov receptor, there might be other receptors or co-receptors for this virus that are yet to be discovered. effective therapies against sars are urgently required should further major outbreaks occur. from studies on other coronaviruses, a vaccination approach might be viable, although not without limitations [26] . hence, soluble ace2 fragments or ace2 antibodies might provide alternative anti-viral therapeutic approaches, although the possible side-effects of blocking ace2 are unknown. indeed, infection by sars-cov might affect ace2 function adversely, which could in turn contribute to some of the pathology of the disease. given the ability of viruses to usurp cell-surface peptidases and the prevalence of ace in respiratory and other tissues, ace itself might have a role as a receptor for an as yet unidentified virus. the recent coronavirus pandemic crisis is due to viral infection of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), causing uncontrolled inflammatory conditions in the human lung. soon after the first transmission emergence of sars-cov from animals to humans in china in 2003 [1], a genetically evolved beta-coronavirus genus similar to human viruses was discovered in chinese horseshoe bats (rhinolophus sinicus) [2]. to date, pneumonia is epidemiologically caused by diverse viruses. for example, adenovirus, influenza virus, middle east respiratory syndrome virus (mers-v), parainfluenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), sars-cov and enteric enveloped cov can cause pneumonia in human hosts.the world health organization (who) reported the official terminology of the 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) on 13 january 2020, and on february 11th, who edited the name of the disease caused by 2019-ncov to coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19). in academia, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) provided official nomenclature to the virus as sars-cov-2 due to the similarity between the novel coronavirus and sars-cov [3]. sars-cov-2 is spreading and causing a global health-threatening emergency [4]. researchers have been in a race to develop anti-viral drugs against sars-cov-2 even before the who declared a worldwide pandemic threatening human lives. preventive and therapeutic drugs for patients infected with sars-cov-2 are yet to be discovered.the covs as enveloped forms can also infect the gastrointestinal track (git), although most other enteric viruses are naked in morphology [5,6]. covs can also rarely infect neural cells [7]. there is, unfortunately, no solid information on how the coronaviruses infect humans and animals with reciprocal infectivity and cause a zoonotic viral outbreak. this is in contrast to influenza viruses, which are known to selectively utilize sialic acid (sa) linkages [8]. currently, only limited information is available on β-covs, such as sars-cov and its receptor usage and infectible cell types from different species. host cell surface o-acetylated sas are recognized by the lectin-like spike proteins of sars cov-2 for the first step of attachment to host cells. infectious virus interaction with the host cell surface is mediated by sialoglycans as the most important phenomenon in eukaryote-parasite co-evolution. o-glcnac, a minor glycan source, is mainly found in the nucleus and cytosol (figure 1). apart from the general roles of glycans, covs recognize host cells and attach to host cell surface molecules to enter the host cells. for example, activity of the hemagglutinin-esterase (he) enzyme relies on the typical carbohydrate-binding lectin and receptor-destroying enzyme (rde) domains. most β-covs target 9-o-acetylated sas, but certain species have switched to recognizing 4-o-acetyl sa instead [8,9]. crystallographic data for the molecular structure of type ii he provides an explanation for the switching mechanism to acquire 4-o acetyl sa binding. this event follows the orthodox ligand–receptor interaction (lri), lectin–carbohydrate interaction (lci), lectin–glycan interaction (lgi), lectin–sphingolipid interaction (lsi), protein–glycan interaction (pgi), protein–carbohydrate interaction (pci), and also protein–protein interaction (ppi). recently, 332 protein candidates were suggested to be sars-cov-2-human protein interacting proteins through ppis. among these, 66 human proteins, as druggable host factors, were further characterized as possible fda-approvable drugs [10]. if ppi is involved, however, carbohydrates or glycans may serve as co-receptors or co-determinants. previous reports suggest that carbohydrates act as receptor determinants in most cases. the general principles of pci stereochemistry potentiate the sa–ligand switch by way of simple conformational shifts for the lectin and esterase domain. this indicates that our examination of natural adaptation should be directed to how carbohydrate-binding proteins measure and observe carbohydrates, leading to virus evolution toward transitional host tropism.the 9-carbon sas are mainly animal-specific with anionic sugars attached to terminal sugars. sas exist in two forms, neugc and neuac. neugc is a differentially modified form of the parental sa form, neu5ac. sas are structurally diverse. for example, several modified sa forms are known for their structures including neuraminic acid (neuc), n-acetyl neuraminic acid (neuac), n-glycolyl neuraminic acid (neugc), n,o-diacetyl neuraminic acid (occurs in horses), n,o-diacetyl neuraminic acid (occurs in bovines) and n-acetyl o-diacetyl neuraminic acid (occurs in bovines) (figure 2). sialyltransferases (sts) biosynthesize different sa linkages. sa linkage diversity occurs at the α2-3, α2-6, α2-8 or α2-9 to the sa or gal residues (figure 3). for example, in formation of α2,3 sa or α2,6 sa structures, α2,3-st and α2,6-st utilize substrates such as galβ-1,4-glcnac (figure 4). the most frequent modification of sas is o-acetylation at positions of c4, c7, c8 and c9 of sa (figure 5).mammal- and avian-infectible covs consist of the broad-ranged subfamily of coronavirinae. the ictv recommended classification is as follows: riboviria (realm)—nidovirales (order)— cornidovirineae (suborder)—coronavirida (family)—orthocoronavirinae—coronavirus genus. the four cov genera [11] are the α-cov, β-cov, γ-cov and δ-cov. the 2019-ncov or sars-cov-2 belong to the β-cov genus and are zoonotic and cause mammalian infection, causing respiratory disease in the human lung. the α-cov and β-cov genus target mammal hosts while the δ-cov and γ-cov genus target avians and certain mammals. the β-cov genus has a, b, c and d lineages. among these, lineage b includes sars-cov and sars-cov-2. lineage c includes mers-cov. the b lineage sars-cov and c lineage mers-cov, which are classified as β-covs, exhibit lethal rates of 10% and 35% in humans, respectively.covs in humans are associated with respiratory infections such as colds with clinical importance, as experienced for the previous outbreak in 2003 of sars-human cov (hcov), hcov-hku1 and hcov-nl63 [12,13]. human infectious hcov includes seven species, including α-cov (hcov-nl63 and hcov-229e) and β-cov (sars-cov, sars-cov-2, hcov-oc43, hcov-hku1 and mers-cov). cov rna sequences mutate at a high frequency. among the known rna viruses, covs bear the longest genome sizes of 26 to 32 kb length rna. nucleotide sequences of cov ssrna genomes isolated from covid-19 patients in wuhan show a high homology of 89% with the nucleotide sequence of the previously known bat sars-like cov-zxc-21 strain and 89% with the previous sars-cov. the initial wuhan cov isolates belong to the β-cov genus and were therefore termed sars-cov-2 or 2019-ncov [14]. sars-cov-2 infects human respiratory tracts and causes outbreaks of pneumonia. sars-cov-2 is a novel cov and originates from the wuhan district in china. the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 exhibits 79% sequence homology with the sars-cov rna sequence and 50% with the mers-cov sequence [15].in rna viruses, the s glycoprotein (pdb: 6vsb) is the biggest protein, heavily glycosylated and its n-terminal domain (ntd) sequence binds to the host receptor to enter the er of host cells. sars-cov-2 s-glycoprotein bears 22 n-glycan sequons in each protomer. therefore, the trimeric s glycoprotein surface is dominated by 66 n-glycans. the s glycoprotein mediates direct and indirect interaction of virus with host cells in the infection cycle. all covs exhibit a surface s glycoprotein, which bears the receptor-binding domain (rbd). the s glycoprotein has a distinct spike structure. when s glycoprotein binds to its host receptor, a host furin-like protease cleaves the s glycoprotein, which liberates the spike fusion peptides, allowing entry of the virus into the host cell [18]. the furin-like protease-generated s1 and s2 exist as a s1/s2 complex, where s1 in a homotrimeric form interacts with the host cell membrane and s2 penetrates the cytosolic area. for sars-cov and mers-cov, the s1 c-terminal domains (ctds) have a dual role in virus entry via attachment and fusion. the s1 ntd binds to carbohydrate receptors because the s1 domains act as the rbd. the ctd of s1 recognizes protein receptors via rbds.in rna viruses, the n protein recognizes the viral rna genome. the n protein (pdb: 6m3m) binds to the rna genome via the ntd and ctd. the n protein tethers to the viral rna and replicase–transcriptase complex (rtc). nsp3 (pdb: 6vxs) of cov blocks the innate immune responses of hosts. after entrance into the host cells, for cov transcription and particle release, rna chaperones such as nonspecific nucleic acid binding proteins potentiate ssrna conformation shifts. representatively, the n protein is known as the rna chaperone protein. for example, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (gsk3) phosphorylates the sars-cov n-protein and thus, gsk3 inhibition contributes to reduced replication activity of sars-cov [19]. in addition, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a1 (hnrnp a1) regulates the preformed mrna splicing in the nucleus and continuous translation. hnrnpa1 interacts with sars-cov n protein to form a replication and transcription complex during ssrna genome biosynthesis [20].e protein is the most abundant structural protein needed to assemble virus particles in the cytosol. as a tm protein, e protein is the smallest structural protein with a mw of 12 kda. the e protein has an ntd in the extracellular region and a ctd in the cytosolic region. the e protein bears an ectodomain in the ntd and an endodomain in the ctd. it has also an ion channel domain. e protein is present in the cytosolic region of infected cells and only a limited amount is incorporated into the envelope of virions [21]. most e proteins assemble and bud in new virus particles.the m protein contains three tm domains and is an abundant structural protein with a mw of 30 kda. it consists of a small glycosylated ntd in the extracellular region and ctd in the cytoplasmic region. the m protein forms a scaffold for virus assembly in the cytosol via binding to s glycoprotein and n protein [22]. for example, e protein and n protein are co-expressed with m protein to form virus-like particles (vlps) that are released from the cells, as the m and e protein are involved in cov assembly. then, covs bud into the ergic, trafficking by membrane vesicles and transported via the exocytosis-secretory pathway [23,24]. the dimeric m protein binds to the nucleocapsid.-m protein binds to s glycoprotein for s glycoprotein retention in the ergic/golgi complex. the m-n protein complex keeps the n protein–rna complex stable, for nucleocapsid and the viral assembly.-m and e proteins constitute the virus envelope for successful release of virus-like particles.he hemagglutinates and destroys receptors. as rna viruses, covs bear rdes, which are used in effective attachment to hosts and also reversely in detachment from the hosts. for example, enveloped rna viruses evade the hosts via their rdes. currently, rde-related functional enzymes such as neuraminidase (na) and sa-o-acetyl-esterase are known. sa-o-acetyl-esterase was originally identified in influenza c virus and in nidoviruses (cov and torovirus) as well as in salmon anemia virus (teleost orthomyxovirus). the origin and evolution of cov sa-o-acetylesterases are correlated to other viruses. the fusion event of s glycoprotein and he is specific for hcov attachment to sa-associated receptors in the host [25]. the he has acetylesterase activity [26]. in early sa-related biology, influenza a/b viruses were found to recognize chicken erythrocytes in 1942 [27]. they caused hemagglutination through clumping by virus-borne hemagglutinin. these phenomena were widely found in influenza viruses, paramyxoviruses, newcastle disease (ndv) and mumps virus.sas have various derivatives of more than 50 chemically different structures formed from the basic n-acetylneuraminic acid (neu5ac) on the main ring of pyranose and the glycerol side chain. sa are modified by acetyl-, lactyl-, methyl- and sulfo-groups individually or in multiple combinations [28]. multiple enzymes are involved in the modifications [29]. historically, the first discovered sa was crystallized by gunner blix via a hot mild acid extraction of bovine submaxillary mucin in 1936. it consisted of two acetyl groups. among these, only one acetyl group was attached to nitrogen [30]. blix isolated a 9-o-acetyl sa of the common sa n-acetylneuraminic acid (neu5ac), chemically described as 9-o-acetyl-n-acetylneuraminic acid (neu5,9ac2). neu5,9ac2, neu5ac and neu5gc are naturally occurring sa species in mammals. a common modification is o-acetylation. in fact, o-acetylation of sas is common in organisms.the o-acetyl modification occurs in single positions of c-4, c-7, c-8 and c-9 of sa as well as in combined c-positions to yield neu4,5ac2, neu5,9ac2 and neu5,7,9ac3 sas. neu5ac9nac is a chemical and biologic mimic of neu5,9ac2 in the sa-glycans. the c-7 and/or c-9 o-acetylations are catalyzed by the sa o-acetyltransferase enzyme, cas1 domain containing 1 (casd1) (figure 6). casd1 catalyzes the addition of acetyl groups to the sa c-7 at the late golgi apparatus compartment [31]. thereafter, an enzyme termed “migrase” transfers the additional acetyl-group from c-7 to c-9, although this enzyme has not been identified [29]. casd1 uses acetyl-coenzyme a as a donor substrate and cmp-neu5ac as an acceptor substrate, but with weak activity on cmp-neu5gc.biologically, the sa o-acetylation event confers merits to hosts such as protection from pathogenic invasion and maintenance of systemic self-homeostasis. the o-acetylation event of sas protects the sa-containing glycans from neuraminidase (na)/sialidase action, because o-acetyl-groups inhibit microbial na activity. the chemical structure of the o-acetyl group is quite unstable and susceptible to esterase enzymes. sialic acid cleavage of the di-acetylated neu5,7,9ac3 by bacterial nas decreases two-fold, when compared to mono-o-acetylated neu5ac. the o-acetylated glycan modification invites interaction with viruses, antibodies and mammalian lectins [32]. therefore, the sa o-acetylation modification confers specific functions to organisms.for example, in the horse, c4-o-acetyl modification of neu5ac (sa) occupies more than 50% of the total sa content. the c4-o-acetylated neu5ac, neu4,5ac2, inhibits the influenza a2 virus ha. de-acetylation reagents such as naoh or naio4 treatment completely hemagglutinate neu4,5ac2 by elimination of the c4-o-acetyl group [33]. the c4-o-acetyl neu5ac species are found in various sources such as equine erythrocyte gm3, starfish a. rubens and fish [34,35,36,37,38]. c4-o-acetylated neu5ac facilitates the initial attachment of viruses to target cells. like the influenza c virus, infectious salmon anemia virus (isav), a member of the orthomyxoviridae family, contains he and hef proteins to mediate virus entry and exit. c4-o-ac neu5ac is the major receptor determinant of isav in receptor binding and destruction [38], while the influenza c virus recognizes c9-o-ac neu5ac. the acetylesterase rde of isav cleaves c4-o-ac via 4-sa-o-acetylesterase with a short turnover time, whereas c9-o-ac neu5ac is cleaved by 9-sa-o-acetylesterase with a long turnover time [34].the position of sa o-acetylation is linked to functions including substrate differentiation of enzymes such as nas and esterase by c4 o-ac. previous development of o-ac site-selective na inhibitors were based on the conceptual consideration of different o-ac positions. the o-ac of sas is site-specific, as c4 of neu5ac is considered to be a potential position for modification. historically, inhibitors of influenza a and b viruses-sialidases were designed by von-itzstein in 1993 [39]. the ac group-based c4 substitution interacts with amino acid glu-119 present in the active site of sialidase. guanidine-attached c4 of c2–c3 unsaturated sa (neu5ac2en) inhibits activity of sialidases isolated from influenza a virus (singapore/1/57) and b virus (victoria/102/85). the same scenario was applied for sialidase inhibition of the human parainfluenza virus type 3, which has hn and fusion proteins [40]. the c4 of neu5ac2en was substituted by alkyl groups such as the o-ethyl group. for example, zanamivir has a substitution with a 4-guanidino group with an ic50 of 25 μm. thus, sialidase inhibition is important for c4 modification of neu5ac2en. later, oseltamivir with the tradename tamiflu (basel, switzerland) and zanamivir with the tradename relenza (london, uk) were established [41]. these drugs exhibit some adverse side effects that restrict clinical use.the sa 9-o-acetylation in hosts allows hosts to evade influenza a virus hemagglutinin (ha) recognition and some lectins of factor h (fh), cd22/siglec-2 and sialoadhesin/siglec-1. instead, the influenza c virus ha recognizes the hosts. β-elimination and permethylation eliminate the 9-o-acetyl group from sas. chemical modification of the c-9 position of neu5,9ac2 generates a 9-n-acetyl analog, 9-acetamido-9-deoxy-n-acetylneuraminic acid (neu5ac9nac), a mimic of neu5,9ac2 with influenza c virus-binding capacity, which is not cleaved by the he [42]. sa o-acetylesterase regulates the presence of 7,9-o-ac and 9-o-ac. sa o-acetylation and deacetylation are involved in development, cancer and immunology. sa o-acetylation alters host lectin bindings such as siglecs [29]. the presence of 9-o-ac can also reduce the activity of nas [43]. sa modifications regulate pathogen binding or pathogen nas. influenza a/b/c/d viruses use sa as their entry receptors. influenza a and b subtypes bind to sas via ha and na to allow endocytosis of the virus and fusion of the viral envelope with endosomes. in contrast, influenza c and d subtypes bear only one coated glycoprotein, termed the he fusion protein (hef). the hef acts as the ha and na. hef recognizes 9-o-acetyl sa for entry into cells, while the esterase domain removes 9-o-acetyl-groups and liberates the virus from mucus and mis-assembled virus aggregates after budding. the 9-o-ac on cells prevents the na activity and ha binding of the influenza a type virus [44].influenza a and b viruses bear two spikes of receptor-binding ha and na [45].hef is indeed an ancient type of sa-o-acetylesterase. in contrast to a/b, the influenza c virus bears one spike with triple functions of hef as a homotrimer [46]. each hef subunit bears two neu5,9ac2-binding sites and binds to the 9-o-acetyl group. in parallel, another modification of o-acetylation is found. indeed, influenza c virus bears sa-o-acetylesterase [47], which converts 5-n-acetyl-9-o-neuac (neu5,9ac2) to 5-neu5ac. the 9-o-acetyl sa is a unique determinant for the influenza c virus receptor and neu5,9ac2 is crucial for receptor activity, but not neu5gc or neu5ac [48]. neu5,9ac2 is an essential determinant for influenza virus c type-specific host cell tropism. nas cleave the α-ketosidic linkages to the d-gal or galnac. sa-o-acetylesterases cleave different o-acetyl linkages (figure 5). the oh-group of tyr224 and the guanidino group of arg236 interact with the ch3co-carbonyl oxygen [49]. hef sa-o-acetylesterase is found in several enveloped (+) ssrna viruses of influenza c virus and also in certain covs and toroviruses [47]. the covs are different from the orthomyxoviruses, which hold a segmented (−) ssrna genome and are instead evolutionary linked to the family coronaviridae, order nidovirales [45].covs and toroviruses of the coronaviridae family are specific for the o-ac sa receptors. their s and he glycoproteins are similar to influenza c virus hef. covs and all toroviruses bear he gene form class i envelope membrane proteins of about 400 amino acid residues which bear 7 to 12 n-glycosylation sites [50]. he multimer forms enter virions. bovine cov (bcov) and hcov-oc43, similar to influenza c virus, recognize neu5,9ac2 and bear sa-9-o-acetylesterase [8]. cov hes are all o-acetylesterases. the he enzymes found in torovirus, cov and influenza c virus are evolutionarily interspecies-mutated with about 30% homology by heterologous rna recombination [51] and horizontal gene transfer. therefore, viral hes are diverse and widespread over evolution.hes as envelope proteins are found in covs, orthomyxoviruses and toroviruses. coronaviral hes are involved in virus attachment to sa species. he protein in β-covs binds to neu5,9ac2 form sa and agglutinates the red blood cells (rbcs) of rodents [52]. as with sa-o-acetylesterase, he potentiates viral entry with the s protein and spreading via the mucosal glycans. it contains a carbohydrate-recognizing domain (crd) known in lectin. the he glycan-binding domain (gbd) mediates virus attachment to sas on host cells. he is the only ha. this indicates that compared to the s glycoprotein, he is only minor a ha and the s glycoprotein mainly attaches to the cell surface. the he protein of murine hepatitis virus (mhv), an enveloped cov, binds to sa-4-acetylester or sa-9-o-acetylester of the carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 1a (ceacam; known as cd66a) as the key receptor [53]. murine covs hes acquired by horizontal gene transfer, bind to c9-o-ac neu5ac. however, some murine cov hes cannot bind to c4-o-ac neu5ac. the original mouse mhv he binds to c9-o-ac neu5ac, while the mhv s-strain he evolutionarily acquired the ability to bind to c4-o-ac neu5ac [12,53,54]. in terms of structure, the c5 n- and c9 o-ac neu5ac-accomodating hydrophobic pocket was shifted to a c5 n- and c4-o-ac neu5ac-accomodating pocket [55].type i he is specific for the 9-o-acetylated sas (9-o-ac-sas). type ii he is specific for 4-o-ac-sas. the sa-binding shift indicates quasi-synchronous adaptations of the sa-recognition sites of the lectin and esterase domains. type i he monomers of β-cov lineage a have a bimodular enzyme–lectin domain similar to cellular glycan/carbohydrate-modifying proteins. originally, he homologs are found in various viruses including toroviruses and orthomyxoviruses such as the influenza virus c/d and isavirus, as well as the exceptional case of β-cov lineage a among covs. the he gene was transmitted to a β-cov lineage a progenitor via horizontal gene transfer from a 9-o-ac-sia–recognizing hef, as shown in influenza virus c/d. he acquisition and expansion occurred by cross-species transmission over he evolution and this phenomenon reflects viral evolutionary adaptation to host sa-containing glycans. therefore, cov he receptor switching precedes virus evolution driven by sa-containing glycan diversity of hosts. for instance, the bcov he prefers 7,9-di-o-ac-sas, which is also a target of the bovine torovirus he. for a more outstanding case, such a switching event occurred in the murine covs for the β-cov lineage a type switch toward o-ac-sa recognition. in the he specificity of murine covs, two different murine cov subtypes of virus group exist with one subtype possessing the typical 9-o-ac-sa (type i) attachment factor and the other exclusively 4-o-ac-sa (type ii) attachment virus group [56].the first coronaviral he proteins identified were from the porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (phev), bcov and hcov-oc43, which bear sa-9-o-acetylesterases similar to hef [8]. rat cov (rcov) has sa-4-o-acetylesterases, converting neu4,5ac2 to neu5ac [53,57,58]. some murine covs prefer 4-o-ac-sas and others 9-o-ac-sas. hcov-oc43 and bcov prefer α2-6-sa 9-o-acetylation by their sa-o-acetyleseterases. the s glycoproteins of bcov and hcov-oc43 are neu5,9ac2-recognizing lectins and agglutinate murine, rat and chicken erythrocytes due to the enriched 9-o-ac-sa species [52]. bcov and hcov-oc43 adapted to sa receptor determinants of 9-o-ac-sa receptors [59]. for a second receptor, the binding of s glycoprotein to neu5,9ac2 receptor is essential for entry into cells. bcov-infection is prevented by prior treatment of cells with na enzyme or with viral sa-o-acetylesterases, blocking the roles of he and s glycoprotein in sa-dependent entry to host cells.in α-covs such as tgev, ha-activity is attributed to the sa-recognizing activity to α2,3-neugc [61,62]. the sa-binding site is present on the n-terminal region of the s-glycoprotein of tgev. tgev has two types with enteric and respiratory tropism. the respiratory tgev has the porcine aminopeptidase n (papn)-binding domain and sa-binding domain. nucleotide 655 of the s gene is essential for enteric tropism and the s219a mutation of the s glycoprotein confers the enteric to respiratory tropism shift. in addition, a 6-nucleotide insertional mutation at nucleotide 1124, which yields the y374-t375insnd shift of the s glycoprotein, causes enhanced enteric tract tropism. tgev interacts with sa species on mucin-like glycoprotein (mgp), a highly glycosylated protein, in an sa-dependent manner, on mucin-secreting goblet cells [6]. mgp sa-binding allows virus entry via the mucus layer to the intestinal enterocytes. different from tgev, the s glycoprotein of porcine cov has no hemagglutination activity due to deletion of the sa-binding site of the s glycoprotein [61]. the loss of sa-binding activity is correlated to the non-enteropathogenicity. sas function as ha-mediated entry determinants for tgev, causing the enteropathogenic outcome of the virus, and sa-recognition activity is also responsible for virus amplification in cells. sa-binding activity-deficient tgev can propagate in cells through papn, known as cd13, as a receptor [62,63]. the sa-binding activity potentiates infection and is crucial for intestinal infection.in β-cov, he mediates viral attachment to o-ac-sas and its function relies on the combined cbd and rde domains. most β-covs target 9-o-ac-sas (type i), but certain strains switched to alternatively targeting 4-o-ac-sas (type ii). for example, the sa-acetylesterase enzyme in bcovs and hcov-oc43 is known to have hemagglutinizing activities as a type of sa-9-o-acetylesterase [8]. the sa-acetylesterase is the he surface glycoprotein in bcov. the three-dimensional structure of bcov he is similar to other viral esterases [9]. the he gene is found only in the β-cov genus. the acetylesterase of murine covs differs in its substrate binding specificity from that of bcov and hcov-oc43, which is specific for o-acetyl residue release from sa c-9. murine covs prefer to esterize 4-o-acetyl-neuac [64]. the β-cov acetylesterase destroys the receptors and this specificity is similar to that of influenza viruses. acetylesterase activity can be inhibited by diisopropyl fluorophosphate and this agent decreases viral infection levels [65]. as deduced from the sa acetylesterase of hcov-oc43 [8], the 9-o-ac-sa species is a receptor binding determinant for erythrocytes and entry into cells [59]. the bcov he protein has dual activity of acetylesterase and ha [9]. bcov widely agglutinates erythrocytes and purified he only agglutinates neu5,9ac2-enriched erythrocytes of rats and mice. bcov and hcov-oc43 can agglutinate chicken erythrocytes, while purified he cannot. in contrast to the he protein, purified s glycoprotein can agglutinate chicken erythrocytes [52], indicating that the major ha is the s protein which acts as the major sa-binding protein. however, the role of o-ac-sas is not certain to be essential in receptors, and sa-binding activity may be essential only to the he protein, but not to the s glycoprotein [54].in γ-covs, ibv strains, known as poultry respiratory infectious pathogens, can agglutinate erythrocytes. ibv prefers to recognize α2,3-neuac and the sa functions as a host entry receptor for infection [66]. glycosylation of ibv m41 s1 protein rbd is crucial for interaction with chicken trachea tissue and rbd n-glycosylation confers receptor specificity and enables virus replication. the heavy glycosylated m41 rbd has 10 glycosylation sites. n-glycosylation of ibv determines receptor specificity. however, the host receptor has not yet been found. na treatment reduces the binding of soluble s to kidney and tracheal epithelial cells. the ibv s protein recognizes epithelial cells in a sa-dependent manner. the sa-binding ability of ibv is necessary for infection of tracheal epithelial cells and lung respiratory epithelial cells [67]. the sa-binding site is located on s1 of the ibv s protein, although the ibv-specific protein receptor is not known. in contrast to bcov or hcov-oc43, ibv lacks an rde. sa binding of ibv is likely more essential than in other viruses such as tgev.in torovirus, which belongs to the family coronaviridae, the toroviruses are grouped into the torovirinae subfamily and the torovirus genus. the known toroviruses can infect four species of hosts, constituting bovine, equine, porcine and human toroviruses. they mildly infect swine and cattle through the he protein, which is similar to the β-cov he protein [68]. the he protein is a class i membrane glycoprotein which forms homodimers with a mw of 65 kda. the rde protein he reversibly binds to glycans [15] through binding to sas. the acetyl-esterase activity disrupts sa binding. he hemagglutinates mouse erythrocytes and cleaves the acetyl-ester linkage of glycans and acetylated synthetic substrate p-nitrophenyl acetate (pnpa) [69]. similar to cov, torovirus he is an acetylesterase type, which cleaves the o-acetyl group from the sa c-9 position using neu5,9ac2 and n-acetyl-7(8),9-o-neuac [64]. however, torovirus he exhibits a restricted specificity for the neu5,9ac2 substrate, but not for the neu5,7(8),9ac3 substrate, with a unique sa-binding site generated by a single amino acid difference in porcine thr73 and bovine ser64 for each he [70].the s glycoprotein sars-cov-2 initiates infection of the host cells. the molecular basis of cov attachment to sugar/glycan receptors is an important issue, as demonstrated by recent cryo-em defining the structure of the cov-oc43 s glycoprotein trimer complexed with a 9-o-acetylated sa [56]. cryo-em structures of the trimeric ectodomain of s glycoprotein were observed using forms complexed with neu5ac, neu5gc, sialyl–lewisx (slex), α2,3-sialyl-n-acetyl-lactosamine (α2,3-slacnac) and α2,6-slacnac, respectively. the receptor-binding site is commonly conserved in all cov s glycoproteins, which attach to 9-o-ac-sa species with similar ligand-binding pockets to the cov hes and influenza virus c/d hef glycoproteins, indicating conserved recognizing structures [25]. the s glycoprotein-9-o-acetyl-sa interaction resembles the ligand-binding pockets of cov hes and influenza virus c/d he fusion glycoproteins. hcov-oc43 and bcov recognize 9-o-ac-sa. s glycoproteins engage 9-o-acetyl-sas. the 9-o-acetyl sas are the binding site for hcov-oc43 s glycoprotein and related β-1 cov s glycoproteins, however sa-binding sites on the 9-o-acetyl sialyl receptors of mers-cov s glycoprotein and hcov-oc43 s glycoprotein are different [71]. thus, covs use two different entry and attachment receptors. therefore, s glycoproteins of covs are distinct from influenza virus a has, which bind to the neu5ac species by conserved binding sites. the ligand-binding sites of bcov he enzyme, influenza hef enzyme and cov s glycoprotein have evolved 9-o-ac-sa binding through hydrogen bonding with the 9-o-acetyl carbonyl group and hydrophobic pocket formation with the 9-o-acetyl methyl group [71,72]. however, influenza ha cannot bind to 9-o-acetyl-sas but can bind to neugcs [73]. the hcov-oc43 s glycoprotein, hcov-hku1 s glycoprotein, bcov s glycoprotein and phev s glycoprotein, therefore, share the ligand-binding specificity of influenza c/d hef enzyme, although they are functionally more similar to influenza virus a/b ha, whereas cov he or influenza virus a/b na have rde activitiescov hes are functionally similar to influenza virus c/d hef glycoproteins. in cov, the s glycoprotein recognizes the 9-o-ac-sa sugar, while the he acts as the rde enzyme with sa-o-acetyl-esterase activity to release virions from infected host cells. for example, hcov-oc43 also has a similar he as an rde [71]. in influenza c and d viruses, hef glycoproteins act similarly to the cov he [74]. in influenza a virus, rde na releases virions from host cells. however, mers-cov does not have a similar enzyme and thus mer-cov binding to sa receptors is mediated by energetically reversible interactions of the lipid rafts with increased sa receptors [75], thus enhancing dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) or carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 5 (ceacam5) recognition power and viral entry [76] and membrane-associated 78-kda glucose-regulated protein (grp78) [77].mers-cov s glycoprotein can hemagglutinate human erythrocytes and mediates virus entry into human respiratory epithelial cells. mers-cov s glycoprotein attachment is not observed for 9-o-acetylated or 5-n-glycolyl sas, but is observed for α2,3-sa linkage over α2,6-sa linkages. sa-binding sites of mers-cov s glycoprotein and hcov-oc43 s glycoprotein are not conserved [78], although they engage α2,3-sas on the avian host cell surface [79]. mers-cov recognizes α2,3-sa and to a lesser extent the α2,6-sas and sulfated slex for binding preference. thus, s glycoproteins may have independently evolved sa recognition. the acquisition of sa-binding ability of mers-cov s seems to be an evolutionarily recent event, because hku4 s1 and hku5 s1 cannot hemagglutinate human erythrocytes [75], indicating flexible evolutionary exchange allowing cross-species transmission towards host cell tropism of covs. in conclusion, cov recognition of 9-o-ac-sas for infection is based on a conserved sequence for engagement of sa-related carbohydrate ligands across covs and orthomyxoviruses.sars-cov-2 needs ace2 for entry. host proteases such as human ace2 help viral entry through removement of a barrier to enter human cells through unknown receptors. human ace2 is known for its role as the sars-cov-2 entry receptor and the sars-cov receptor. the enzyme ace-2 in the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is associated with cov entry into lungs. ace2 mediates sars-2002 entry into host cells via s glycoprotein interaction with the ace2 receptor. the ace2 levels on the plasma membrane correlate with virus infectivity. ace2 expression is present in most tissues such as the lung epithelium. it is highly expressed by respiratory epithelial cells and type i/ii lung alveolar epithelial cells [88]. the host receptor is not linked to the classification of covs. mers-cov, a β-cov, does not recognize the ace2 receptor. in contrast, the α-cov hcov-nl63 recognizes the ace2 receptor. ace2 is a membrane-anchored carboxypeptidase with 805 amino acid residues and is captopril-insensitive. it contains 17 amino acid residues as a signal peptide in the n-terminal region, a type i membrane-anchored domain in the c-terminal region, an extracellular n-terminal domain with heavy n-glycans, a n-terminal sars-cov-binding and carboxypeptidase site and a short c-terminal cytoplasmic tail. the ace2 gene is located on chromosome xp22. two ace2 forms are known, a membrane-bound form and a soluble form.ace cleaves angiotensin i (ang i) substrate to ang ii. ang ii recognizes the ang ii receptor type 1 (at1r), contributing to systemic and local vasoconstriction, fibrosis and salt retention in vascular organs. ace2 has the opposite function of ace. ace2 is a close homolog to human ace. ace2 activity on ang ii is about 400-fold higher than that on ang i. ang-1 to ang-7 recognize the g protein-coupled receptor (gpcr) mas to activate vasorelaxation, cardioprotection, antioxidative action, antiinflammation and anti-ang ii-signaling. therefore, the ace2-ang-1 to ang-7 axis is a target candidate for cardiovascular diseases. ace2 shows similar binding structures between ncov and sars-cov. the three proteins of ace, ang ii and at1r contribute to progression of lung injury in humans. ace2 removes a single amino acid residue from ang ii to yield the vasodilator, named ang 1-ang 7. ace2 cleaves ang-i to ang 1–ang 9 and ang ii to ang-1 to ang-7. the biggest difference between ace2 and ace is that ace2 has a non-inhibitory property by ace inhibitors.pulmonary ace2 is potentially a candidate target in cov-involved inflammatory pathogenesis. if ace inhibitors and ang ii-at1 blockers are dosed, ace2 expression is increased. however, currently we have no conclusive evidence that the inhibitors help sars-cov or sars-cov-2 entry. rather, sars-cov infection reduces ace2 expression. therefore, sars-cov-2 host tropism is not related to ace2 expression. ace2 levels and ang ii/ang 1–7 levels regulate the pathogenic progression. ace2 expression is upregulated by gene polymorphisms and ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor blockers such as sartans.a disintegrin and metallopeptidase domain (adam) family of zn-metalloproteinases belongs to membrane proteins. the well-known adam17 is a tnf-α-converting enzyme (tace), called the sheddase for tnf-α. other adam sheddase family members include adam9, adam10 and adam12. adam17 mediates ace2 shedding. sars-cov s glycoprotein activates cellular tace and consequently facilitates virus entry. soluble ace2 as the n-terminal carboxypeptidase domain form is derived from the original ace2 form by an adam17 metalloprotease in the membrane [89]. adam17 is indeed an enzyme that can convert membrane type pro-tnf-α to soluble tnf-α, a functional proinflammatory cytokine. therefore, adam17 inhibition indicates an anti-inflammatory response and adam17 inhibitors are promising candidates for tnf-α-induced inflammatory diseases. the short c-terminal domain of ace2 is removed by adam17 and tmprss2. however, tmprss2 cleaves ace2 competitively with the adam17 metalloprotease. sars-s protein-ace2 binding leads to adam17/tnf-α-converting enzyme (tace)-cleavage of ace2, facilitating extracellular ace2 shedding and consequent sars-cov entry into host cells [90,91]. only tmprss2 cleavage allows sars-cov entry into host cells through endocytosis and fusion. soluble ace2 also recognizes the virus and prevents sars-cov-2 infection. sars-cov-2 infection requires membrane ace2 and tmprss2. the ace2–b0at1 complex binds to the s glycoprotein of sars-cov-2. intestinal membrane ace2 and lung tmprss2-shedded ace2 can act as alternative entry sites for sars-cov-2. sars-cov-2 infects the lungs and intestine via tmprss2-cleaved ace2. if tmprss2 is engaged in sars-cov-2 entry and ace2 downregulation, tmprss2 inhibition would lead to covid-19 prevention. although ace2 is expressed both in type i and type ii lung alveolar epithelial cells, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 target only type ii epithelial cells due to the ace2–tmprss2 interaction. therefore, supplementation of ace2 (soluble ace2) or ang-1 to ang-7 should be a way to reduce sars-cov-2-related symptoms.tmprss2-cleaved ace2 is involved in sars-cov and mers-cov infections. sars-cov-2 uses ace2 for cell entry through tmprss2 priming of the s glycoprotein (figure 7). infection of the h7n9 influenza and h1n1 influenza a subtype viruses are also mediated by tmprss2-cleaved ace2. this implies that tmprss2 can be targeted as a strategic antiviral therapy [92]. transmembrane protease serine 2, termed tmprss2, a type ii tm ser protease (ttsp), also cleaves ace2. the human tmprss2 gene, located on chromosome 21, comprises androgen receptor elements (ares) in the upstream 5′-flanking region [93]. tmprss2 expression is regulated in an androgen-dependent manner. the tmprss2 gene encodes 492 amino acids. the original form is cleaved into the major membrane form and the minor soluble form. tmprss2 activates protease activated receptor 2 (par-2) and activated par-2 upregulates matrix metalloproteinase-2 (mmp-2) and mmp-9. tmprss2-activated hepatocyte growth factor (hgf) induces c-met receptor signaling. tmprss2 activates sars-cov and mers-cov. the sars-cov s glycoprotein is cleaved by host-borne tmprss2, human airway trypsin-like protease (hat), tm protease, serine 13 (mspl), serine protease desc1 (desc1), furin, factor xa and endosomal cathepsin l/b. sars-cov can enter cells upon cleavage by protease tmprss2 or endosomal cathepsin l/b [90]. virus s protein precursor is cleaved by host proteases. the spikes are cleaved by endosomal cathepsin and by golgi or plasma membrane tmprss2 in the step of assembly or attachment and release. the serine protease inhibitor camostat effectively blocks lethal sars-cov infection to mice. however, serine protease and cathepsin inhibitors are not effective. thus, tmprss2 is suggested to be an acting protease for sars-cov entry into host cells, but not by cathepsin. cis-cleavage liberates sars-cov s glycoprotein fragments into the extracellular supernatant. trans-cleavage activates the sars-cov s glycoprotein on the target cells, potentiating efficient sars-cov s glycoprotein-driven viral fusion. tmprss2-activated sars-cov facilitates enveloped virus entry into cells. tmprss2 is important for sars-cov entry and infection [81,94,95,96].the fact that sars- and mers-cov infections are potentiated by tmprss2 indicates that tmprss2 is a promising target for therapeutic agents. for example, several ser protease inhibitors such as camostat mesylate inhibit tmprss2–ace2-involved sars-cov-2 entry. camostat, a serine protease inhibitor, reduces influenza virus titers in cell culture. camostat-treated tmprss2 inhibition in calu-3 cells greatly reduces sars-cov viral titers and improves survival rate in sars-cov infected mice. a treatment of 10-μm camostat blocks mers-cov entry to african green monkey kidney (vero)-tmprss2 cells and blocks viral rna synthesis in calu-3 cells upon mers-cov infection. aprotinin is a polypeptide with 58 amino acid residues that was isolated from bovine lungs. another serine protease inhibitor, nafamostat, inhibits mers-cov entry and infection by tmprss2 inhibition [93]. nafamostat mesylate blocks the tmprss2–ace2-involved sars-cov-2 envelope–pm fusion and prevents sars-cov-2 entry [95]. nafamostat mesylate inhibits viral entry and thrombosis in covid-19 patients. similarly, an fda-approved mucolytic cough suppressant, bromhexine hydrochloride (bhh), inhibits tmprss2 (ic50 0.75 μm) and hence blocks infection of cov and influenza virus. mprss2 as a host factor plays a pivotal role in sars-cov and mers-cov infections. fda-approved tmprss2 inhibitors are yet under development. because tmprss2 mediates efficient viral entry and replication, it should be a promising target for new therapeutics against cov infection.the ser exopeptidase dpp-4/human cd26 (pdb: 4l72), a type ii tm ectopeptidase, functions as a host cell receptor for mers-cov. the rbd structure was characterized by crystallography approaches of the mers-cov s glycoprotein–dpp4 complex. dpp4 is a single type ii tm glycoprotein with a small cytoplasmic tail in the n-terminal region and is present as a homodimeric form. dpp4 cleaves x-proline dipeptides from the n-terminal region. s glycoprotein recognizes sa species and dpp44 as the attachment and entry receptors, respectively. the mers-cov s1 n-terminal domain attaches to dpp4 as the host receptor [81]. the s2 c-terminal domain of mers-cov anchors to cellular pm to enter. mers-cov s glycoprotein is cleaved at a sequence between the s1 and s2 domains [96]. another cleavage site s2′ is present in the s2 domain. mers cov s glycoprotein sialyl receptors are expressed in the camel nasal respiratory epithelial cells and the human lung alveolar epithelial cells, which express dpp4. binding capacities are hindered by the sa 9-o-acetyl group or sa 5-n-glycolyl group [75].entry of host cells needs binding of s glycoproteins to the ceacam receptor, forming s-protein-mediated membrane fusion. the trimeric s glycoprotein bears three s1 receptor heads. the three s1 heads of the virus bind to three receptor molecules on the host cell. cholesterol is indirectly involved in membrane fusion through ceacam engagement into “lipid raft” microdomains, increasing multiple s protein interaction with the receptors and triggering membrane fusion [97]. the enveloped cov, mhv, binds to ceacams on cholesterol-depleted cells in bhk cell cultures. the ntd of s1 recognizes ceacam1. for mers-cov, another ceacam5 isoform is the attachment factor for virus entry [75]. the cov s1 ntd has a similar tertiary structure to human galactose-recognizing galectins. mhv s1 ntd binds murine ceacam1a and bcov s1 ntd binds sugar [98,99,100]. ceacam1a is a cell adhesion protein (cam) and its mrna is alternatively spliced. the cryo-em structure of mhv s complexed with ceacam1a was elucidated [101]. thus, hcovs evolutionarily combined the galectin gene of hosts into their s1 glycoprotein gene, while bcov s1 protein is present without such gene recombination but contains the sugar-recognizing lectin capacity. mhv s1 protein also evolutionarily acquired murine ceacam1a-recognizing activity [102]. therefore, covs are under evolution to adapt their host receptor interaction to infect cross-species hosts [80,103]. on the host side, to escape the lethal pressure from cov infections, hosts have also evolved to acquire sa-binding proteins such as siglecs to inhibit or activate the innate immune cells.both raft and non-raft ceacams are involved in the virus–cell membrane fusion event. formation of ceacam-associated mhv particles or ceacam-induced mhv fusion is possible by gpi-anchored ceacams through the binding between ceacam and s proteins. however, mhv can bind to both gpi- and tm-anchored ceacams. in addition, soluble ceacams also mediate s glycoprotein-driven fusion [104]. this implies that membrane anchors are not intrinsically necessary. in fact, ceacams are present in different tissue-specific isoforms [105]. nevertheless, gpi-anchored ceacams are more effective for mhv infection than tm-anchored ceacams. soluble ceacam receptors can bind to viral s glycoproteins and induce conformational shifts to acceptable s glycoprotein-involved membrane fusions [106]. for example, soluble ceacam forms interacts with s1 fragments [107] and alters the s1–s2 association stability [108] and s1 oxidation confirmation [109]. s proteins are structurally shifted prior to membrane fusion. for the cross-linking of viruses and cells, integral hydrophobic peptides of the s2 chain are embedded into membranes via membrane hydrophobic cholesterols.mers-cov s glycoprotein also recognizes a 78-kda glucose–regulated protein (grp78) or heat shock 70 kda protein 5 (hspa5), known as binding immunoglobulin protein (bip) or byun1, which is encoded by the hspa5 gene in humans. hsp5a is a er-resident unfolded protein response (upr) protein. stressed cell status such as viral infection increase expression and translocation of hspa5 to the pm to form a membrane protein complex. grp78 modulates mers-cov entry in the presence of the dpp4 as a host cell receptor. additionally, lineage d β-cov and bat cov hku9 (bcov-hku9) also bind to grp78 [76]. a cell surface receptor, grp78, was predicted to be another covid-19 receptor as an s glycoprotein binding site [110]. the prediction was made using the combined technology of molecular modeling docking with structural bioinformatics. grp78 or bip is a chaperone protein located in the er lumen [111]. known er-bound enzymes include activating transcription factor 6 (atf6), inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (ire1) and protein kinase rna (pkr)-like er kinase (perk) [112]. depending on threshold of unfolded protein accumulation, grp78 releases ire1, atf6 and perk, and is activated, resulting in translation inhibition and refolding. stress-overexpressed grp78 can avoid er retention and is translocated to the membrane. grp78 translocated to the cell pm can recognize viruses by its substrate-binding domain (sbd) for virus entry into the cell (figure 8). in sequence and structural alignments and protein–protein docking, rbd of the cov spike protein recognizes the grp78 sbdβ as the host cell receptor. the predicted region iii (c391–c525) and region iv (c480–c488) of the s glycoprotein and grp78 are highly potential binding sites. region iv is the grp78 binding-driving force. these nine amino acid residues are being molecularly targeted for the designation and simulation of covid-19-specific drugs. this process is the mechanism underlying the cell surface hspa5 (grp78) exposure and this is exploited to be used for pathogen entry. such pathogenic entry into host cells has been observed in multiple infections including pathogenic human viruses such as human papillomavirus, ebola virus, zika virus and hcovs—as well as fungal rhizopus oryzae [113,114,115,116]. therefore, natural products can inhibit cell-surface hspa5 recognition of the viral s glycoprotein.among the six hcovs, the α-cov hcov-229e s protein recognizes hapn known as cd13 or membrane alanyl aminopeptidase (ec 3.4.11.2). porcine epidemic diarrhea coronavirus virus (pedv) binds to protein receptor apn of human- and pig neuac species as its co-receptor. apart from hapn, tgev and pedv bind to sa species [117], although sa recognition by tgev is not essential in the first step of entry cycle. hcov-229e recognizes hapn known as cd13 for its entry receptor. hapn (pdb: 4fyq) or cd13 (ec 3.4.11.2), which is a zn-dependent metalloprotease, has a mw 150 kda with 967 amino acids. cd13 is a type ii tm protein with a short cytoplasmic domain in the n-terminal region and long extracellular region in the ctd. the ctd has a pentapeptide sequence specific for the zinc–mmps. the apn binding domain is located on the ctd of pedv s1 (amino acid 477–629 residues), while the sa-binding domain is found in the n-terminal region of pedv s1 (amino acid 1–320 residues) [118]. cd13 is also a receptor for hcov-229e, human cytomegalovirus, porcine cov tgev, feline infectious peritonitis virus (fipv), feline enteric virus (fecv) and canine-infectious covs [119,120,121,122]. homodimeric cd13 digests luminal peptides. the hapn-encoding anpep gene is a dominant component in proximal tubular epithelial cells, small intestinal cells, macrophages, granulocytes and synaptic membranes. if this gene is defective, leukemia or lymphoma are transformed [123]. porcine and human apn exhibit about 80% protein identity. fipv and fecv are in the same group as hcov-229e and tgev. thus, porcine apn is also an attachment site for pig tgev with an additional second receptor. hcov-229e first binds to cd13 and consequently clusters cd13 in caveolae-associated lipid rafts [120].for glycan interaction, hcov-nl63 and mhv utilize heparan sulfate proteoglycans (hspgs) as attachment enhancers [87,124]. viruses recognize hspgs as attachment molecules. in the spike (s) protein-deficient virions, the m protein recognizes hspg. the s proteins generally bind to the viral cellular receptor. however, the m protein also acts as a receptor in the early step of hcov-nl63 infection. the m membrane protein of hcov-nl63 recognizes the attachment site of hspgs. hcov-nl63 m protein binds to hspg for the initial attachment of virus to host cells and thereafter, the m and s proteins cooperate for virus entrance into the host cells [125]. hspgs are glycosaminoglycan (gag)-carrying proteins frequently used as a secondary receptor for viral entry. hspgs are composed of covalent-bonded hs chains as a gag form. the hs gag linkage structure of tetrasaccharide exhibits gluaβ1,3glcnacα1,4galβ1,3galβ1,4xylβ-o-serine. glycosyltransferases involved in hs gag synthesis include glcat-ii (glucuronosyltransferase) and glcnact-ii (n-acetylglucosaminyltransferase ii) for heparan sulfate synthesis (figure 9). gag is used as docking sites for virus interaction with the host cell surface. gags contain negatively charged n- and o-sulfated sugars [126]. the biosynthetic pathway and biologic roles in early embryogenic morphogenesis and vulval morphogenesis of hs and chondroitin sulfate gag have been elucidated in caenorhabditis elegans [127]. the negative charges mediate the interaction of gags and their ligands through electrostatic forces. interaction of hspg with ligands potentiates many virus infectious cycles. for examples, adeno-associated virus, human t cell lymphotropic virus type 1, human papilloma virus 16, herpes viruses, hepatitis b and c viruses, kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus, human papilloma viruses and merkel cell polyoma virus recognize the hspgs [128,129]. hspgs increase virulence upon interaction with viral factors required for viral attachment and replication.although hcov-hku1 utilizes o-acetyl-sas as attachment sites, the hcov-hku1 s protein also interacts with mhc-i c (hla-c) as an additional attachment molecule [85].sars-cov uses the c-type lectins of dc-sign and dc-l-sign as additional or secondary receptors. glycans on the s glycoprotein are recognized by dc/l-sign for virus attachment and entry. seven glycosylation sites of the s glycoprotein have been found to be essential for dc/l-sign-driven virus entry [86,130].tetraspanin cd9, but not tetraspanin cd81, associates with dpp4 and the type ii tm serine protease (ttsp) member tmprss2, a cov-activating protease, to form a cell surface complex [131]. this cd9–dpp4–tmprss2 complex permits mers-cov pseudovirus entrance into the host cells. the tetraspanins have four tm spanning regions linked by one large and one small loop in the extracellular region. tetraspanins form virus entry baselines and open cov entry routes. to help viral entry into host cells, mers-cov s interacts with dpp4 receptors via the rbd. receptor involvement causes cleavage using proteases such as the previously described tmprss2. association of tetraspanin cd9 with the dpp4–tmprss2 complex triggers the s glycoprotein. mers-covs enter the cells via endocytosis and cathepsins cleave the s proteins [132].sas are predominant surface determinants for pathogen attachment, adherence and entry to host cells. eleven representative vertebrate virus families utilize sas as initial entry receptors or as attachment factors. interaction of virus with sa-containing glycans is complex because virus sa-binding lectins are inherently of very low affinity. viruses acquire enzymes to catalyze virion elution by regional depletion of binding receptors [56]. tm s glycoprotein recognizes oligosaccharide receptors. using cryo-em technology and observed structures of s glycoprotein trimers of cov oc43 complexed with 9-o-acetylated sa, s glycoprotein was demonstrated to mediate virus adhesion and entry to host cells. all cov s proteins show conservation in binding to 9-o-acetyl-sas. mers-cov also recognizes 9-carbon sugar sa species. mers-cov s-1a binds to sa species. for example, saα2,3- over saα2,6-linkages expressed in human erythrocytes and mucins are preferentially targeted by mers-cov s-1a. binding is hence blocked by sa modification to 5-n-neugc and 7, 9-o-neuac species [73]. for example, impairment of ace2 receptor glycosylation does not influence s-glycoprotein-ace2 interaction, however, sars-cov-2 virus entry into respiratory epithelial host cells was downregulated [133]. changes in ace2 n-glycans do not apparently influence interaction with the sars-cov s glycoprotein, but instead, impair viral s glycoprotein-mediated membrane fusion. the receptor glycan structures decide the entry of some human viruses. changes in ace2 receptor sialylation influences interaction affinity between virus ligands and host receptor. inter-species or individual genetic variations such as drift and mutation may occur in sars-covs. this explains currently emerging differences in cov responses within the same population such as humans.on the other hand, from the aspect of virus ligand, the s glycoprotein decorates viral surfaces and is, therefore, the target for vaccination design. virus internalization requires potential glycosylation of viral glycoproteins. among the three viral envelope components, s and m are the major glycoproteins and e is nascent and not glycosylated. the m glycoprotein consists of a short glycosylated ectodomain in the n-terminal region. the s glycoprotein expressed in hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus is an ha that recognizes n-acetyl-9-o-neuac as a binding receptor expressed on erythrocyte surfaces [134]. for example, bcovs attach to the surface receptor of n-acetyl-9-o-neuac (9-o-acetylated sas) on host cells. tgev and pedv are currently known as a similar class of such covs. pedv infects multiple hosts including bat, pig, human and monkey, where bats are considered to be the evolutionary origin for pedv. the s glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 utilizes different glycosylation patterns to recognize its receptors. the glycosylation sites in minimal rbd exhibits similar sites to other covs. the trimeric sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein is also highly glycosylated with 66 n-glycans, but a few o-glycans [135]. glycosylation of s glycoproteins leads to immune evasion. in the mers-cov and the bat-specific cov-hku4, glycosylation is linked to zoonotic infection for fusion-based entry [136].clq and clq-oh are under investigation worldwide to treat covid-19 (figure 10). clq and its derivative clq-oh block cov replication, amplification and spread in in vitro culture via inhibition of ace2 receptor glycosylation. in hcovs, interaction of the s glycoprotein with gangliosides initially occur as the first entry step during the replication cycle of the virus. clq and clq-oh have been alternative drugs for ra and several autoimmune diseases for 70 years, although they are anti-malaria prophylaxis drugs. clq-oh is an aminoquinoline with less toxicity than clq. clq-oh bears an n-hydroxyethyl side chain, which increases its solubility compared to clq [141]. clq-oh modulates activated immune cells via downregulation of tlr signaling and il-6 production [142]. clinical trials are also under consideration for the efficacy and safety of these drugs. regarding the action mechanism(s), clq and clq-oh-mediated inhibition of ace2 terminal glycosylation was considered. in in vitro vero e6 cells, clq significantly inhibits sars-cov spread by interfering with ace2 function, acting at the entry and post-entry steps of sars-cov-2 replication and infection. the binding affinity of ace2 to s glycoprotein is simulated to be lowered by treatment with clq-oh or clq. clq may modify the binding affinity between ace2 and s glycoprotein by alterations in ace2 glycosylation or modification. clq-oh (ec50 0.72 μm) and clq (ec50, 5.47 μm) inhibit sars-cov-2 [143].using computer simulation techniques, clq and clq-oh have been suggested to recognize the enzymatic active site of the udp-glcnac 2-epimerase, known as an essential enzyme in sa biosynthesis [144], blocking the sialylation of host cells. the mechanism underlying the glycosylation inhibition may support the antiviral properties of clq and clq-oh through interactions of clq or clq-oh with ndp-saccharide mutases or glycosyltransferases [145]. clq was reported to inhibit quinone reductase 2 [146], known as a catalytic mimetic or structural neighbor of udp-glcnac 2-epimerases [147,148]. if clq or clq-oh inhibits sa synthesis, the inhibitory properties may support the antiviral activity of clq or clq-oh against sars-covs because the sars-cov receptor ace2 contains sa species. in fact, clq exhibits in vitro anti-sars-cov-1 activity via defective glycosylation of viral ace2 in vero cells [149]. in addition. the interference of clq or clq-oh with sa synthesis may broadly be applicable as an antiviral because the hcovs or other orthomyxoviruses also utilize sas as entry molecules [150]. however, the detailed mechanisms should be further elucidated. the clq treatment efficacy in covid-19 patients has, however, not been conclusively determined.lipid rafts are also viral attachment sites. viruses such as ibv, dengue virus, ebola virus, hepatitis c virus, hiv, human herpes virus 6, measles virus, newcastle disease virus, poliovirus, west nile virus, foot-and-mouth disease virus, simian virus 40, rotavirus, influenza virus and marburg virus also use lipid rafts for virus entry [151,152,153,154,155,156]. in avian cov ibv, structural proteins of the ibv virus are co-localized with pm lipid rafts embedded with the ganglioside gm1. hcov-229e entry is prevented by cholesterol depleted conditions because hcov-229e clusters in caveolae-associated lipid rafts [157]. caveolae of caveolin-1, -2 and -3 are cross-linked [158] and control the molecular distribution between rafts and caveolae in a regulatory mechanism. s protein-cd13 cross-linking occurs via cd13-caveolin-1 sequestering. hcov-229e particles similarly exhibit a longitudinal distribution property. hcov-229e-colocalized caveolin-1 undergoes the next step of virus infection. caveolin-1 knockdown inhibited hcov-229e endocytosis and entry and thus caveolin-1 is essential for hcov-229e infection. tgev also endocytoses by a clathrin-mediated mechanism in mdck cells [159]. other viruses including hcov-oc43 also use an entry receptor sequestered to cross-linked caveolae [160]. in sars-cov, the first entry step to host cells needs ace2 in intact lipid rafts by the s glycoprotein [151]. ace2 is associated with caveolin-1 and gm1 in membrane rafts depending on its cell-type specific localization [161]. raft integrity with cholesterol and ace2 is necessary for sars-cov pseudovirus entry into vero e6 cells and for sars-cov-microdomain-based entry. c-type lectin, cd209 l (l-sign), can also form lipid rafts and acts as a sars-cov receptor [162]. information of the cov entry pathways is important for therapeutic designation of sars-cov-targeting drugs, for example, if agents disrupt lipid-raft localization of the ace2 receptor.clq binds the sas and gangliosides in lipid rafts with a high affinity. therefore, clq or clq-oh prevents the s glycoprotein–ganglioside binding. clq (or clq-oh) binding to sa consequently prevents s glycoprotein binding to host receptors. the n-terminal region of sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein interacts with gangliosides. a ganglioside-binding site (gbs) or ganglioside-binding domain (gbd) is present in the ntd of the s glycoprotein of sars-cov-2. using molecular modeling and simulation technology, clq has been suggested to recognize the sas and gangliosides. human type neu5ac binds to clq and clq-oh. thus, sas are binding targets of clq and clq-oh. clq and clq-oh have two specific recognition sites in the polar sugar residues of ganglioside gm1. the first site is found at the tip of the sugar residues of gm1 with an interaction energy of −47 kj/mol. the clq rings face the galnac residue of gm1, while the second site is in a large region of the sugar-ceramide junction and the sugar residues. several amino acid residues of the s protein ntd, which are phe-135, asn-137 and arg-158, recognize the ganglioside gm1. the s glycoprotein ntd-gm1 complex is suggested to form a trimolecular complex with two molecules of ganglioside gm1 anchored to the ntd of s protein [163]. the ace2-binding rbd is suggested to be a potential gbs located on a differential site of the s glycoprotein ntd. the protein sequence interfacing surface of the ntd is the consensus gbds [164]. the amino acids gly, pro and/or ser residues found in gbd motifs are in the same 111–158 amino acids of the ntd as the ganglioside-attachment interface. the gbd is conserved throughout viral isolates from worldwide covid-19 patients. the gbd potentially increases viral attachment ability to pm lipid rafts and contact between host ace-2 and s protein [165]. the interaction between clq-oh and 9-o-acetyl-neuac is also similar to the 9-o-acetyl-neuac-clq interaction. the clq-oh oh group enhances the interaction of clq with sa via a hydrogen bond [163]. in conditions with clq or clq-oh derivative treatment, the s glycoprotein cannot bind to gangliosides in in silico studies, which are used to uncover the action mechanism. clq and clq-oh prevent the binding of s glycoprotein to gangliosides. the clq-sa complex is formed in a mixed surface and balls by the positioning of the negative charged cooh group of neu5ac and one of the two cationic charges of clq [163]. covs preferentially bind to 9-o-acetyl-neuac [60], differentiating with other viral properties.as clq interacts with the gm1 sugar part, the n-terminal domain of the s protein loses viral attachment capacity to the cell receptors [166]. the s protein ntd and the clq/clq-oh maintain the same position during gm1 binding, consequently preventing gm1 binding to the s protein and the drug at the same time, because the ntd and the clq/clq-oh simultaneously recognize gm1. asn-167 forms a hydrogen bond with the galnac residue, whereas an aromatic phe-135 stacks to the glc residue of gm1. therefore, the antiviral activities of clq and clq-oh is to block the interaction between the sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein and gangliosides on host cell surfaces. the lipid composition of host cell pm can also be a potential target for preventive and therapeutic drugs against such viruses.the sars-cov-2-caused covid-19 pandemic is a global public health issue in the 21st century. in order to coordinate efforts against and mitigate the public health consequences of the spreading and outbreak of the disease, the international community has been exchanging independent information and knowledge. the scientists and epidemiologists exchange covid-19 information to highlight interdisciplinary approaches. the pandemic outbreak issue has raised interest in the pathology and epidemiology of the disease. the current covid-19 pandemic resulted in establishment of the covid action platform of the world economic forum (wef) to perform evidence-based cutting-edge research and analyze the fast-evolving pandemic. the virus outbreak data network (vodan) of the gofair data alliance also pursues to apply the best remedy against the pandemic infection. in the aspect of basic biology, most β-covs recognize 9-o-acetyl sas, but certain viruses have switched to binding 4-o-acetyl sa. originally, he is found in other viruses such as toroviruses and orthomyxoviruses (influenza c/d and isavirus). the exceptional β-cov lineage a is the only one to bear he among the covs. virus entry and replication inhibitors need to be urgently developed. computation-fused artificial intelligence accelerates therapeutic agent development. the sars-cov-2 genome shows 80% similarity to the previous sars-cov and sars-targeting agents can be commonly treated to the related sars-cov-2 patients. for better understanding of the entry pathway of sars-cov-2, the importance of the carbohydrates including sas on cell and virus surfaces is again emphasized.the coronavirus sars-cov-2, responsible for the pandemic which started in wuhan, china, during the latter part of 2019, has spread to 213 countries, areas and territories according to the who [1, 2] by april 16th 2020 and continues to spread, infecting approximately 84,500 and causing the death of approximately 8000 people daily. although young people usually develop mild symptoms, it can cause severe lower respiratory disease affecting mostly the elderly and individuals with other co-morbidities such as cardiovascular problems, pre-existing respiratory disease, diabetes, hypertension or cancer [1] .sars-cov-2 belongs to the βcov genera of the coronavirinae subfamily of the order of nidovirals [3] . compared to sars and mers-coronavirus strains that caused the two most recent epidemics, in 2002-2003 and 2012, respectively-it mostly resembles sars-cov-1 (2002-03), with 79.5% sequence identity and the same mechanism for host cell entrance, via the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) surface protein of the cell [4] .as far as cleavage recognition motifs are concerned, the sars-cov-2 main protease cleaves the viral polyprotein at no less than 11 sites, recognizing the sequence leu-gln ↓ ser/ala/gly [22] . the hiv-1 protease recognizes nine cleavage sites in its polyprotein substrate, with sequence differences that keep the feature of cleavage, most commonly, between phe and pro. alternatively, it cleaves between amino acids with hydrophobic or aromatic side chains (tyr/met/leu/phe ↓ pro/phe/tyr/ala/leu/met) [23] . the hcv protease cleaves its polyprotein substrate at four sites, recognizing a glu/asp-glu/asp-xxx-cys ↓ ser general motif [24] . the human organism protease dpp-4 preferentially cleaves at x ↓ pro or x ↓ ala sites [25] , whereas thrombin preferentially cleaves at the gly/ala/val/ile/pro-arg ↓ ser/ala/gly/thr/(note/d)-x(note/d)-arg/(note) motif [27] . the coagulation factor xa cleaves after arg, recognizing a motif val/pro/ile-gln/asp/glu-phe/gly-arg ↓ ser-leu [26] . renin recognizes the sequence ile-his-pro-phe-his-leu↓ [29] , while angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) recognizes the angiotensin i sequence asp-arg-val-tyr-ile-his-pro-phe ↓ his-leu [28] .similarities between proteases at the catalytic amino acids of the active site and in the nature of amino acids of the substrate may be an indication for efficient inhibition of the proteases by the same inhibitors. however, the nature of surrounding amino acids of the active site and the 3d structure of the active center are also of great importance.in the present study, the 3d structure of the sars-cov-2 main protease was compared with the 3d structures of proteases which are drug targets with approved inhibitors. in addition, a number of approved inhibitors of the above proteases were evaluated by docking analysis for their ability to inhibit the sars-cov-2 main protease, interacting with the active site of the enzyme.since the 3d structure of the active site of the enzyme is crucial for catalytic activity, we proceeded to a comparison of the sars-cov-2 main protease, mpro, with the hiv-1 protease, the hcv protease (ns3 protein) and the human proteases dpp-4, thrombin, factor xa, renin and ace, which constitute known drug targets with approved inhibitors.significant 3d similarity was found between the sars-cov-2 and the hcv protease (p = 1.34 × 10 −4 ) as well as between the sars-cov-2 protease and α-thrombin (p = 7.42 × 10 −4 ). interestingly, the protein parts with increased structural alignment included the catalytic area of the enzyme. the lowest similarity was observed in the case of angiotensin-converting enzyme and coagulation factor xa (figures 1 and 2) .the structural similarity between the sars-cov-2 protease and some of the selected proteases, in combination with the existence of the same amino acids at certain positions of the substrate cleavage site, such as ser at the p1' position of the recognition sequence of the hcv protease and thrombin are promising features in the effort to identify effective sars-cov-2 protease inhibitors among the approved drugs of the selected proteases.to investigate this possibility further, we proceeded to docking analysis of randomly selected approved or on-trial inhibitors of the selected proteases (table 1 ). an exception from the random selection was made for the hiv-1 inhibitors where lopinavir and ritonavir were selected because they have already been proposed for the treatment of sars-cov-2. the rest of the drugs that were selected are the anti-hcv drugs telaprevir and boceprevir, the dpp-4 inhibitor sitagliptin, the renin inhibitor alisliren, the ace inhibitor captopril, the thrombin direct inhibitors argatroban and dabigatran and the coagulation factor xa inhibitor rivaroxaban. docking analysis was performed using the sars-cov-2 structure 6lu7. the results were promising for most of the compounds, with the exception of the ace and renin inhibitors, captopril and aliskiren, for which the calculated free binding energy was −5.17 and −4.66 kcal mol −1 , respectively ( table 2 ). according to our previous experience and to the literature, a free binding energy higher than −5.5 kcal mol −1 is an indication that the compound is inactive [32, 33] . the best results were obtained for the hcv protease inhibitors telaprevir and boceprevir, with free binding energies of −10.05 and −9.16 kcal mol −1 , respectively, followed by the thrombin inhibitor argatropan and the dpp-4 inhibitor, sitagliptin, with free binding energies of −9.03 and −8.80 kcal mol −1 , respectively. the hiv-1 protease inhibitors ritonavir and lopinavir showed a little lower predicted activity, with free binding energies of −8.96 and −8.65 kcal mol −1 , respectively. docking analysis to the whole enzyme indicated that the enzyme active site is the second preferred binding site of lopinavir, ritonavir and boceprevir. according to this observation, the expected inhibitory action of these compounds is to be lower than that predicted based on their binding energy to the active site [32] . rivaroxamban and dabigatran are also expected to be active, with calculated free binding energies of −7.97 and −6.57 kcal mol −1 , respectively.since the evaluation of the randomly selected hcv protease, dpp-4, α-thrombin and coagulation factor xa inhibitors showed promising results, we proceeded to the evaluation of a more extended sample of approved drugs of these categories, including a number of drugs currently in phase iii clinical trial (table 3, table 4 ). for better estimation of the probable inhibitory effect of the selected compounds, a second protein structure of the sars-cov-2 protease was also used (pdb id: 6m2n). the whole enzyme, including both protease subunits, was selected for the process. for comparison reasons, the estimated binding energy of the compounds to their initial targets were also calculated. for the same reasons, for some of the most promising sars-cov-2 candidate inhibitors, the estimated binding energy to the hiv-1 4rvj protease structure was calculated.docking analysis of both sars-cov-2 protease structures gave similar results. interestingly, 20 out of the 24 compounds which were selected for evaluation exhibited lower estimated binding energy than the initial inhibitor of the 6m2n structure (−7.45 kcal mol −1 ) [34] and of the n3 inhibitor (−7.41 kcal mol −1 ) [35] . docking of the compounds to the target proteases for which they were designed showed a generally higher binding probability (lower estimated binding energy) for the initial targets compared to the sars-cov-2 protease but the most active compounds showed comparable results for the two targets. for example, faldaprevir exhibited an estimated binding energy of −11.27 kcal mol −1 for the sars-cov-2 protease and −11.15 kcal mol −1 for the hcv protease, while teneligliptin showed −9.87 kcal mol −1 for the new protease and −9.16 kcal mol −1 for its initial target. table 3 . estimated binding energies of approved or under-trial iii protease inhibitors to the structure of the sars-cov-2 main protease structures (pdb code: 6lu7 and pdb code: 6m2n), to their initial protease target (hcv protease structure 2wf8, dpp-4 structure 2ffw, a-thrombin structure 1dwe, factor xa structure 4bti) and to the hiv-1 protease structure 4rvj. according to the estimated free binding energies, all evaluated drugs could act as sars-cov-2 protease inhibitors. among the hcv protease inhibitors, faldaprevir exhibited the lowest free binding energy.teneligliptin and gemigliptin are the most promising drugs among the dpp-4 inhibitors. in the group of anti-coagulants, inogartan and argatroban of the first randomly selected compounds were the most promising among a-thrombin inhibitors and edoxaban among factor xa inhibitors. docking analysis of the whole enzyme indicated that the enzyme active site is the first preferred binding site for all the hcv protease and dpp-4 inhibitors presented in table 3 but the third preferred site for inogatran and the second for edoxaban. consequently, the expected inhibitory action of inogatran and edoxaban are to be lower than that predicted based on their relative binding energy to the active site.in conclusion, faldaprevir, teneligliptin and gemigliptin are the compounds expected to exhibit the highest activity against the sars-cov-2 main protease.the sars-cov-2 protease preferentially cleaves its substrate after gln which follows leu and before a ser or ala or gly amino acid (leu-gln ↓ ser/ala/gly). the gln amino acid, at the p1 position of the substrate, is an amino acid with a relatively long side chain leading to a polar amide group with hydrogen donor/acceptor possibility. as shown by studies of complexes of the mpro enzyme with substrate analogues [34] , gln is placed in vicinity to cys145, at the subsite s1 of the active center, surrounded by the side chains of the amino acids asn142, glu166, his163, and his172 and the main chains of phe140 and leu141. the p2 amino acid, leu, has a relatively long, hydrophobic but not bulky or aromatic side chain. the side chain of leu is inserted at the s2 subsite, which consists of the side chains of the amino acids his41, met49, tyr54 and met165 placed in vicinity to asp187. the p4 amino acid of the peptide interacts with the amino acids met165, leu167, phe185, and gln192 and the main chain of gln189.in the case of the substrate analogue n3, in addition to polar or hydrophobic interactions, a hydrogen bond (hb) is formed between the his163 side chain and o of the lactam ring which serves as a mimetic of the gln amino acid of the natural substrate [34] . a second hb is formed between the h of the closest to the lactam ring nh group of the backbone of the ligand and the co of the main chain of his164 of the enzyme, while the nh group of the backbone of leu amino acid of the ligand interacts with the co of the backbone of gln189 of the enzyme. the lactam ring as a mimetic of the gln amino acid of the substrate is also present at the structure of the a-ketomide inhibitors designed by zang et al. [22] . in this case, the h of the nh group of the lactam ring forms two hydrogen bonds with the co of the main chain of phe140 and the carboxylate of glu166, while the co oxygen of the lactam moiety forms a hydrogen bond with the imidazole of his163. in the most active compound of this series, the p2 leu of the natural substrate has been replaced by a cyclopropane, while the pyridon ring at the p3 position participates in complex stabilization through hydrogen bonds with the o of the side chain of gln189 and the nh of the main chain of glu166.the two above substrates constitute peptidomimetics with peptide bonds between amino acid mimetic moieties. in both cases, the catalytic amino acid cys145 forms a covalent bond with the ligand. most of the approved drugs proposed as sars-cov-2 protease inhibitors according to in silico studies are not peptidomimetics. according to docking analysis, various groups may be placed at the s1 subsite such as the 7-methoxy-8-methyl-quinoline moiety of simeprevir [15] or the oxadiazole group of raltegravir, which adopts a curved form within the binding pocket [13] . interaction with thr24, thr25 and ser46 also seems to play an important role in complex stabilization of many compounds including raltegravir and ribavirin [12] .most inhibitors used in this study do not contain the classic peptide bonds but share with peptide substrates the characteristic of many polar, hd/a groups.in gemigliptin, the tetrahydropyridine ring and the 2-amino-4-oxobutyl bridge are placed at the s1 subsite between glu166 and cys145. a hydrogen bond between the co group of the backbone of glu166 and the nh 2 group of the 2-amino-4-oxobutyl bridge contributes to complex stabilization, while cys145 participates in hydrophobic interactions with carbons of the bicyclic moiety ( figure 3 ). the trifluoromethyl pyrimidine moiety interacts with his41 of the s2 subsite which stabilizes the complex by halogen bond formation with the f atoms and pi interactions with the pyrimidine ring. halogen bonds are also formed between the f atoms of the fluoropiperidinone ring and amino acids val186, arg188 and thr190.in linagliptin, the n of the piperidine ring participates in hydrogen bond interactions with the o of the co group of the main chain of glu166 of the s1 subsite, while the nh 2 substituent of the ring forms hb with pro168. the his41 of the s2 subsite participates in complex stabilization by polar interaction with the n atom of the methylquinazoline and by hydrophobic and pi interactions with the carbons of this moiety, while met49 also forms hydrophobic interactions. additional stabilization is achieved by the interaction of met165 with the dihydropurine moiety ( figure 3 ).in faldaprevir, the cyclopentyl carbamate moiety participates in hydrogen bond formation with the asn142 of the s1 subsite, while hydrogen bonds are also formed between the 2-ethenylcyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid group and the amino acids thr25 and ser46 (figure 4 ).in the case of melagatran, a curved conformation is adopted. the catalytic amino acid, cys145, forms hydrophobic interactions with cyclohexan, while asn144 of the s1 subsite strongly contributes to complex stabilization via polar interaction with the n atom of the aminoacetyl acid group. at the s2 subsite, the nh group of the side chain of his41 participates in hydrogen interaction with the o of the methyl carbamoyl bridge, while met49 is involved in hydrophobic interactions with the phenyl ring of the molecule. in addition, the oh group of the nearby ser46 participates in hydrogen bond formation with the nh 2 of the benzimidamide group ( figure 5) . in betrixaban, the chloropyridin moiety is placed at the s1 subsite, interacting via halogen bonds with the amino acids glu166, phe140 and leu141 and via hydrophobic interactions with cys145. in addition, a hydrogen bond is formed between cys145 and the n of the amide bridge connecting the chloropyridin-2yl and the methoxybenzyl rings of the molecule. his41 of the s2 subsite forms pi interactions with the carbons of the methoxyphenyl ring. the n,n-dimethylbenzimidamide moiety, placed in the area of the s4 subsite, strongly contributes to complex stabilization via the hydrophobic interaction between met165 and the phenyl ring as well as by hydrogen bond formation between the amino acids arg188, thr190 and gln192 and the n of the n,n-dimethylbenzimidamide moiety ( figure 5 ). in general, there is a great variety between the groups placed at the s1 or s2 subsites of the enzyme, as concluded by our results and the literature [12, 13, 15] . most of the amino acids involved in complex stabilization of the natural substrate and the peptide analogues [22, 34] participate in interactions with the studied compounds as well. however, the substantial interaction with his163 in peptidomimetic complexes is not observed in the interaction pattern of the most potent compounds. different structures may offer the possibility of interaction with the crucial amino acids of the sars-cov-2 active site contributing to complex stability. however, the right distances between polar, hd/a, hydrophobic/aromatic moieties constitute important features of each structure.according to docking analysis, all active molecules are long enough to interact simultaneously with amino acids surrounding glu166, cys145 and amino acids in the vicinity of thr25 and his41 and contain several hydrophobic and aromatic moieties as well as hydrogen bond donor/acceptor groups capable of hydrogen bond formation and polar interactions. the enzyme amino acids involved in hydrogen bond formation are glu166, pro168, gln189, arg188, thr24, thr25, thr26, his41, cys44, ser46, asn142, gly143, cys145, his164, thr190, and glu192 (figures 3-7) . apart from the polar and hydrophobic interactions, at least two hydrogen bonds are formed in the case of the most active compounds, while interactions with phe140 were also involved in complex stabilization of argatroban. the most promising compounds of all categories contain multiple hydrophobic moieties as well as polar/hydrogen donor/acceptor moieties. the most active molecules of the categories of gliptines and previrs are relatively long molecules and adopt linear conformations.hydrophobic moieties at distances of approximately 9 å, 11 å, 14 å and 16 å are present in all potent compounds. met165, his41, cys44, cys145, leu167 of the mpro active site are mainly involved in hydrophobic and pi interactions, with a maximum distance between them of approximately 18 å (figures 3-7) . polar or hydrogen donor/acceptor moieties are present at multiple distances, with a distance of 8 å being common in active compounds. glu166 and his 41, at a distance of approximately 13 å, participate in hydrogen bond and polar interactions of the most potent gliptins (figures 3 and 6) , while ser46, thr25 and asn142, at a distance of approximately 12 å, participate in hydrogen bond formation of faldaprevir. in the sars-cov-2 protease, amino acids involved in hydrophobic and polar interactions are distributed in all the active sites, although pi interactions are mostly observed at the region of his41. distances of approximately 5 å, 9 å, 11 å and 16 å are observed between amino acids participating in polar and hydrophobic interactions.amino acids with hydrophobic or polar/hydrogen donor acceptor properties exist at similar distances at the active sites of the initial target of these compounds, dpp-4 and the hcv protease, respectively.for example, in the case of the gliptins' initial target dpp-4, a great number of tyrosine amino acids are present at the active site. as shown in the case of teneligliptin, figure 6 , the amino acids tyr586, phe355, tyr667, tyr667, ty548, and tyr632 are involved in hydrophobic and pi interactions with distances among them varying between 8 å and 19 å. the amino acids arg123, glu203, glu204, ser631, tyr633 and asn711 are involved in polar interactions and hydrogen bond formation. all hydrophobic interactions originate from amino acids oriented at the same moiety of the active site, while the amino acids participating in polar interaction are placed in the other moiety. distances, between 11 and 18 å are observed between amino acids of the active site participating in polar and hydrophobic interactions. the length of the molecules, the great number of polar and hydrophobic groups, the flexibility of the molecules and the appropriate distances between characteristic groups seem to favor binding of gliptins at the mpro active site. a higher binding energy was estimated for the smaller molecule alogliptin (figure 7) .in the case of thrombin inhibitors, a number of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions mainly stabilize the complex. his41, ser46 and met49 participate in hydrogen bond formation between melagatran and mpro enzyme, while leu27, his41, met49 and cys145 are involved in hydrophobic interactions. although these interactions lead to a substantially low estimated binding energy of the compound, the significantly higher hydrogen bonds, pi bonds, polar and hydrophobic interactions may be responsible for the much better prediction results for binding to the initial protease target. ala189, ala190, gly219, cys191, cys220, trp215, his 57 and leu99 seem to be involved in binding to thrombin.the evaluated compounds were approved drugs, currently on the market with the exception of four compounds which were under phase iii trial (table 4 ). there are several compounds among the most promising ones, which are characterized as well-tolerated or having no side effects, such as danoprevir and sovaprevir of the hcv protease inhibitors, teneligliptin and gemigliptin but also trelagliptin, evogliptin and gosogliptin among the dpp-4 inhibitors, inogatran and melagatran of α-thrombin inhibitors.the dpp-4 inhibitors developed for the treatment of diabetes type ii as well as the α-thrombin and factor xa inhibitors, used as anti-coagulants, may not be appropriate for patients who do not suffer such problems. however, they may be worth consideration for patients already being treated for type ii diabetes or with anti-coagulants. moreover, higher platelet count and increased coagulation features are observed in covid-19 patients with severe pneumonia compared to patients with non sars-cov-2-induced pneumonia. furthermore, according to recent results, anti-coagulant treatment by heparin administration reduced mortality of covid-19 patients with severe pneumonia and markedly elevated d-dimers [35] .in general, the results can be considered as promising for some of the evaluated drugs and could be useful for scientists working in the field. in vitro evaluation is also within our future targets if the recombinant sars-cov-2 protease becomes available in the market.the 3d alignment was performed between the 3d structure of the sars-cov docking analysis was carried out on a molecular docking server using autodock [38, 39] , as previously described [32] . the lamarckian genetic algorithm (lga) and the solis and wets local search method [40] were used for the docking simulation. during docking, all rotatable torsions were released. autodock parameter set-and distance-dependent dielectric functions were used in the calculation of the van der waals and the electrostatic terms, respectively-100 different runs that were set to terminate after a maximum of 2,500,000 energy evaluations were performed in each docking experiment. the population size was set to 150. a translational step of 0.2 å, and quaternion and torsion steps of 5 were applied during the search. docking analysis of the hcv protease and the hiv-1 protease presented in table 3 was performed using autodock4.2. via ligandscout. among the values calculated by the program is the estimated free binding energy, which is an indicator of the probability of the compounds to form a stable complex with the selected enzyme target and consequently the probability to be effective enzyme inhibitors.the protein structures chosen from the protein data bank and the docking center and docking box chosen for each docking analysis were as follows: for docking analysis of the sars-cov-2 main protease enzyme, the structure 6lu7 of the enzyme in a complex with the competitive inhibitor n3 for active compounds, the docking was repeated, extending the docking box to cover the whole enzyme, to ensure that the compound does not preferentially bind to other sites of the enzyme instead of the active site [32] .for better estimation of the probable inhibitory effect of the selected compounds, a second protein structure of the sars-cov-2 protease complexed with the inhibitor 5,6,7-trihydroxy-2-phenyl-4h-chromen-4-one was also used (pdb id: 6m2n). in this structure, both subunits were included in the pdb file and the whole enzyme constructed by the two identical subunits was used. the use of the two subunit form was preferred as it could enable the evaluation of a probable interference of the second subunit in binding of the inhibitors, since glu166 which commonly participates in complex stabilization interacts with ser1 of the other protein chain. the docking center was set at x = −61.73, y = −35.18, z = 23.26 and the docking box was set at x = 20, y = 20, z = 20.for comparison reasons, the estimated binding energy of the compounds to their initial targets was also calculated. the structures chosen were the hcv structure 2wf8 in complex with asunaprevir (center: for some of the most promising sars-cov-2 candidate inhibitors, the estimated binding energy to the hiv-1 protease 4rvj structure (crystallized in complex with amprenavir) was evaluated (center: x = −1.935, y = 4.006, z = 48.913, box x = 40, y = 40, z = 30).in all cases, during enzyme preparation, the inhibitor of the initial enzyme complex was abstracted, and the ph was set at 7.0 for ligand preparation. for the evaluation of the docking method, the initial ligand was docked to the enzyme and the position was compared with its initial position at the complex. examples of the similarity of the two positions are shown at figure 8 . stomach ache, abnormal results of blood tests that measure liver function, anemia [57] otamixaban -ended at phase iii sanofi - figure 8 . docking of the initial ligand (5,6,7-trihydroxy-2-phenyl-4h-chromen-4-one) of the 6m2n complex to the sars-cov-2 protease structure 6m2n and of the initial ligand (sitagliptin) to the 4ffw structure of dpp-4. the position of the docked ligand (green) is very close to that of the initial ligand (magenta).the 3d structure alignment of the sars-cov-2 main protease with the hiv-1 and hcv viral proteases as well as with the human proteases dpp-4, thrombin, coagulation factor xa, renin and ace showed greater similarity with the hcv protease and with thrombin. this finding, in combination with the fact that these two proteases preferentially cleave before ser like sars-cov-2 protease, enhances the possibility of finding effective sars-cov-2 inhibitors among the approved anti-hcv protease and anti-thrombin inhibitors. docking analysis of 34 approved or phase iii trial protease inhibitors to the sars-cov-2 protease revealed several drugs that may act as sars-cov-2 protease inhibitors, within the classes of the hcv protease, dpp-4, α-thrombin and coagulation factor xa inhibitors. twenty five of them exhibited estimated binding energy lower than the reference inhibitor n3, and twenty one lower than −8.00 kcal mol −1 . several of the most promising compounds are approved drugs characterized as well tolerated in subjects. compared to lopinavir and ritonavir, most of the evaluated compounds showed better results, as characterized by lower predicted free binding energy and high preference for binding to the active site compared to other sites of the enzyme. these promising in silico results encourage further evaluation for in vitro and in vivo anti-viral activity. the dpp-4 inhibitors developed for the treatment of type ii diabetes, as well as α-thrombin and factor xa inhibitors used as anti-coagulants, may not be appropriate for patients who do not suffer such problems but may be useful for patients who need such treatment. it is worth mentioning that diabetic patients belong to the high-risk group for this virus, while anti-coagulant therapy has been proposed for covid-19 patients with severe pneumonia. the authors declare no conflict of interest.rna-dependent rna polymerase dpp-4 dipeptidyl peptidase-4coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and since the initiation of the pandemic it has caused globally hundreds of thousands of deaths [1]. while the majority of people with covid-19 won’t require hospitalization (being asymptomatic or with mild symptoms) for those who need the clinical features may evolve to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and cardiac injury. major risk factors for developing severe symptoms is age, sex (with a prevalence in males), as well as obesity, diabetes, hypertension and respiratory or cardiovascular diseases [2,3]. as no covid-19 specific drugs are available [4] a better understanding of the underlying covid-19 pathobiology is required.at the molecular level sars-cov-2 entry into target cells is facilitated by the spike (s) protein of the coronavirus. sars-cov-2 infection starts with binding to zinc metallopeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) which enables viral attachment to the surface of target cells; an additional step refers to s protein priming by the transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) [5,6] (fig. 1 ). reportedly, furin protease is also likely involved in the sars-cov-2 infection process [7]. these processes are similar to those used for sars-cov transmissibility [8]. notably, as for sars-cov where the endosomal cysteine proteases cathepsins b/l (ctsb, ctsl) are also needed for viral cell entry [8,9], ammonium chloride treatment strongly inhibited sars-cov-2 cell entry into tmprss2- 293t cells suggesting that sars-cov-2 can likely use either tmprss2 or ctsb/l for cell infection [5]. tmprss2 expression in lung tissues may be a determinant of viral tropism and pathogenicity at the initial site of sars-cov-2 infection [10], and, as for sars-cov [11], it may reduce viral control by the humoral immune response. notably, in common with sars-cov, sars-cov-2 infection is enhanced by tmprss2 [10].ace2 is a critical component of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) which plays a key role in maintaining blood pressure homeostasis, as well as fluid and salt balance [12]. the components of the system mainly include renin, angiotensinogen (agt), angiotensin ii (angii), angiotensin converting enzyme (ace), angiotensin ii type 1 receptor (at1r) and angiotensin ii type 2 receptor (at2r) (fig. 1). angii is generated by angi from ace and is a key effector peptide of the system causing vasoconstriction. ras overactivation has been implicated (among others) in the induction and progression of hypertension, atherosclerosis, diabetes, heart failure, renovascular disorders, pulmonary hypertension and fibrosis, pneumonia and sepsis [13,14]. ace2, a highly homologous to ace metalloprotease, functions as a negative regulator of the agt system as it reduces angii levels by producing the sorter ang(1-7) and ang(1-9) peptides, which can then activate the anti-inflammatory and vasodilation-promoting receptor mas (masr) (fig. 1) [14]. recombinant ace2 protects mice from severe acute lung failure and loss of ace2 expression is likely involved in increased vascular permeability, one of the hallmarks in ards pathogenesis [15]. ace2 also links amino acid malnutrition to intestinal inflammation, as it is a key regulator of dietary amino acid homeostasis, innate immunity and gut microbial ecology [16]. overall, the balance between the ace/angii/at1r and the counter-regulatory ace2/ang(1–7)/masr axes is critical in the physiological regulation of neural, cardiovascular, blood pressure and kidney functions [17].although ace2 expression seems to correlate with susceptibility to sars-cov infection in cell assays and it is downregulated by sars-cov [18], the relationship between ace2 expression levels and the susceptibly to sars-cov-2 infection remains elusive; also, it is not clear whether sars-cov-2 infection interferes with ace2 expression. nonetheless, it is logical to assume that high ace2 expression levels and/or the simultaneous co-expression of the ace2, tmprss2 and ctsb/l proteins in sars-cov-2 targeted tissues/cells may lead to higher risk for sars-cov-2 infection. to get more insights on this issue we mapped ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl genes and corresponding proteins expression in human tissues and pathology, as well in response to sars-cov-2 used therapeutic treatments by analyzing expression datasets from geo, arrayexpress and protein atlas databases. our findings provide a rational explanation for most of the clinical features of covid-19.in this gene expression profiling meta-analysis study, the ace2 [ace2 (entrez id 59272, ensembl ensg00000130234)] and tmprss2 [tmprss2 (entrez id 7113, ensembl ensg00000184012)] genes related microarray datasets were retrieved from ncbi and arrayexpress databases. the selection of datasets from ncbi or arrayexpress was based on the terms homo sapiens [organism], ace2 [gene symbol] or tmprss2 [gene symbol] respectively, along with additional data filtering for up/down genes in the differential expression search filter in geo profiles of ncbi. the ncbi and arrayexpress databases were also searched for currently investigated therapeutic approaches against covid-19 [e.g. interferon-beta (ifn-β), remdesivir, lopinavir, ritonavir, chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine and a number of immunosuppressants] and the terms ace2 [gene symbol] or tmprss2 [gene symbol]. the records collected after database search, include 63 ace2, 150 tmprss2, 36 ifn-β, 34 chloroquine and 13 hydroxychloroquine entries.following the removal of duplicate entries from the ncbi and array express databases the unique datasets (n=250) were collected. additional datasets were excluded by eliminating the non-geo entries (n=69) and those (n=26) with insufficient data. specifically, datasets were excluded if these were non-geo entries or if a very low number of samples per state/condition was provided, thus, the requirements of geo2r tool were not met. gene expression analysis of the 155 selected datasets was performed using the ncbi provided geo2r tool, aiming to identify differential expression of the genes of interest (i.e. ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl) across different experimental conditions; statistically significant cases (p-value <0.05) were chosen for visualization (see, prisma flowchart; fig. s1) [19].additional information about the expression levels of ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl genes and proteins across human tissues and recorded pathologies was gathered from the human protein atlas database. finally, the terms ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl were searched in kegg pathways and the found pathways/molecules were used to screen drugbank for drugs (at various phases of development) that modulate identified kegg pathways.differential regulation of the sars-cov-2 spike protein receptor ace2 and of the priming protease tmprss2 genes in geo and arrayexpress databases.given that sars-cov-2 infection rate in human cells likely depends on the expression levels of its receptor ace2 and the priming protease tmprss2, we initially performed an expression profiling meta-analysis at the geo and arrayexpress microarrays databases. we found that the ace2 gene is significantly less expressed in venous vs. arterial endothelial cells; in biopsies of patients with nephrosclerosis (a hypoxia-related glomerulopathy), as well as in various biological settings following treatment with lipopolysaccharides, tumor necrosis factor (tnf) and interleukins -4 (il-4) and -13 (il-13) (fig. 2 a1, table s1). tmprss2 gene was (among others) suppressed by tnf, hepatitis antigen hbsag and influenza h1n1 virus; hypoxia, methotrexate, serum response factor and estradiol, the primary endothelial receptor lox-1 for oxidized ldl and oxidized ldl, arc (a nucleoside analog with anti-cancer activity), sangivamycin (a nucleoside analogue and potent inhibitor of protein kinase c), the bet inhibitor i-bet762, as well as following tgfβ-activated kinase 1 (tak1) knock down, mycophenolic acid or bicalutamide (an antiandrogen) treatment and prostate castration (fig. 2b1, table s2). the tmprss2 gene was also found to be significantly downregulated in many tumors or tumor cells.on the other hand, ace2 gene expression is (among others; see fig. 2a1, table s1) induced by obesity, stomach infection by helicobacter pylori and interferons ifn-α and ifn-γ; also, it is upregulated following treatment with retinoic acid, the p160 steroid coactivator protein src-1, egf/serum or fgfr stimulation, knock down of the rnf31 atypical e3 ligase and by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-beta. the expression of the tmprss2 gene is (among others; see fig. 2b1, table s2) elevated by androgens, androgen receptor (ar) activation/overexpression or by ar agonists; by cigarette smoke extract; in rectal suction specimens of cystic fibrosis patients, in nasal lavage samples obtained from asthmatic children during an acute picornavirus-induced exacerbation, following rhinovirus infection, as well as in juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes and barrett's esophagus. notably, the ace2 and tmprss2 genes showed a trend for similar regulation in geo, arrayexpress experiments (fig. s2; tables s1 and s2).our search in geo and arrayexpress databases showed that the ace2 gene is highly expressed in thymus, lung, kidney, pancreas and heart (fig. 2a2, table s1); while, the tmprss2 gene is overexpressed in bladder, kidney, as well as in the tissues of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract (fig. 2b2, table s2). thus, the ace2 and tmprss2 genes are widely expressed in human tissues where they are induced in pro-inflammatory conditions and by androgens.comparative analysis of ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl genes and corresponding proteins expression patterns as depicted in protein atlas.we then collected data for ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl genes and proteins expression data from the protein atlas database. the ctsb and ctsl genes are in general more homogeneously expressed and in higher levels, as compared to ace2 and tmprss2, across different tissues (fig. 3 a, table s3). for ace2 and tmprss2 genes very low expression levels were found in brain and blood tissues, as well as in most cell lines studied; on the contrary, high ace2 and tmprss2 genes co-expression was found in kidney, gallbladder, colon duodenum, small intestine, salivary and thyroid glands. also, the ace2 gene is highly expressed in heart and in testis.similarly, according to protein atlas database the ace2 protein is expressed in adrenal gland and testis and in high levels at the gastrointestinal tract; while tmprss2 in highly expressed in kidney and in the gastrointestinal tract (fig. s3; table s4). a notable observation in these analyses was again a tendency for a positive correlation of the ace2 and tmprss2 genes expression patterns (fig. 3b); thus, an intervention that modulates either ace2 or tmprss2 expression would likely also affect the non-targeted gene.regulation of the ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl genes following treatment with ifn1-β, chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine and screening of kegg pathways and drugbank for the identification of possible anti covid-19 treatments.given that a number of combinational therapeutic schemes [4] are currently being prioritized for covid-19 treatment, we also performed a more focused search in geo and arrayexpress databases for these drugs and the ace2, tmprss, ctsb/l genes. our findings are shown in fig. 4 (see also tables s5–s7) and refer to experiments containing information for ifn-β, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. interestingly, ifn-β significantly induced ace2 gene expression in bronchial epithelial cells (fig. 4a; table s5). on the other hand, chloroquine administration in hiv-infected patients tended (non-significant) to induce ctbs gene expression, likely due to a negative feedback loop aiming to restore physiological cathepsins activity (fig. 4b, table s6). finally, hydroxychloroquine suppressed ace2 and tmprss2 genes expression and induced ctsb and ctsl genes expression in pbmc cells of systemic lupus erythematosus patients (fig. 4c, table s7).we then analyzed kegg pathways modulated by ace2, tmprss2 and ctsb/l and found ace2 to be involved in renin-angiotensin system and protein digestion; tmprss2 in transcriptional mis-regulation in cancer, prostate cancer and influenza a; and ctsb/l, in renin secretion, antigen processing/presentation, autophagy, lysosome, phagosome, apoptosis, nod-like receptor signaling pathway, proteoglycans in cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, fluid shear stress and atherosclerosis (table s8). modules of these pathways were used to probe drugbank in order to identify drugs (experimental, in trials or approved) that target components of these pathways; we also searched for clathrin-mediated endocytosis-, actin- and tubulin-polymerization inhibitors (tables s9–s26; see also, fig. 1). a number of potentially usable drugs include anti-androgens or ar inhibitors, vasodilators, tnf blockers or interleukins’ activity modulators (tables s9–s26).our findings indicate that the major cellular components (i.e. ace2, tmprss2 and ctsb/l) that enable sars-cov-2 infection in human cells are widely expressed in human tissues; being enriched in kidney, heart as well as in the tissues of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract, with minimal expression (for ace2 and tmprss2 genes) levels in brain and blood cells. these data are in accordance to recent similar approaches focused solely on the ace2 gene [20,21]. regarding lung (a primary site of infection) it was recently found that both the ace2 and tmprss2 genes are primarily expressed in bronchial transient secretory cells [22]; it was also found that sars-cov-2 entry factors are highly expressed in nasal epithelial cells [23]. the enrichment of all sars-cov-2 infection-related cellular components in the gastrointestinal tract, explain diarrhoea and sars-cov-2 sustained isolation from stool as a major symptom of covid-19 [2,24], and suggest that the intestine may represent a major entry site for the virus due to consumption of contaminated food. considering that ace2 expression correlates with sars-cov (the close relative of sars-cov-2) infection rate in cells [15,18], it is likely that even in patients with no underlying morbidities most major human organs are potentially vulnerable to covid-19.in addition of tissues/organs enrichment to ace2, tmprss2 and ctsb/l genes expression, we also found that the ace2 (likely as a counterbalancing anti-inflammatory response) and tmprss2 genes are induced in various pro-inflammatory conditions including obesity, barrett's esophagus, stomach infection by helicobacter pylori, diabetes, autoimmune diseases and oxidized ldl. several of these morbidities have been already recognized as risk factors for severe disease and death [2] while others indicate novel possible risk factors for severe covid-19. notably, in the particular biological settings assayed, these genes were induced by exhaustive and likely moderate exercise, as well as by cigarette smoke, growth factors, viruses’ infections and interferons (see below); we also found a strong positive regulation by androgens largely explaining the increased sensitivity of men to covid-19 [2].in high-risk covid-19 conditions like hypertension, respiratory disease and cardiovascular disease the ace/angii/at1r axis is overactive and likely ace2 expression (and thus sars-cov-2 available binding sites) increases when patients are treated with drugs that suppress ace/angii/at1r (e.g. at1r blockers) [25]. so, when a hypertensive patient is infected by sars-cov-2 it is in high risk simply because the ace/angii/at1r is overactive (but partly suppressed by at1r blockers) and ace2 is overexpressed. the infection by sars-cov-2 likely eliminates the ace2/ang(1–7)/masr regulatory axis (fig. 1) leading to sudden exaggeration of the ace/angii/at1r activity, causing thus ards and at the systemic level (among others) kidney and cardiac failure (fig. 5 ). indeed, sars-cov infection in mice downregulates ace2 protein (but not ace) contributing to severe lung injury [12]. also, loss of ace2 expression and locally increased angii production triggers leakage of pulmonary blood vessels through at1r stimulation in ards [15]. interestingly, in a model of nanoparticles-mediated lung injury due to direct binding to ace2 (that led to suppression of ace2 activity and expression levels) the administration of losartan (an at1r antagonist) can ameliorate nanoparticles-induced lung injury [26].since ace2, tmprss2 and ctsb/l genes are widely expressed in human tissues (e.g. heart and kidney) leakage of pulmonary blood vessels during ards (fig. 5) would likely allow virus spreading in the circulation enabling direct infection of these organs, decreased ace2/ang(1–7)/masr activity and systemic failure. although there is likely no detectable viremia (i.e., infectious virus in plasma) during asymptomatic infection or prior to clinical disease [27], sars-cov-2 rna has been detected in blood donations from patients with mild symptoms [28] and detectable sars-cov-2 viral rna in blood is a strong indicator for further clinical severity [24]. overall, and since aging (another risk factor for covid-19) correlates with increased ace1/ace2 ratio in a rat model [29], high risk covid-19 patients (or even not hypertensive patients as a prophylactic measure) should likely receive additional ras inhibitors to decrease systemic damage risk.given the delicate balance between the ace/angii/at1r and ace2/ang(1–7)/masr regulatory axes along with the aforementioned morbidities being induced due to disruption of this balance in favor of ace/angii/at1r activation, the development of effective covid-19 therapeutics seems particularly puzzling. specifically, covid-19 is a two-phase disease, namely a. infection and spreading (life cycle) of the virus (fig. 1; ❶ - ❾) in the respiratory and, likely, gastrointestinal tracts, and b. ards induction which can then lead to systemic failure (fig. 5; ❶ - ❹). thus, as it is seemingly both the virus and the uncontrolled response of a patient’s immune system that promote lethality; effective treatments thus, should probe both the life cycle and the side-effects induced by sars-cov-2. current, under investigation or in clinical trials, therapeutics for covid-19 include azithromycin (bacterial protein synthesis inhibitor) chloroquine/hydroxy-chloroquine (lysosomotropic agents inhibiting the activity of endosomal/lysosomal compartments), lopinavir/lavipiravir/remdesivir (antiviral drugs) and τocilizumab (a humanized monoclonal antibody against the il-6 receptor) [4]. for alternatives and/or additional combinatorial approaches, we searched kegg pathways for the ace2, tmprss2, ctsb and ctsl terms (figs. s3–s5) and drugbank for agents (at various phases of development) (tables s9–s23) that target modules of the found pathways; additional information for clathrin-mediated endocytosis, as well as for actin or tubulin polymerization inhibitors in shown in tables s24–s26.for targeting the virus life cycle the magic bullet will be the development of an effective vaccine; here, cell lines that express ace2 (see fig. 3a2, table s3) and facilitate viral replication may be most efficient in large-scale vaccine production. in another approach, soluble ace2 (e.g. rhace2; apn01, gsk2586881) can be likely used to neutralize the virus by competitive binding and also rescue cellular ace2 activity.towards blocking sars-cov-2 binding to ace2 or reducing available binding sites by ace2 downregulation possible approaches may involve, a. antibodies or small molecules that target ace2, e.g. ssaa09e2 which blocks early interactions of sars-cov with ace2 [30], or b. tnf, androgen or ar inhibitors (see tables s9–s26) as we found that these interventions can strongly suppress ace2 and tmprss2 genes expression. yet, given the anticipated toxic effects of systemic loss-of ace2 activity whatever intervention should be transient and with constant monitoring of the clinical output. an alternative (and likely safer as compared to ace2 inhibition) approach would be the usage of tmprss2 specific inhibitors. tmrpss2 is druggable and camostat mesylate partially blocked sars-cov-2 entry into caco-2 and vero-tmprss2 cells [5]; additional benefits of tmrpss2 inhibition would be the reduced viral tropism at the initial site of sars-cov-2 infection and enhanced humoral immune responses (see above). next steps to be targeted at the sars-cov-2 life cycle include membrane fusion and clathrin-mediated endocytosis. here, the clathrin-mediated endocytosis inhibitor ikarugamycin [31], the dynamin inhibitor dynasore (or its analogs) [32] or the actin depolymerizing drug latrunculin b [33] can be tested in preclinical models. also, ssaa09e3 prevents fusion of the viral membrane with the host cellular membrane in a sars-cov infection model [30]. intracellularly, novel sars-cov-2 specific antiviral drugs will target the sars-cov-2 main protease due to its essential role in processing the polyproteins that are translated from the viral rna [34]; alternatively, existing antiviral can be tested, as according to molecular docking studies they bind tightly to rna dependent rna polymerase [35].other intracellular components of the virus life cycle that can be targeted, include tubulin and/or ctsb/l (fig. 1). for the former, colchicine (a tubulin polymerization inhibitor [36]; is a promising (at least in patients with ards [37]; drug, while for the latter, chloroquine or hydroxy-chloroquine are already used against covid-19 [38]. yet, in spite of promising clinical data obtained for chloroquine/hydroxy-chloroquine, which could also relate to reduced renin production (fig. s4), these lysosomotropic agents inhibit the activity of endosomal/lysosomal compartments non-specifically. thus, existing ctsb/l specific inhibitors, some of which are of endogenous origin and function as regulators of cathepsin b activity in the cell, such as the cystatins [39], can be be also considered. notably, cathepsins b/l activity increases significantly with age [40] and has been associated with arterial stiffening and atherosclerotic vascular disease [41]; these observations further support the notion that age and cardiac dysfunction are risk factors for covid-19. at the dark side of inhibiting the acidic cellular endosomal compartments or ctsb/l is their functional involvement in mhc class ii antigen (ag) presentation (fig. 1) [42]. thus, the usage of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine; ctsb/l specific inhibitors or even the excessive contamination of the endosomal compartments by the virus itself could suppress mhc class ii antigen (ag) presentation. this functional output along with the presence of o-linked glycans at the surface of the virus [43] could result in immunoevasion. in this case, clearance of the virus may proceed via proteasome-mediated mhc-i related ag presentation (fig. 1) [44] and the activity of specific immune cells (e.g. nk cells). proteasome is downregulated during aging [45] and is less responsive to ifn-γ [46], which would then result in reduced ag presentation in mhc i molecules and consequently reduced immune responses (fig. 1) in the elderly; in this context drugs and/or small molecules that activate proteasome could provide useful additive therapeutics against covid-19. our previous high-throughput screenings for the identification of natural products modulating proteostatic pathways has revealed promising candidates that exert anti-oxidant activity and a parallel combinatorial action as ctsb/l inhibitors and proteasome activators (unpublished data).in relation to phase 2 of the disease i.e. ards induction and the cytokine storm which can then lead to systemic failure [47] along with the downregulation of ace2 due to sars-cov-2 infection we propose that the use of the ang(1-7) peptide (or non-peptide analogs) could bypass the loss of ace2 and reactivate the anti-inflammatory/vasodilatory masr signaling pathway (fig. 1). in support, ang(1-7) protects endothelial cells from high glucose-induced injury and inflammation [48], improves the action of insulin [49] and has shown protective action in heart failure [50] and stroke [51]. due to the likely covid-19 infection-mediated overactivation of the pro-oxidative ace/angii/at1r axis which can then promote endothelial dysfunction due to dysbalanced nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species ratios in the vessel wall [52], the use of drugs that activate anti-oxidant cellular defenses or act as radicals scavengers could be an additional prophylactic intervention. finally, regarding covid-19 induced cytokine storm, i.e. the uncontrolled systemic inﬂammatory response resulting from the release of large amounts of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines [2,47], the idea of inhibiting key pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. the il-6 receptor by tocilizumab) makes sense [47]; obviously however, an excessive inhibition of the immune system by corticosteroids should be avoided [53]. our findings that interferons, and especially ifn-β and ifn-γ, induce the ace2 gene (figs 2a, 4α; tables s1 and s5) indicate that their therapeutic activationp could upregulate the bindings sites and hence infection rates of the virus in targeted tissues. thus, the regulation of the ace2, tmprss2 and ctsb/l genes from immune system key effector molecules should be studied in details.in conclusion, our data indicate possible novel high-risk groups for covid-19; they also provide a rich resource for a. future investigations of covid-19 pathogenesis and b. possible combinatorial therapeutic approaches.ipt -supervised the study, interpreted the data and wrote the paper; eg, gb and kv collected and analyzed data. all authors edited the manuscript.the authors declare no conflict of interest.it has been confirmed that the sars-cov-2 virus, like other coronaviruses, enters lung cells by binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 3, 4 , which is an important element of the ras. the main function of this enzyme, which is expressed in various human tissues 5 , appears to be the maintenance of a balance between this vasoconstricting system , proinflammatory, proliferative, profibrotic, and oxidant effects and the other antagonizing effects through degradation and decreased production of angiotensin ii and formation of angiotensin 1-7 [6] [7] [8] (fig. 1 ). it seems that the main mechanism by which ace2 regulates angiotensin ii is direct degradation, as its effect on angiotensin ii has been estimated to be 400 times greater than its effect on angiotensin i. 9 in recent years, various studies have been published on ace2's possible beneficial effects on the cardiovascular system, kidneys, and lungs [10] [11] [12] [13] , which have been linked to its angiotensin ii-suppressing effect. imai et al. 13 found that angiotensin ii worsened respiratory distress in different experimental models and that this poor course improved with angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at1) blockade. they also found that the course worsened in the event of a reduction in ace2 expression, as in coronavirus infections, and argued that this unfavorable course was due in part to a drop in angiotensin ii regulation by this enzyme.in this same line, gurwitz 14 and other authors 15,16 have suggested that angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) could have a beneficial effect on the course of lung disease in sars-cov-2 infection, either directly due to their capacity to increase ace2 levels by counteracting the decrease in levels caused by the virus, or by blocking at1 receptors and thus impeding the action of a possible excess of angiotensin ii, the harmful effects of which in the lungs have been reported in cases of pneumonia due to the sars-cov-2 virus 15 and the avian influenza a virus 17 .in an experimental study in rats, ferrario et al. 18 found conflicting data on the effects of lisinopril, an ace inhibitor, and losartan, an arb, on mrna expression of ace2 and the activity of this enzyme, observing that both increase mrna expression of ace2, although only losartan, not lisinopril, increases its activity. based on this study and on the fact that patients at higher cardiovascular risk infected with the sars-cov-2 virus seem to follow a worse course, sommerstein and gräni suggested that treatment with ace inhibitors could have an unfavorable effect under these circumstances. 19 by contrast, studies conducted in humans have not found any association between use of ace inhibitors or arbs and levels of ace2. 20in line with imai et al. 13 , the worse course in infection with the sars-cov-2 virus in patients at higher cardiovascular risk (hypertensive, diabetic, and elderly patients as well as those with greater cardiac morbidity) 21 could also be interpreted to be due to them having higher levels of angiotensin ii and, consequently, higher levels of ace2 to degrade it and thus reduce its harmful effects on the lungs. also supporting the idea of the presence of excess angiotensin ii in this process is the fact that both patients who have sars-cov-2 infection and patients who have survived sars-cov-2 infection have a higher incidence of hypertension, cardiovascular problems, and glucose metabolism disorders. 22according to this hypothesis, blocking angiotensin ii production with ace inhibitors could be an alternative for decreasing its levels and its inflammatory potential in the lungs and, consequently, decreasing ace2 expression. this would render the virus less infectious in the early phases of the disease and in contacts, as it would decrease the receptors available for the sars-cov-2 virus to enter cells. experimental studies have found that ace2 knockout mice are not infected by these viruses. 13 it has also been suggested that ace inhibitors could partly alter the structure of the enzyme due to their similarity to ace, which would also impede the binding of the virus. 5 with respect to more severe cases, the data are more contradictory, as it has been reported that the drop in ace2 activity caused by the virus could increase lung injury, although under these circumstances the possible benefit of ace2 could be due to the fact that it increases angiotensin ii degradation, which would be elevated by a defect in its regulation and an increase in renin activity stimulated by hypoxia. such conditions, which are seen in 5-10% of patients with sars-cov-2 infection, are characterized by devastating acute inflammation with predominant pulmonary expression (pneumonia, hypoxia, and severe respiratory distress) and are probably tied to different expressions of interferon, patterns of cytokines, and other unknown molecular mechanisms, which would explain the different clinical presentations, independent of patient age. 23 it is interesting to note that there are differences between individuals in terms of the structure of ace and its accompanying effects. different studies have shown the pharmacogenomic significance of the three variants of endothelial nitric oxide synthases (enos) with regard to ace inhibition responses. genetic variability in enos genes and in the genes that contribute to their activation could affect the ace inhibitor response. one of these studies focused on patients with hypertension treated with enalapril, an ace inhibitor. 24 the beneficial effects of ace inhibition in the lungs have been demonstrated in various studies, both experimentally (enalapril was found to exert an anti-inflammatory effect in an animal model of induced pulmonary toxicity 25 , and perindopril, another ace inhibitor, was found to have the same effect on lung impairment secondary to sepsis 26 ) and clinically (through a meta-analysis that found ace inhibitors to possess a protective effect with respect to pneumonia risk) 27 .the clinical effect of ace inhibitors and arbs in patients with covid-19 who require hospital admission is being evaluated in a study in progress at king's college hospital and princess royal university hospital in london. 28 its preliminary results do not find a worse course in patients treated with ace inhibitors compared to patients not taking these drugs; it is even noted that they seem to follow a more favorable course. regarding arbs, it is not yet possible to draw conclusions given the limited number of cases analyzed.regardless of other more specific treatment options -antivirals, direct ace2 blockade, treatment with recombinant ace2 in an attempt to saturate the capacity for binding of the virus to the same, vaccines, and others 29,30 -the option proposed should be considered because it is a well-known, accessible, and safe treatment, if administered with proper management and monitoring, which could aid in reducing the spread and effects of the infection.in an initial phase, it would be necessary, as other authors have remarked 13,18 , to analyze as soon as possible the epidemiological data available for infected patients, with respect to their course and history of taking antihypertensive drugs; at the same time, it would be appropriate to propose randomized prospective studies in initial infections in which one of the arms includes not only the treatment considered most suitable for each case but also an ace inhibitor, with strict clinical management of these patients, in line with those already started by other researchers.it is necessary to continue conducting research aimed at improving knowledge of the correlation between angiotensin ii levels and ace2 activity in different tissues -lung, heart, and kidney tissuessince it seems that the degree of activity of the components of the ras may vary by organ and in accordance with plasma levels. in addition, it must be clarified whether the possible beneficial effect reported with higher ace2 levels is due to greater degradation of angiotensin ii and increased angiotensin 1-7 or to an action through other metabolic pathways.we also believe that it is very important to have, as soon as possible, results from regulated and systematized studies on the effects of blockade of angiotensin ii and other components of the ras in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sars-cov-2 infection, since the lack of scientific evidence in this regard is resulting in a proliferation of scientific literature with highly conflicting opinions on the possible effects of the drugs that interfere with this system, based only on experimental studies with many limitations, such as some of those mentioned, and on subjective interpretations. 31, 32 indeed, there have even been formal -and, we believe, hasty -proposals of actions contrary to the positioning of scientific associations and the european medicines agency on the use of these medicines in patients with covid-19. 33none.angiotensina i (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) angiotensina ii (1- figure 1 diagram of the renin-angiotensin system. ace: angiotensin-converting enzyme; ace2: angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; arb: at1 receptor blocker; at1: angiotensin ii receptor type 1; at2: angiotensin ii receptor type 2; mas: mitochondrial assembly receptor. gr1 the global epidemic of three coronaviruses have emerged in this century so far. in (4, 5) . current studies indicate that this coronavirus is similar to sars-cov. although these three coronaviruses -sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 are identified as a highly pathogenic into the human population, there is no effective antiviral treatment. therefore, current studies are focused on rapid development of vaccines and antiviral drugs to prevent and treat coronavirus infection.one of the attractive antiviral drug targets is the sars-cov encoded cysteine protease -papain-like protease (plpro) (6) . this enzyme recognizes the tetrapeptide lxgg motif found in-between viral proteins nsp1 and nsp2, nsp2 and nsp3, and nsp3 and nsp4 (nsp1/2, nsp2/3, nsp3/4) (7, 8) . the hydrolysis of the peptide bond on the carboxyl side of glycine at the p1 position leads to the release of nsp1, nsp2, and nsp3 proteins, which are essential for viral replication. the in vitro studies have shown that sars-cov-plpro harbors two other proteolytic activities, removal of ubiquitin (ub) and ubiquitin-like protein isg15 (interferoninduced gene 15) from cellular proteins (9) (10) (11) . ubiquitinated and isgylated substrates are more efficiently hydrolyzed by sars-cov-plpro than small substrates containing c-terminal lrgg motif (11, 12) . these results indicated a more complex mechanism of substrate recognition than only the interaction of s4-s1 pockets of enzyme with tetrapeptide fragment.further studies revealed that sars-cov-plpro possess two distinct ub binding subsites (sub1 and sub2) and recognize lys48-linked polyub chains for polyubiquitin chain editing and/or deubiquitination of polyubiquitinated proteins (13) (14) (15) .due to the deubiquitinating and deisgylating activities of sars-cov plpro, this enzyme performs significant role in the innate immune response during viral infection (16, 17) . sars-cov-plpro is involved in inhibiting the production of cytokines and chemokines, that are 4 responsible for the activation of the host innate immune response against viral infection (18) (19) (20) . for these reasons, this enzyme is an important molecular target in the design of sars-cov antiviral drugs. despite substantial research efforts in the development of sars-cov inhibitors, efficacy data of these compounds from clinical trials are missing (21) (22) (23) .nevertheless, we hypothesize that information gained over past years for the sars-cov-plpro could be immediately translated into the timely study of sars-cov-2-plpro to accelerate new antivirals development and drug retargeting approaches. the optimal method to check level of similarity in binding site architecture between two enzymes is positional scanning technology. we have recently developed a novel chemical approach, called hycosul (hybrid combinatorial substrate library), to dissect a broad substrate specificity of proteolytic enzymes (24) . application of this approach sars-cov-2-plpro facilitated the development of irreversible inhibitors (vir250 and vir251) harboring a high degree of selectivity for sars plpro variants versus other proteases. crystal structures of vir250 and vir251 in complex with sars-cov-2-plpro reveal their inhibitory mechanisms and provide a structural basis for the observed substrate specificity profiles. we also examined processing of ub and ubl by sars-cov-2 plpro and found that it harbors deisgylating activities similar to sars-cov-1-plpro but its ability to hydrolyze k48-linked ub chains is significantly diminished. altogether this work has revealed the molecular rules governing plpro substrate specificity, provides a framework for development of inhibitors with potential therapeutic value or drug repositioning, and reveals intriguing differences in the biochemical functions of sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro that may contribute to differences in their biology.sars-cov-2 plpro recognizes the tetrapeptide lxgg motif found in-between viral proteins nsp1 and nsp2, nsp2 and nsp3, and nsp3 and nsp4 ( figure 1a ) (7, 8) . hydrolysis of the peptide bond on the carboxyl side of glycine at the p1 position leads to the release of nsp1, nsp2, and nsp3 proteins, which are essential for viral replication. sars-cov-2 plpro also harbors deubiquitinating and deisgylating activities and recognizes the conserved lrgg motif at the c-terminus of these proteins. ( figure 1a ). our previous studies of sars-cov-1 plpro substrate preferences using a combinatorial substrate library containing only natural amino acids revealed that this protease recognizes lxgg motif at p4-p1 positions with broad substrate specificity at p3 position (25) . these results suggest that more detailed mapping of binding pocket architecture should facilitate design of new, active substrates as well as optimal peptide sequences for inhibitor development efforts. to achieve this goal we developed a defined and combinatorial substrate library (hycosul) containing wide variety of nonproteinogenic amino acids (24) . since tetrapeptide fluorogenic substrates are not very efficiently hydrolyzed by enzymes exhibiting deubiquitinating activity, we designed and synthesized the p2 defined library with a general structure of ac-lrxg-acc (x -19 natural and 109 unnatural amino acids) and a hybrid combinatorial substrate library, where three positions were fixed and one position contains an equimolar mixture of 19 amino acids (mix), (p3 sublibrary: ac-mix-p3-gly-gly-acc, p4 sublibrary: ac-p4-mix-gly-gly-acc; p3 and p4a natural or unnatural amino acid) (26) . by design of libraries with tailored peptide scaffold toward dubs we could reach the highest possible concentration of individual fluorogenic substrates in each sublibrary during the assay. table s1 supplemental information). these enzymes do not recognize acidic residues and most d-amino acids (the exception are d-arg, d-hphe, d-lys, and d-phg). the s4 pocket of sars-cov and sars-cov-2-plpro can accommodate hydrophobic residues only, among natural amino acids, practically only leucine can be tolerated (being the best hit for sars-cov-2-plpro) ( figure 1b ). sars-cov-plpro recognized two unnatural residues better than leucine at p4 position (htyr and htyr(me)). other bulky amino acids are also accepted (≥ 30%, hphe, abu(bth), phe(3-i), cys(bzl), cys(mebzl), cys(4-meobzl), hser(bzl), and dht) ( figure 1b ).to validate the library-screening data we designed optimal tetrapeptide fluorogenic substrates to find optimal sequences recognized by sars-cov and sars-cov-2-plpro. we analyzed both sars plpro substrate specificity profile at the p4-p2 positions and selected the most preferred amino acids (p2: gly; p3: dap, phe(guan); p4: htyr, hphe, and abu(bth)) ( figure 1e ). kinetic analysis revealed that some designed substrates were better recognized by sars-cov-1 plpro with ac-htyr-dap-gly-gly-acc being almost 2.5 times more efficiently cleaved than endogenous ac-lrgg-acc. in case of sars-cov-2-plpro, we did not find significant difference between ac-lrgg-acc and all tested substrates ( figure 1c ). it is important to notice that substitution of arg in p3 position by relatively small dap did not affect binding to s3 pocket and yields very good substrates ( figure 1c ). thus, data obtained from combinatorial screening very well translate into individual substrates and demonstrate very high level of similarity between two investigated enzymes.next, we wanted to see if incorporation of unnatural amino acids in p4 and p3 positions of peptide sequence can result in selective tetrapeptide substrates. we tested the substrates with four enzymes that exhibit deubiquitinating activity -sars-cov-plpro, sars-cov-2-plpro, mers-cov-plpro and human dub uch-l3. we have found that none of the substrates with unnatural amino acids in the sequence were significantly recognized at 10µm either by mers-cov-2 plpro (2.5 µm) nor human dub uch-l3 (8 µm) ( figure 1d ). in line with previous data, ac-lrgg-acc was recognized by all four enzymes ( figure 1d ).to further analyze selectivity of peptide sequences with unnatural amino acids we converted two substrates (ac-htyr-dap-gly-gly-acc and ac-abu(bth)-dap-gly-gly-acc) into inhibitors by exchanging the fluorescent tag to a reactive group -vinylmethyl ester (vme). vme group was selected due to its broad reactivity toward dubs (inhibitor selectivity is determined by tetrapeptide sequence). the results from kinetic analysis of sars-cov-plpro and sars-cov-2-plpro inhibitors reflected those of substrate hydrolysis (figure 2a, b) . selective inhibitor toward these enzymes than ac-abu(bth)-dap-gly-gly-vme (hereafter referred to as vir250). importantly, both compounds exhibit high selectivity for sars-plpro variants and robustly inhibit both sars-cov-plpro, sars-cov-2-plpro activities. in contrast, practically no inhibition of human uch-l3 and only a slight inhibition of mers-plpro was observed (figure 2a, b) . further, incubation of hela lysates with ub-vme yields a crosslinking profile that is unaltered by titrations of vir250 or vir251 ( figure 2c ). since a major crosslinking target of ub-vme is known to be human dub enzymes, this data suggests that vir250 8 and vir251 do not cross-react with human dubs. this is an important finding in search for a selective antiviral molecule with minimal cross-reactivity with human dubs.we next set out to determine crystal structures of sars-cov-2-plpro in complex with vir250 and vir251 in order to gain insights into the molecular mechanism by which these molecules inhibit sars-cov-2-plpro activity as well as the basis for the observed substrate selectivity profile. catalytic cysteine 111 of cov-2-plpro engages in michael addition to the bcarbon of the vinyl group of the vme warheads of vir250 and vir251, resulting in formation of a covalent thioether linkage ( figure 2d ). large-scale cross-linking reactions yielded cov-2-plpro-vir250 and cov-2 plpro-vir251 complexes of yield and purity sufficient for growth of diffraction quality crystals. the structure of cov-2-plpro in complex with vir250 ( figure 2e) was determined by molecular replacement using the recently determined structure of apo cov-2 plpro (pdb: 6w9c) and was resolved to 2.79 å resolution with r/rfree values of 0.230/0.195 (table s2) . this structure was used as the molecular replacement search model for determination of the structure of cov-2-plpro in complex with vir251 ( figure 2f ). the cov-2 plpro/vir251 structure was resolved to 1.65 å resolution and refined to r/rfree values of 0.196/0.170 (table s2) . (figures 2a, b) .analysis of the cov-2-plpro/vir250 and cov-2-plpro/vir251 complexes reveals a similar network of interacting residues with ~560 å 2 from a total of ~775 å 2 solvent accessible area of vir251 and ~600 å 2 from a total of ~800 å 2 solvent accessible area of vir250 buried upon complex formation. with the exception of the p4 positions of vir250 and vir251, which engage largely in hydrophobic interactions with cov-2-plpro, the majority of interactions at the p1-p3 positions of both inhibitors are mediated through polar interactions and hydrogen bonds ( figures 3a, b) . at the p1 position of vir250, glyvme is covalently linked via thioether bond to catalytic cys111 of cov-2-plpro and engages in a backbone-backbone hydrogen bond to gly271 (figure 3a ). at the p2 vir250 position, gly engages in two backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds to gly163 and van der waals contacts to leu163 and tyr164 of cov-2-plpro and p3 dap of vir250 participates in a backbone-backbone hydrogen bond with gly271 ( figure 3a ). the network of backbone-backbone hydrogen bonds participated in at the p3-p1 positions of vir250 are fully conserved in vir251 ( figure 3b ). in contrast, while the methylester group from the glyvme warhead of vir250 engages in a hydrogen bond with his272 from the catalytic triad of cov-2-plpro, the corresponding methylester of vir251 participates in hydrogen bonds with trp106 and asn109 side chains, which are proposed to contribute to oxyanion hole stabilization ( figures 3a, b) . trp106 adopts a different conformation and is poorly ordered in the vir250 complex ( figure 3a) . in terms of how our structures correlate with the observed substrate selectivity profiles described above, p2 dependence on gly is the result of residues from the b14-b15 and a5-a6 loops of cov-2-plpro (notably leu162, tyr 264, cys270, gly271, and tyr273) clamping down on top of the p2 position leaving no room for side chain atoms at the r position ( figures 3a-c) . the preference for positive and hydrophobic residues and selection against acidic residues at the p3 position is likely the result of its broader pocket and proximity to the acidic carbonyl oxygens of tyr268, gln269, and leu162, the side chain of asp164, as well as the hydrophobic side chains of leu162 and tyr268 (figures 3a-c) . at the p4 position the strong preference for bulky hydrophobic residues can be explained by the hydrophobic nature of the p4 binding pocket that is largely formed by residues met208 pro247, pro248, tyr264, and tyr268 ( figures   3a, b) . notably, the very deep and broad nature of the s4 pocket of sars-cov-2-plpro has been exploited by the abu(bth) and h-tyr sidechains at p4 of vir250 and vir251, which as noted above project towards different ends of the s4 pocket and engage in distinct networks of contacts ( figure 3c ). with that said there remain regions at the deepest parts of this pocket, particularly an acidic patch formed by asp164, tyr273, and thr301 that could potentially be exploited for development of more potent inhibitors.studies carried out for sars-cov-1 plpro revealed that this enzyme has ubiquitin binding domain and efficiently process full ubiquitin fluorogenic substrates (12) . we wanted to see if this is also the case for sars-cov-2-plpro. to that end, we used ubiquitin activitybased probe (abp) for labeling of both enzymes. in this abp, biotin was used as detection tag and vme as an irreversible warhead that cross-links to the catalytic cysteines. to test its sensitivity, we performed sds-page analysis followed by nitrocellulose membrane transfer and visualization with fluorescent streptavidin ( figure 4a ). we observed significant labeling of both proteases by biotin-ub-vme at a concentration twice higher than the enzyme concentration (200 nm), however sars-cov-1 plpro was more efficiently labeled compared to sars-cov-2 plpro. we next decided to explore the ub and ub-like protein (ubl) substrate specificity of sars-cov-2 plpro by testing its reactivity with a panel of ub/ubl abps. this plpro for recognition of isg15 and monoub and a poor ability to recognize k48-linked and k63-linked diub ( figure 4b ). as expected, preincubation of sars-cov-2 plpro with vir251 completely blocked its ability to react with all of the probes ( figure 4b ). the apparent lack of reactivity with the k48-linked diub-pa probe and the increased processing of isg15 ctd -vps relative to monoub-pa was surprising since sars-cov-2 plpro has been demonstrated to robustly process k48-linked polyub chains and a preference for ub over isg15 (27, 28) .to more thoroughly examine these differences, we performed a comparison of the kinetics of sars-cov-1 and cov-2 plpro processing of lrgg-acc, ub-acc, and isg15-amc fluorogenic substrates. the results of this experiment show that sars-cov-2 plpro processes ub-acc 4-fold less efficiently compared to sars-cov-1 plpro and that sars-cov-2 plpro processes isg15-amc 60-fold more efficiently than ub-acc ( figure 4c ).further, sars-cov-2 plpro, like sars-cov-1 plpro, more robustly processes k48 tetraub compared to k63 tetraub ( figure 4d) , and cross-links to the abp ub-vs similarly to sars-cov-1 plpro, mers plpro, and the human dub usp2cd ( figure 4e ). yet, in side-by-side comparison, sars-cov-2 plpro demonstrates a significantly diminished ability to process k48 tetraub compared to sars-cov-1 plpro ( figure 4f ). this was an unexpected finding as we and others have shown before that sars-cov-1 plpro displays a preference for recognition of k48 diub linkages over isg15 (27, 28) . as expected and shown before, both mers plpro and usp2cd efficiently processes both types of ub chains.the significantly diminished ability of sars-cov-2 plpro to process k48 polyub chains compared to sars-cov-1 plpro was surprising considering the very high overall similarity between the enzymes (83% identity, 9% similarity) ( figure 3d ). to try to reconcile this apparent contradiction, we compared our sars-cov-2 plpro structures with the previously reported structure of sars-cov-1-plpro in complex with k48 diub ( figure 4g ) (28) . this structure revealed three key interfaces: 1) the catalytic site that accommodates the c-terminus of ub with l73, r74, g75, and g76 constituting the s4-s1 residues, 2) a binding site for the 's1 ub' which is the ub n-terminal to the cleavage site in the k48 polyub chain, and 3) a binding site for the 's2 ub' which is n-terminal to the s1 ub ( figure 4g ). comparative analysis of the catalytic sites of sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro shows a 100% conservation of residues involved in contacts to the s4-s1 positions of s1 ub, vir250, and vir251 ( figure  3d ) and unsurprisingly a very similar structure in this region ( figure 4g ). while the ub s1 site harbors more variability than the catalytic site the overall amino acid conservation is still very high (83% identity, 17% similarity) ( figure 3d ) and the structures align well in this region ( figure 4g ).in contrast to the catalytic and s1 ub sites, the s2 ub site of sars-cov-2 plpro harbors much less conservation at the amino acid level (67% identity, 13% similarity) compared to sars-cov-1 plpro (figure 3d) , and there are several structural differences at these regions important for molecular recognition of the s2 ub ( figure 4g) . a key interaction surface at this interface is formed by the ile44 hydrophobic patch (formed by leu8, ile44, and val70), and in the sars-cov-1 plpro/k48 diub structure the ile44 patch of the s2 ub engages in a network of hydrophobic contacts with leu75 ( figure 4g ). interestingly, this residue has changed to a threonine in sars-cov-2 which would be unable to engage in a similar network of contacts with s2 ub as leucine. further, much of the sars-cov-2 structure in proximity to the s2 ub site adopts a slightly different structure including a ~3 å translation of thr75 of sars-cov-2 plpro relative to leu75 of sars-cov-1 plpro and other notable amino acid changes of s66v and e77p ( figure 4g ). lastly, glu179 of sars-cov-1 plpro engages in hydrogen bonds to thr9 and lys11 of s2 ub ( figure 4g ). this residue has changed to an aspartate in sars-cov-2 plpro, which is a conservative change, but the shorter aspartate side chain is unable to engage in a similar set of contacts ( figure 4g ). based on our analysis, we posit that the diminished ability of sars-cov-2 plpro to process k48 polyub is largely due to the aforementioned differences at the s2 ub binding site. consistent with this hypothesis, mutation of leu75 of sars-cov-1 plpro to serine resulted in a five-fold reduction in binding of k48 diub with no apparent effect on monoub (27) . in combination with other changes in sars-cov-2 plpro such as e179d, there appears to be a cumulative effect of several relatively minor changes between sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro at the s2 binding site that altogether have a significant effect on their ability to process k48 polyub. whether these changes also account for the apparent preference of sars-cov-2 plpro for isg15 over ub and whether these intriguing differences in the function of sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro have any effect on the biology of the viruses remains to be seen.the outbreak of the current coronavirus pandemic leading to covid-19 disease has dramatically accelerated research into effective drugs and a vaccine to treat this disease. the genome of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) consists of 29811 nucleotides that encode 29 proteins, two of which are proteases. the first of these, sars-cov-2-mpro is used by the virus in the process of protein maturation. its structure has already been described recently (29) . the results of retargeting about 12,000 drugs and other leading structures resulted in selection of several candidates for further studies (30) . to date, there is no information about the activity of the second protease, namely sars-cov-2-plpro. we were hypothesizing that this enzyme, similarly to sars-cov-plpro, in addition to participating in the process of virus protein maturation, also performs an additional function, which is to help the virus in evasion of the host innate immune responses by controlling the deubiquitination and deisgylation process. thus, sars-cov-2-plpro is also an excellent candidate for a drug, not only blocking virus replication, but also inhibiting the dysregulation of signaling cascades in infected cells (9) . knowledge of substrate preferences is equally important with understanding the structure of the protein, as it enables rational design of inhibitors or research on drug retargeting.in our research, we decided to examine the sars-cov-2-plpro substrate preferences at positions p4-p2 and compare them directly with the well-known sars virus 2002/03 protein, sars-cov-plpro. for this purpose, we used positional scanning technology using natural and unnatural amino acids (hycosul). library screening revealed that both enzymes recognize only gly in p2 and possess broad in p3 and rather narrow substrate specificity at the p4 position. moreover, direct analysis of the preferences of both enzymes demonstrate that the architecture of s4-s2 pockets is almost identical, because they recognize natural and unnatural amino acids practically in a very similar way. the differences in activity for a given amino acid between the two enzymes observed in some positions are very small, and there are no amino acids that are recognized by one enzyme only. this is also confirmed by the analysis of amino acids building s4-s2 pockets in both enzymes, which is identical ( figure 1b and s1). this is critically important information in the aspect of using information from research on inhibitors or retargeting of drugs conducted in the past for sars-cov-plpro for immediate application to sars-cov-2-plpro. analysis of kinetic parameters for tetrapeptide substrates for both enzymes shows a high degree of similarity in terms of kcat/km values, proving that the catalytic yields of both enzymes are also similar. importantly, the sequences containing unnatural amino acids at p4-p3 positions were recognized only by both sars-plpro, not mers-plpro and the human dub uch-l3.we next leveraged the information we gained regarding the molecular rules governing substrate selectivity by sars-cov-2-plpro to develop covalent inhibitors vir250 and vir251.these inhibitors proved to be active and selectively inhibited the sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro, but exhibited much weaker activity towards mers-plpro and practically no activity towards human uch-l3. this is excellent information in terms of conducting research towards the search for peptide antiviral compounds targeted to this enzyme. importantly, our crystal structures of vir250 and vir251 in complex with sars-cov-2-plpro reveals their inhibitory mechanisms and provides a structural basis for the observed substrate specificity profiles.further, the unexpected finding that the p4 amino acids of vir250 and vir251 occupy opposite sides of the broad s4 pocket of sars-cov-2 plpro and that there are additional regions of this pocket that are unengaged by either inhibitor raise the possibility that our structures will inform future drug discovery efforts aimed at generating more potent inhibitors.lastly, we decided to examine processing of ub and ubl variants by sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro and found that sars-cov-2-plpro harbors deisgylating activities similar to sars-cov-1-plpro but its ability to hydrolyze k48-linked ub chains is significantly diminished. this was an unexpected result considering the very high sequence identity between sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro, however our structure analysis revealed subtle structural and sequence variations in the s2 ub binding site of sars-cov-2 plpro which we posit collectively diminish the ability of the s2 ub of k48 polyub to bind and subsequently be processed. further, analysis of the enzyme kinetics of the ub-acc substrate indicates that it is efficiently processed by the enzyme, but the difference between the tetrapeptide substrate and ubiquitin is only about ten times, when in the case of sars-cov-1 plpro this difference is around sixty times ( figure   4c ). this indicates some differences between both enzymes in the aspect of interaction in the exosite binding region related to amino acids identity and similarity. given the role of ub and isg15 conjugation in evasion of the host innate immune responses whether these intriguing differences in the function of sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro have any effect on the biology of the viruses remains to be seen and will be the topic of future studies.collectively our work has revealed the molecular rules governing plpro substrate specificity and reveals a very high level of sequence and structural similarity between sars-cov-1 and 2 plpro in the substrate binding pocket. these findings signal that previously discovered information on sars-cov-1 plpro can immediately be applied to the search for effective antiviral molecules as well as retargeting of known drugs for the inhibition of sars-cov-2 plpro. further, structures of the novel inhibitors vir250 and vir251 in complex with sars-cov-2 plpro provides a framework for rational development of inhibitors with improved potency. altogether, our data also gives a hope for design of a drug that can act as a panselective inhibitor against both sars-cov-plpro and sars-cov-2-plpro, and may have some universal value against emerging coronaviruses in the near future.puumala virus (puuv) infection causes over 5000 cases of hemorrhagic fever in europe annually and can influence the hemostatic balance extensively. infection might lead to hemorrhage, while a recent study showed an increased risk of myocardial infarction during or shortly after puuv infection. the mechanism by which this hantavirus influences the coagulation system remains unknown. therefore we aimed to elucidate mechanisms explaining alterations seen in primary and secondary hemostasis during puuv infection. by using low passage puuv isolates to infect primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (huvecs) we were able to show alterations in the regulation of primary-and secondary hemostasis and in the release of fibrinolysis regulators. our main finding was an activation of secondary hemostasis due to increased tissue factor (tf) expression leading to increased thrombin generation in a functional assay. furthermore, we showed that during infection platelets adhered to huvec and subsequently specifically to puuv virus particles. infection of huvec with puuv did not result in increased von willebrand factor while they produced more plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (pai-1) compared to controls. the pai-1 produced in this model formed complexes with vitronectin. this is the first report that reveals a potential mechanism behind the pro-coagulant changes in puuv patients, which could be the result of increased thrombin generation due to an increased tf expression on endothelial cells during infection. furthermore, we provide insight into the contribution of endothelial cell responses regarding hemostasis in puuv pathogenesis.puumala virus (puuv), a hantavirus carried by chronically infected bank voles, is the causative agent of an estimated 5000 cases yearly of viral hemorrhagic fever in europe (vapalahti et al., 2003; vaheri et al., 2013a) . hantaviruses are rodent-borne, negative stranded, rna viruses belonging to the bunyaviridae family, which may cause two types of disease in humans (goeijenbier et al., 2013) . in europe and asia, hantavirus infection causes hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (hfrs), characterized by renal failure and bleeding complications. in north and south america, hantavirus infection causes the hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (hcps) where patients present with severe acute respiratory distress (sargianou et al., 2012) . changing ecological factors determine fluctuations in hantavirus epidemiology resulting in sudden increases in incidence, for instance through increased food availability, prolonged virus survival and decreased biodiversity (reusken and heyman, 2013) . recent epidemiological studies reported an overall incidence increase of puuv infections in europe (heyman and vaheri, 2008) .although puuv infections have a low case fatality rate (<1%) and in literature the virus is often described as the least virulent of the pathogenic viruses within the hantavirus genus, puuv infections can cause severe disease in healthy adults, which may require a long recovery period lasting up to 1 year (schmaljohn and hjelle, 1997) . furthermore, several reports described cases with severe (hemorrhagic) complications like pituitary gland hemorrhage, hematemesis and gastro-intestinal bleedings (eckerle et al., 2012; antonen et al., 2013) . in contrast to these bleeding complications, a recent study from sweden reported increased risk for acute myocardial infarction shortly after puuv infection (connolly-andersen et al., 2014) . given the high incidence in northern europe, acute myocardial infarction as a complication of puuv infection could have a major impact in endemic areas. in light of both bleeding and thrombotic events that might complicate puuv infections, we hypothesized that endothelial cells, also the target cells for hantaviruses and the major regulators of coagulation and inflammation, play a central role in the pathogenesis of the disease (zhou et al., 2003) .during hantavirus infection drastic alterations in the coagulation system have been observed (laine et al., 2014) . clinical studies focusing on primary and secondary hemostasis during hantavirus disease showed thrombocytopenia in both hfrs and hcps, a decreased plasma activity of coagulation factors ii, v, viii, ix, and x in acute hfrs patients, prolongation of the prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin time, increased thrombin generation and d-dimer levels and a decrease in adamts13 activity in acute puuv patients (lee, 1987; mackow and gavrilovskaya, 2009; laine et al., 2011; mustonen et al., 2013) . the ability to infect endothelial cells by hantaviruses has been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo (yanagihara and silverman, 1990; pensiero et al., 1992; toro et al., 1998) . although infection does not lead to cytopathic changes, several studies observed endothelial cell dysfunction during hantavirus infection (yanagihara and silverman, 1990; pensiero et al., 1992; mackow and gavrilovskaya, 2009) , ranging from increased clinical markers of a stressed endothelium in vivo (sicam-1, vwf and circulating endothelial cells; han et al., 2010; krautkramer et al., 2014) , to increased permeability and decreased huvec integrin ligand migration in vitro geimonen et al., 2002; taylor et al., 2013) .integrin ανβ3, experimentally proven to be the receptor for hantavirus infection, is abundantly present on the surface of endothelial cells (gavrilovskaya et al., 1999; song et al., 2005) . infection with pathogenic hantaviruses is suggested to result in the loss of function of the ανβ3 integrin (wang et al., 2012) , but also an increased ανβ3 expression on cultured endothelial cells and platelets has been observed (liu et al., 2008) . furthermore gavrilovskaya et al. (2010) studied the adherence of quiescent platelets to sin nombre and hantaan virus infected endothelial cells seems to be the result of virus binding to the ανβ3 integrin present on platelets (gavrilovskaya et al., 2010) .how the abnormalities in the primary (thrombocytopenia) and secondary hemostasis (increase in thrombin generation and raised d-dimer levels) are induced in puuv infected patients and the mechanism by which old-world hantaviruses cause hemorrhage and/or renal failure remain largely elusive (vaheri et al., 2013b) . lack of specific treatment and an effective vaccine makes understanding of the pathophysiology of hantavirus infection an important medical need, especially with the recently discovered association of puuv with cardiovascular disease (connolly-andersen et al., 2014) . therefore, we have used an integrated approach to study changes in primary and secondary hemostasis using an in vitro endothelial cell model.veroe6 cells (american type culture collection, usa) were grown in dulbecco's modified eagle medium (dmem) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs, lonza, the netherlands), 100 u/ml penicillin-streptomycin solution, 1% hepes buffer and 1% sodium bicarbonate (all from gibco, life sciences, usa). human umbilical vein endothelial cells (huvecs) were harvested from umbilical veins, which were kindly provided by erasmus mc birth center. briefly, umbilical cords were stored in sterile 500 ml pbs supplemented with gentamycin (50 μg/ml; leo pharmaceutical, denmark). veins were rinsed with pbs containing 50 u/ml heparin (leo pharmaceutical). subsequently, cells were detached with 0.1% collagenase solution (c6885, sigma aldrich, usa). cell suspension was collected in a sterile 50 ml tube followed by two times centrifugation (5 min 300 g). the cell pellet was re-suspended in huvec medium (human endothelial-sfm medium; invitrogen, life sciences, usa) containing 10% human serum (lonza), 20% filtrated fbs (lonza); penicilin/streptomycin 100 u/ml, 20 ng/ml fibroblast growth factor (peprotech, usa) and 10 ng/ml of endothelial cell growth factor (peprotech). huvec cell suspensions were cultured in flasks pre-coated with 20 μg/ml of fibronectin (roche, the netherlands). only cells up to passage four, from one specific donor, were used for this study. identity of the endothelial cells was confirmed by flow cytometry using ulex europeus lectin, anti-cd31 and von willebrand factor (vwf) staining and immunoblot.we made use of the following antibodies and conjugates: polyclonal rabbit anti-vwf, hrp labeled polyclonal goat antirabbit igg and polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse (all from dako, the netherlands). fitc labeled monoclonal anti-cd31 (sigma aldrich, usa), polyclonal rabbit anti-cd41 (perbio science, the netherlands), polyclonal rabbit anti-cd3 (dako), polyclonal rabbit anti-puuv nucleoprotein (bei resources, usa), monoclonal anti-puuv glycoprotein (hy test, finland), monoclonal anti-ανβ3 integrin (abcam, uk), monoclonal antivitronectin (novus bio, usa), polyclonal rabbit-anti pai-1 (bio connect, the netherlands), polyclonal rabbit anti-tissue factor (tf; bio connect), human serum from a recovered puuv case described in goeijenbier et al. (2011) retrieved after informed consent and ethical board approval. antibodies and conjugate were diluted in dilution buffer, which consisted of pbs with 0.5% bovine serum albumin, 2% nacl and 1% normal goat serum.lungs of myodes glareolus from konnevesi, finland, infected with puuv were homogenized in dmem (10% w/v) and 100 μl was added onto a 70-80% monolayer of veroe6 cells and incubated for 60 min at 37 • c in 5% co 2 . the supernatant was discarded and cells were washed three times and incubated with fresh veroe6 medium for an additional 5 days. virus stocks up to passage four were created by centrifugation (10 min 400 g) of the supernatant to create a cell free virus stock. virus titer was determined using immune peroxidase reaction (ipox) and tcid 50 was calculated using the karber formula (kärber, 1931) . infectious virus was inactivated using beta-propiolactone (bpl; sigma aldrich, usa; 1:4000 v/v) at 4 • c for 24 h. subsequently, bpl was inactivated for 1 h at 37 • c. all virus stocks were stored at −80 • until use. all experiments were conducted under biosafety instructions required regarding work with live puuv. vesicular stomatitis virus (vsv) strain indiana, propagated also on veroe6 cells, was kindly provided by dr. bart haagmans (erasmus mc).human umbilical vein endothelial cell were seeded into 24well-(2.4 × 10 5 cells) or 96-well plates (4 × 10 4 cells; corning, usa) depending on the experiment. confluent monolayers were infected with a multiplicity of infection (moi) of 0.5 or 3, with infectious and inactivated (bpl-inactivated) virus or a normal medium control for 60 min at 37 • c in 5% co 2 . after incubation, the supernatant was discarded and cells were washed three times with rpmi 1640 (gibco, life sciences). fresh medium was added as described earlier. for vwf and plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (pai-1) quantification, medium did not contain fcs but was supplemented with 4% sterile filtered bovine serum albumin (bsa, sigma aldrich, usa) to avoid addition of fetal calf vwf and pai-1 (zoellner et al., 1996) . to quantify the percentage of infected cells we used an in house developed ipox procedure. huvec were washed three times with pbs. cells were fixed with absolute −20 • c methanol and incubated at −20 • c for 30 min. after fixation, methanol was discarded and cells were incubated for 30 min at 37 • c with 100 μl of 0.05% h 2 o 2 in pbs, to block endogenous peroxidases. subsequently, cells were washed three times with pbs and incubated for 60 min with polyclonal rabbit anti-puuv nucleoprotein antibody (1:500). cells were washed with pbs 0.05% tween followed by incubation with hrp-labeled goat anti-rabbit igg conjugate (1:500). color development was achieved by addition of 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (aec) substrate (aec dissolved in dimethylformamide buffered with acetate buffer of ph 5). percentage of infected cells was determined by manual counting.for the quantification of viral replication we used a standard line of in house generated puuv rna run-off transcripts, as described for west-nile virus (lim et al., 2013) . briefly, rna run-off transcripts were generated using a segment amplified with pan-hantavirus degenerative pcr primers from (johansson et al., 2010) . pcr products were separated on 1% agarose gel and bands of correct size were collected for dna gel extraction using the minelute gel extraction kit protocol (qiagen, usa). dna fragments were cloned into the pcr4 vector using the topo ta cloning kit (life technologies) and one shot top10 chemically competent escherichia coli were transformed with the recombinant vector (qiagen) according to manufacturer's protocol. at least five colonies were collected for further analyses. plasmid dna was purified using minelute dna purification kit (qiagen). plasmid dna was linearized by restriction digestion (noti for the negative strand rna and psti for the positive strand rna). run-off transcripts (in vitro transcripts) were synthesized using t3 rna polymerase for negative strand and t7 rna polymerase for positive strand (megascript t3 and t7 transcription kits, life technologies), followed by dnase treatment (ambion turbo dna-free tm life technologies), according to manufacturer's manual. the amount of rna in the stock was determined using nanodrop and serially diluted. copy numbers in the standards were calculated using rna concentration and sequence length with help of an online calculator (http://endmemo.com/bio/dnacopynum.php).to study interaction between puuv and platelets, platelets were collected according to the protocol described in gavrilovskaya et al. (2010) with minor modifications. briefly, blood was collected in 0.105 m (end concentration) sodium citrate tubes (bd-plymouth, uk) supplemented with 1 μm prostaglandin e1 (cayman chemical, usa) to block platelet activation. plateletrich plasma (prp) was prepared by centrifugation for 15 min at 700 × g at 25 • c. subsequently, platelets were pelleted for 15 min at 1300 × g at 25 • c. platelets were washed twice and resuspended with modified hepes buffer (25 mm hepes, 137 mm nacl, 0.1% albumin and 1 μm prostaglandin e1 ph 7.4) and counted by a hematocytometer.platelets (10 8 per ml) were incubated with infected huvec (96 wells plate; puuv, bpl inactivated puuv or mock control) for 30 min at 37 • c. after incubation, monolayers were washed three times with rpmi and cells were fixed with formalin. after fixation, formalin was discarded and cells were incubated for 30 min at 37 • c/5% co 2 with pbs 0.05% h 2 o 2 . after three washing steps cells were incubated with rabbit polyclonal antihuman cd41a antibody (1:500). the following steps were as described earlier for ipox. after incubation with hrp-labeled goat anti-rabbit conjugate (1:1000) tmb was added to the wells for substrate reaction. after 10 min reaction was stopped by addition of 0.5 m sulphuric acid and optical density (od) was measured at 450 nm using tecan elisa reader. cd41a expression od was calculated by subtracting the blanc od value (wells incubated without platelets but with detection antibody and conjugate). rabbit polyclonal anti-cd3 (1:500) served as an isotype control.to test if changes in cd41a expression was related to direct binding between puuv and platelets, a mechanism shown in hantaan and andes virus infection (gavrilovskaya et al., 2010) , a pull down assay was designed. to this end, we first coated elisa plates with puuv or a control virus (vsv; 100 μl of 10 6 virus particles in dmem at 4 • c overnight) followed by platelet incubation (10 7 platelets). subsequently, cells were washed five times with pbs and the bound platelets were quantified by using a platelet detection antibody (anti-cd41a 1:500 in dilution buffer) followed by a conjugate substrate reaction. cd41a expression was calculated by subtraction of the od measured in the wells without platelet incubations (blanco) to correct for direct (a-specific) anti-cd41a antibody binding to puuv and anti-cd3 was used as isotype control. subsequently, elisa plates were coated with mouse monoclonal anti-puuv glycoprotein-or isotype control antibody (igg2 corona virus; 1:500 in pbs at 4 • c overnight) followed by incubation with puuv to capture the virus followed by platelet incubation, detection antibody and conjugate substrate reaction. thirdly, to further confirm platelet puuv binding, elisa plates were coated with an anti-platelet antibody (1:500 in pbs at 4 • c overnight), followed by incubation with fresh isolated platelets and eventually an incubation step with puuv or vsv followed by a hantavirus detection antibody (mouse mab anti-puuv-glycoprotein 1:500). after washing substrate reaction was achieved by conjugate addition and tmb reaction steps. as a final step we studied the potential blocking of platelet binding by puuv particles by the addition of a blocking step with polyclonal human anti puuv serum. puuv coated plates and plates coated with 5 days old virus free veroe6 medium were incubated with a polyclonal puuv serum (1:50) from a case described in goeijenbier et al. (2011) or with a puuv igg negative control human serum from a healthy volunteer (also 1:50). the following platelet binding steps and cd41 detection were the same as in the earlier experiments.after infection, in a 24-well plate, supernatants (500 μl) were subsequently removed and cells were lysed, after three washing steps, using a 15 min incubation with 500 μl pbs 1% tritonx-100 followed by centrifugation (10 min 400 × g). cell-free supernatants and supernatant from cell lysates were measured using a pai-1 antigen and vwf elisa kits according the manufacturer's instructions (both from zymugen, hyphen biomed, france).human umbilical vein endothelial cell in 96 wells plates were fixed with 4% formalin and incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-tf antibody (1:500) followed by incubation with the respective conjugate (1:500). after washing tmb was added for substrate reaction and reaction was stopped after 10 min by addition of 0.5 m of sulphuric acid. od 450 nm value was measured on tecan elisa reader.cell lysates were prepared as described in section "von willebrand factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 quantification." elisa plates were coated with a mixture of 50 μl cell lysate and 50 μl pbs over night at 4 • c together with a standard curve of recombinant tf (innovin; siemens healthcare diagnostics, germany). after blocking wells were incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-tf antibody (1:500) followed by incubation with the respective conjugate (1:500). after washing tmb was added for substrate reaction and reaction was stopped after 10 min by addition of 0.5 m of sulphuric acid. od 450 nm value was measured on tecan elisa reader.thrombin generation in platelet-poor plasma (ppp) was measured directly on huvec surface, in a 96 well plate, by recalcification of 80 μl of pooled citrated plasma from healthy donors added to the monolayer of infected and uninfected cells. in summary, cells were washed three times with rpmi and 80 μl freshly thawed plasma was added to the monolayer together with 60 μl of hepes buffer (25 mm hepes, 137 mm nacl, 0.1% albumin). on the same plate a serial dilution of recombinant tf (innovin; siemens healthcare diagnostics, germany) in the absence of cells. finally, 60 μl of hepes calcium [25 mm hepes, 137 mm nacl, 0.1% albumin, 38 mm cacl(2)] was added to plasma. directly after recalcification, od 450 nm value was measured using a tecan elisa reader in a kinetic cycle measuring every 45 s for 1 h. thrombin generation time was defined as the time at halfmaximal od.vitronectin -pai-1 complex levels elisa plates were coated with anti-vitronectin antibody (1:500 in pbs at 4 • c overnight), incubated with supernatant from puuv infected or non-infected huvec followed by incubation with polyclonal anti-pai-1 antibody (1:500) and subsequent conjugate-substrate reaction. pbs incubation was used as a blanc control and anti-cd3 antibody (1:500) incubation as an isotype control.all statistical analyses were performed using graphpad prism 5.01 for windows. when comparing two groups we made use of a student's t-test or mann-whitney u, depending on the distribution of the data. for the comparison between multiple groups non-parametric kruskal-wallis test was used with dunn's multiple comparison test or a one-way anova with tukey's multiple comparisons test, depending on the distribution of the data. p ≤ 0.05 were considered significant.to prevent puuv from in vitro loss of virulence, virus stocks of not more than four passages were prepared. freshly isolated huvec were infected with moi 0.5 and 3. the puuv infected and replicated in huvec, as is summarized in figure 1 . noninfected cells (figures 1a,b) showed no red peroxidase staining, confirming specificity of the puuv-staining. from 24 h post infection with a low moi infection (0.5) onward ( figure 1c ) frontiers in microbiology | www.frontiersin.org only a small percentage (±10%) of the cells were infected, which strongly increased after 48 h (figure 1d) , resulting in 50% of infected stained cells. twenty-four hours after infection at a moi of 3 about 40-50% of cells were infected (figure 1e) , which increased further to 80% by 48 h (figure 1f ). comparable kinetics were seen when viral rna copy numbers were determined. to this end, viral rna numbers were estimated both in supernatant ( figure 1g ) and cell lysate (figure 1h) . at both mois the number of viral rna increased significantly (2-log) after 48 h (kruskal-wallis; p = 0.0028), in the supernatant as well as in the cell lysate, confirming active viral replication. viral replication reached a plateau at 72 h post infection.furthermore western-blot analysis of the cell lysate for puuv nucleoprotein confirmed infection of huvec (figure 1i) . the viral copy numbers in the supernatant or cell lysate of huvec incubated with bpl inactivated virus served as a control for nonreplicating virus. consistently, the rna copy numbers did not increase over time indicating the efficient inactivation of the virus by bpl treatment. efficient inactivation was confirmed by negative ipox staining of the huvec incubated with bpl inactivated puuv (data not shown). gavrilovskaya et al. (2010) reported the potential of hantaan and andes virus to bind quiescent platelets via ανβ3 integrin. since this observation is of much importance in further understanding the alterations in primary hemostasis and its role in disease mechanisms in hfrs we decided to confirm this mechanism for puuv using a different approach. first we assessed the ability of quiescent platelets to bind to puuv infected huvec (figure 2) . binding of platelets was determined by measuring the intensity of cd41a (platelet glycoprotein iib), a heterodimeric integral membrane protein present only on platelets and megakaryocytes. cd41a expression was significantly higher on the huvec monolayer after infection with a moi of 0.5, or 3 compared to the control. detection of cd41a expression did not differ when platelets were not added to the huvec monolayers, suggesting that there was no non-specific anti-cd41a binding to infected cells. furthermore there was no difference in od values when an isotype control (anti-cd3) was used to detect platelets. based on cd41a expression, statistically significant differences were measured between infected wells and wells incubated with virus free veroe6 medium (negative control) at 24 h post infection (one way anova, moi 3 vs. neg p < 0.01, moi 0.5 vs. neg p < 0.05). after 48 h of infection this difference in cd41a expression was also significant between moi 3 infected wells and the bpl inactivated virus control (one way anova, moi 3 vs. neg p < 0.001 and moi 3 vs. bpl p < 0.001; moi 0.5 vs. neg p < 0.05). taken together, the data indicate that platelets bind to cultures incubated with puuv. huvec incubated with bpl did show a trend to increased platelet cd41a expression (figure 2) , but this was not statistically significant.we measured vwf antigen in cell free supernatant and vwf expression on the surface of infected huvec. increased vwf production may be a general inflammatory response of endothelial cells that could be evoked as a result of puuv infection. however, at the time points where platelet binding increased, huvecs infected with puuv showed no alteration in vwf activity, as determined by elisa, in neither the supernatant nor the cell lysate (data not shown) compared to bpl or negative control.next we looked whether the platelets could bind directly to puuv particles. for this purpose we performed an in-house developed platelet pull down-assay using quiescent platelets. to this end, several experiments were conducted to demonstrate specificity of this binding. figure 3 shows results of binding of platelets to virus-coated elisa plates ( figure 3a ). more platelets frontiers in microbiology | www.frontiersin.org figure 3 | puumala virus and platelets bind to each other. in a pull down assay platelets adhere better to puuv virus particles compared to vesicular stomatitis virus (vsv; a; mann-whitney u p = 0.0022). when virus was captured with a puuv glycoprotein antibody (b), platelets were able to bind to the captured virus, in contrast to wells coated with an igg2 control antibody (anti-coronavirus glycoprotein; mann-whitney u p = 0.0022), resulting in no capture of puuv during the incubation process, controlling for potential other factors present in the virus stock medium. when platelets were bound to plates coated with an anti-cd41a antibody (c), the puuv particles were able to bind to platelets based on the significant increase in puuv detection od compared to wells incubated with vsv particles, thus no puuv present (mann-whitney u p = 0.0043). the binding between puuv and platelets could be blocked by the addition of a blocking step with human anti-puuv serum (d) which show a decreased cd41 expression when compared to the puuv coated wells incubated with a puuv negative control serum. in all experiments no difference in od was measured when an isotype control antibody was used. data are representative of three independent experiments. * * p < 0.01, * * * p ≤ 0.001.(mann-whitney u; p = 0.0022) adhered to plates directly coated with puuv compared to plates coated with a virus control (vsv), which was cultured under the same conditions as puuv.subsequently, to control if the binding of platelets was directly to the puuv particles and not due to another factor present in the veroe6 supernatant we made use of a sandwich elisa principle. puuv was incubated on elisa plates with wells coated with a monoclonal igg2 specific for the glycoprotein of puuv or with a igg2 control antibody. by this approach significantly more platelets bound to the wells where puuv was captured compared to wells with no puuv capture (mann-whitney u; p = 0.0022; figure 3b ).to confirm direct binding between platelets and puuv, platelets were captured to anti-cd41 coated elisa plates and incubated with virus followed by detection with a puuv specific antibody. to control for binding between puuv detection antibody and captured platelets, control wells were incubated with vsv. puuv detection was significantly higher in the wells incubated with puuv compared to vsv (mann-whitney u; p = 0.0043; figure 3c) . these experiments collectively suggest that platelets can specifically bind to puuv.finally, we show in figure 3d that the binding of platelets to puuv particles could be blocked by addition of a blocking step with human serum from a recovered puuv case. when wells coated with puuv were incubated with human serum with proven puuv neutralizing igg antibodies significantly less platelets adhered to the wells compared to wells incubated with a puuv negative human control serum (figure 3d ; p < 0.001). the anti-cd41 expression in the wells with a blocking step was comparable to that of the negative control, which consisted out of whiskers from minimum to maximum. moi 0.5 infection resulted in shortened tgt 48 h post infection (one way anova p < 0.001). mean tissue factor (tf) concentration, calculated from tgt standard curve, increased more than ninefold after moi 3 infection (one way anova 24 and 48 h p < 0.01). moi 0.5 infection increased tf concentration threefold after 48 h (one way anova p < 0.05; e, f; bars represent se of the mean). data are representative of three independent experiments. * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, * * * p ≤ 0.001.plates coated with 5 days old vero e6 virus free medium. binding of the neutralizing igg antibodies was confirmed by incubation with a goat-anti human hrp labeled conjugate and subsequent tmb reaction.to test the hypothesis whether increased thrombin generation observed in acute puuv patients is the result of increased tf expression on endothelial cells we incubated huvec, infected with puuv at a moi of 3 or with a virus free 5 days old vero e6 medium (control) with a polyclonal anti-tf antibody. by this approach we showed that tf expression was significantly increased with an almost twofold increase in od value 48 h post infection (figure 4a , mann-whitney u; p = 0.0047). cells infected with puuv also showed an increased tf concentration when the cell lysates of puuv infected wells were compared to the lysates of control wells (figure 4b ; both mock and bpl). subsequently we wanted to prove that the increase in tf expression on the endothelial cell surface was of biological significance and would led to increased thrombin generation. thrombin generation was quantified directly on infected endothelial cells by incubating normal plasma on cells and initiating coagulation by the addition of calcium ions. infected cells induced plasma clotting faster due to increased thrombin generation (figures 4c,d) . using a calibration curve with purified tf in the absence of endothelial cells, we quantified huvec tf production after virus infection and after incubation with a virus free medium control. tf concentration showed a statistically significant increase for moi 3 at 24 h compared to the negative control and the huvec infected with moi 0.5 (one way anova; p < 0.01) and at 48 h post infection compared to the negative control (one way anova; p < 0.001). the moi 0.5 infection led to higher levels of tf on the huvec surface only after 48 h post infection (one way anova; p < 0.05) when compared to mock.increased levels of pai-1 and pai-1-vitronectin complexes in huvec supernatant after infection with puuv important proteins in the regulation of fibrinolysis show close interactions with the pathogenic hantavirus receptor ανβ3 integrin. for instance vitronectin, a stabilizer of pai-1 activity in plasma, is largely regulated by this receptor (mackow and gavrilovskaya, 2009; florova et al., 2013) . to study potential changes in regulators of fibrinolysis we first measured pai-1 levels in the cell-free supernatant and supernatant of cell lysate from 24-well plates infected with puuv or control infections. the total pai-1 antigen (the combination of levels in the supernatant and cell lysate) was significantly increased 48 h post infection (kruskal-wallis; p < 0.05) with moi 3 ( figure 5a ). subsequently, we tested if in our model pai-1 would bind to vitronectin, since this binding is associated with increased/prolonged pai-1 activity (seiffert and loskutoff, 1991) , and if this interaction is altered during infection. elisa plates coated with a monoclonal antibody against vitronectin, incubated with supernatant from our experiments (pooled, control or from moi 3 infected wells) followed by incubation with pai-1 antibody suggested formation of pai-1 vitronectin complexes due to an increase in od compared to incubation with pbs (mean expression in medium 490 mod (±100) vs. 370 mod (±70) p = 0.02). if supernatants were tested separately (puuv vs. mock) levels of pai-1 vitronectin complexes were increased after puuv infection (mann-whitney u; p = 0.03; figure 5b ).the present study addresses platelet binding to puuv infected cells and activation of secondary hemostasis after endothelial cell puuv infection. with the lack of a valid and accessible animal model for old-world hantavirus infection, we remain dependent on ex vivo cell culture models to address questions regarding virulence and pathogenesis (vaheri et al., 2013b) . taking into account the recently found association of puuv infection with cardiovascular disease (connolly-andersen et al., 2014) and hemorrhagic complications that may occur during infection, the interaction between puuv and the coagulation system especially warrants further attention. since puuv tends to rapidly lose virulence upon in vitro cell passages the use of low passaged isolates is of vital importance (nemirov et al., 2003) . therefore, we have put a lot of emphasis on obtaining low passage puuv isolates and optimisation of the hemostatic assays under the right biosafety regulations using primary cell cultures.based on hemostatic changes seen in several clinical studies, most from northern europe, we decided to study specific parts of the coagulation system in vitro. we started by studying the effects of puuv infection on formation of a platelet plug, the major event in primary hemostasis. binding of platelets by puuv infected cells could explain thrombocytopenia in acute puuv patients, since it would result in wasting or loss of platelets adhered to these cells (gavrilovskaya et al., 2010; laine et al., 2011) . especially if we make notice of the ability of hantaviruses to infect megakaryocytes and thereby lead to a decreased production of platelets, in addition to the loss of platelets adhered to infected cells (liang et al., 2004; lutteke et al., 2010) . in our model it seems that puuv infection increases binding of platelets to the surface of huvec compared to control cells (figure 2) . here we assumed increased cd41a expression observed in the first experiments was the result of an increased number of platelets on the huvec. theoretically, increased cd41a detection could also be due to an increased expression of cd41a on platelets, after 30 min incubation with infected huvec, rather than an actual increase in platelet numbers. while we cannot rule this out based on our experiments, we blocked extrinsic platelet activation by prostaglandin treatment making platelet activation less likely. furthermore, in line with studies performed with more pathogenic hantaviruses (gavrilovskaya et al., 2010) , we tested specific binding of platelets to puuv particles. judged from results from the platelet pull down experiments (figure 3 ) this seemed to be a specific binding between virus and platelets which could be reversed by the addition of puuv neutralizing antibodies. in these experiments we controlled for aspecific binding of antibodies (isotype control experiments), factors present in the virus culture medium (5 days old veroe6 medium as a control) and binding of platelet detection antibody directly to puuv.we expected the increased platelet binding to co-occur with increased vwf production, as a general inflammatory response during infection. however, the observation that vwf concentration does not change during puuv infection, further suggested a vwf-independent mechanism for platelet binding in hfrs. results from earlier studies showed an increased vwf concentration in hospitalized puuv patients (laine et al., 2011) . one should keep in mind that overall plasma vwf level in any patient represents the state of the total endothelial cell layer and not only that of infected cells, as is the case in our model. furthermore we are studying the acute response of endothelial cells in the first 48 h after infection, a time point at which puuv patients are generally not considered to be hospitalized and tested. the increase of vwf in all three conditions (control, bpl and puuv) over time in our huvec model could be the result of an increased number of cells or a sign of in vitro stress and activation of the endothelial cells. since it seems highly unlikely the cells still multiply after the formation of a full monolayer, which is present at the time of infection, we believe that also non-infected cells show a certain level of activation when in culture. gavrilovskaya et al. (2010) were the first to study the interaction of hantaviruses (andes and hantaan) with platelets, and concluded that there was a specific binding of hantaan and andes virus particle particles to ανβ3 integrins present on both endothelial cells and platelets. interestingly, our experiment showed a trend to increased number of platelets bound to the bpl-inactivated virus treated cultures, suggesting active replication was unnecessary and inactivated virus, bound to the cell surface, might also bind to integrins present on platelets. however, this hypothesis is merely based on a statistical trend observed in wells with the cells incubated with bpl inactivated virus. for the interpretation of our data one should take in mind that we made use of a moi 3 bpl at t = 0 h and that the bpl inactivated virus will not replicate. therefore at timepoint t = 24 and t = 48 the bpl control will most likely be comparable to the moi 0.5 infection. it could very well be the case that when increasing the moi for the bpl infection a more comparable result to the moi 3 infection would be observed.puumala virus infections of huvec directly increased the expression of tf on the cell surface and in the cell lysate compared to controls. this resulted in drastic activation of secondary hemostasis in our cell model during puuv infection. data from a direct clotting assay on the cell monolayer gives interesting insights in the potential mechanism behind increased thrombin generation seen in acute puuv patients (laine et al., 2010 (laine et al., , 2014 . a clear pro-coagulant state, the result of an increased expression of tf on the surface of puuv infected cells, resulted in enhanced thrombin generation. increased thrombin generation (decreased thrombin time, overall increase in prothrombin fragments 1 + 2, antithrombin and protein c) that laine et al. (2010 laine et al. ( , 2014 observed in acute puuv patients could very well be the result of direct infection of endothelial cells and concomitant increased production of tf. whether increase in tf is a general defense response or if the virus actually benefits from tf, as is seen in certain herpesvirus infections (pryzdial et al., 2014) , remains unknown. however, excess of tf production during infection could lead to increased clotting and eventually consumptive coagulopathy or even dic, a severe condition that is only seen in a small percentage of puuv patients (laine et al., 2010) , but which could be one of the factors contributing to the hemorrhagic complications seen in hfrs. especially since increased tf expression has been proven to play an important role in the pathogenesis of other viral hemorrhagic fevers like marburg and ebola (geisbert et al., 2003a,b) .since alterations in pai-1 levels are related to renal disturbances comparable to that seen in hantavirus disease (gong et al., 2007; malgorzewicz et al., 2013) and functional polymorphisms in pai-1 were related to more severe disease in acute puuv patients (laine et al., 2012) , we also studied pai-1 and regulators of pai-1 activity. infection with puuv increases pai-1 production, which would in vivo lead to decreased fibrinolysis. the ανβ3 integrin receptor plays an important role in pai-1/vitronectin complex formation (zhou et al., 2003) . increased ανβ3 expression during puuv infection combined with competitive binding of hantavirus with vitronectin for ανβ3 could hypothetically lead to further alterations in pai-1 half-life and stability. the increased level of vitronectin-pai-1 complexes in the supernatant of puuv infected cells further strengthens this hypothesis. considering that an increase in pai-1 and vitronectin could result in renal impairment, and even cause a nephritis-like response, pledges for further evaluation of interaction between ανβ3 integrin, pai-1, vitronectin and hantaviruses.angiotensin i converting enzyme (ace) is a dicarboxypeptidase that cleaves angiotensin i (ang i) to form angiotensin (ang) ii. its enzymatically active homologue, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), by contrast, degrades ang ii to form ang-(1-7) as well as other substrates (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . there is limited information on whether organ-specific ace2 expression is altered when ace is decreased in genetic models where ace is absent. if ace2 acts indeed as a negative regulator of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) by regulating angiotensin ii levels then ace2 should decrease when ace decreases and conversely ace2 activity should increase when ace activity increases. this mode of physiologic regulation, however, can be altered in pathophysiologic conditions. for instance, it is known that in kidneys from diabetic mice ace2 and ace change in the opposite direction (6) (7) (8) (9) , such that in renal cortex from diabetic db/db (6, 7) and stz mice (6) ace is decreased, whereas ace2 is increased. of note, within the glomeruli from db/db mice (9) ace and ace2 are also altered in the opposite manner (high ace and low ace2) which is just the contrary of that seen in proximal tubules (6, 9) . this finding in diabetic mice was generally confirmed in kidney biopsies from patients with diabetic kidney disease (10) . to examine whether deficiency of kidney ace results in the expected physiologic decrease in kidney ace2 expression we used two different genetic models of ace ablation . captopril and telmisartan moreover were used to pharmacologically inhibit ace activity and block the at1 receptor, respectively .the recent recognition that ace2 is the main receptor that facilitates coronavirus entry into cells (11) raised concerns that treatment with renin-angiotensin system blockers (ras ) might increase the risk of developing a severe and fatal severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 infection (12) . this is relevant because certain groups of patients including those with hypertension, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and clearly the elderly are at risk of covid-19 and many of those patients are treated with ras blockers (12) (13) (14) . concerns came from previous studies showing that angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers and ace inhibitors can upregulate ace2 in certain experimental conditions (15) (16) (17) (18) . the evidence in this regard is not always consistent and differs among the diverse ras blockers, animal species and differing organs. (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) .we reasoned that this issue should be investigated by assessing ace2 expression using membrane membranes prepared from target organs where this protein resides. in polarized epithelia like the lungs, kidneys and intestine, ace2 in its full length form is anchored to the apical plasma membrane (9) . the kidney has abundant ace2 in the apical border of the proximal tubule where it colocalizes with ace (9) . the lungs, by contrast, have a low level of ace2 expression such that the metabolism of angiotensin ii and formation of angiotensin 1-7 depends on enzymes other than ace2, namely pop (25) . to determine whether deficiency of kidney ace alters kidney ace2 expression we used two different genetic models of ace ablation. to mimic the clinical setting of patients receiving ras blockers are exposed to the current covid -19 pandemic, captopril and telmisartan were administered for 2 weeks to pharmacologically inhibit ace activity and the at1 receptor, respectively.all studies were conducted with the review and approval of the institutional animal care and use committee of northwestern university. organs from two genetic models of ace kidney ablation (ace.4 and ace 8/8) were generously provided by drs hong d. xiao and kenneth bernstein.ace.4 mice have the somatic ace promoter replaced by the kidney androgen-regulated protein promoter which in these mice is essentially non-functional (26) ; in the absence of exogenous androgens the levels of kidney ace are less than 1% of normal and no ace is detected in other organs ; this model is overtly hypotensive (26) . the effect of localized kidney ace deficiency on kidney ace2 levels was examined in ace8/8 mouse which is a model lacking ace in the kidney or vascular endothelium, but with 100-fold normal cardiac ace levels (27) . in addition, ace8/8 mice have significant levels of ace activity in the lung and in the plasma and blood (27) .in this animal model, kidney represents a major change from wild-type mice as this organ normally expresses a substantial amount of ace activity in both vascular endothelium and proximal tubular epithelium (27) . the ace8/8 mice have a near normal blood pressure and do not exhibit any gross abnormalities in kidney function (27) . both ace models used in this study have a mixed c57/129 background (26, 27) .to examine the effect of pharmacological ace inhibition on ace2, two groups of 12-14 weeks old c57blks/j mice were assigned to drink either tap water (n=8) or tap water with an ace inhibitor, captopril, (n=8) at a dose of 120 mg*kg -1 *day -1 for 14 days. two other experimental groups of 12-14 weeks old c57blks/j mice were randomly assigned to drink either tap water (vehicle, n=6) or tap water with an angiotensin ii receptor antagonist, telmisartan (boehringer ingelheim), at a dose of 2 mg*kg -1 *day -1 (n=6) for 14 days. before captopril and telmisartan administration, mice were weighted and the daily fluid intake per mouse was recorded to estimate the concentration of the compound needed to be added to the drinking water. during the drug administration, water consumption and body weights were also controlled to make appropriate adjustments.rna was isolated from kidney cortex with trizol reagent (gibco invitrogen). quantitative realtime pcr was performed using the taqman gold rt-pcr kit and abi prism 7700 (applied biosystems) sequence-detection system. primers and probes for ace were designed using primer express software (applied biosystems). the sequences of forward, reverse primer, and probe for ace, ace2 and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (g3pdh) were the same as described before (8) . reverse transcription was carried out for 30 min at 48°c. the ace and ace2 mrna levels of the samples were normalized to their g3pdh contents. experiments were carried out in triplicate for each data point.for total cell lysates, tissues (kidney cortex and lungs) were homogenized in a buffer consisting of (in mmol/l) 50 hepes, ph 7.4, 150 nacl, 0.5% triton x-100, 0.025 zncl2, and 1.0 phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride and then clarified by centrifugation at 6,000g for 15 min. for membrane fraction isolation, a previously employed protocol was used (7) but without edta addition. after measuring protein concentration, tissue samples were diluted in a buffer (50 mmol/l 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid, 300 mmol/l nacl, 10 µmol/l zncl2, and 0.01% triton-x-100, ph 6.5), containing edta-free tablets. the plates were read using a fluorescence plate reader flx800 (biotek instruments) at an excitation wavelength of 320 nm and an emission wavelength of 400 nm. all reactions were performed at ambient temperature in microtiter plates with a 100 µl total volume (6, 28) .total cell lysates and isolated membrane preparations from kidney cortices and lungs were isolated as specified above and subjected to western blot analysis as previously described (6) . for detection of ace, nitrocellulose membranes were incubated with mouse monoclonal antibody (5c4, kind gift from dr. sergei danilov). ace2 protein was detected using our affinity purified rabbit anti-ace2 antibody (obtained as described in. signals on western blots were quantified by densitometry (eagle eye, stratagene) and corrected for gapdh (total cell lysates) or β-actin (membrane fraction) loading control.the data were expressed as relative to the control (vehicle or wild-type) animal groups, assigning a value of 100% to the control baseline mean. the data were reported as mean ± standard error (se). significance was defined as p< 0.05. for comparisons between two independent means, the t-test was used.in ace.4 mice, kidney ace mrna was about 7±4% of the mrna levels in wt mice as previously reported (26) . total cell lysates from ace.4 mice kidney cortex were examined for the presence of ace and ace2 protein (figure 1 ). the signal for ace protein in kidneys from wt mice was detectable as a single band at the expected molecular weight of about 170 kd. in ace.4 mice, ace protein was barely detectable (equivalent of 3±1% of the wt) ( figure 1b) . in ace.4 mice, ace2 protein abundance in kidney cortex total cell lysates and in isolated membranes was reduced to 70 % and to 42% of the wt, p<0.05, respectively ( figure 1b and 1c) .concordant with ace2 protein expression, ace2 activity was also reduced significantly in kidneys from ace.4 mice as compared to wt controls (58.3±12% of the wt) ( figure 1d (figure 2a) , whereas it was clearly present in wt kidneys ( figure 2a ). ace2 protein expression in isolated kidney membranes from ace8/8 was significantly reduced (38±9% of wt mice) ( figure 2b ). in ace8/8 mice, ace2 activity likewise was lower than in the wild-type but this difference was small and not statistically significant (90±17% of the wt) ( figure 2c ). ace2 mrna levels in kidney cortex from ace8/8 mice were not different from those of their respective wt littermates (1.02±0.04 vs. 1.00±0.07, respectively).kidney cortex of mice treated with captopril or telmisartan for 14 days and respective vehicle treated controls were examined for the presence of ace2 mrna, protein and activity. no significant changes in mrna levels were found between captopril treated and control mice (99±21%) of control. ace2 activity was lower in isolated membrane from captopril-treated mice (81±8% of the vehicle-treated mice) but the difference did not reach statistical significance , (p = 0.053). ace2 protein abundance in total lysates from captopril-treated mice was reduced to 71±5 of vehicle-treated mice but the difference did not reach statistical significance ( figure 3a ). in isolated membranes, however, the decrease in ace2 protein was profound and statistically significant (37±4% of the vehicle-treated mice) ( figure 3b) . a corresponding increase in cytosolic ace2 protein was found ( figure 3c ). by confocal microscopy ace2 is localized in the apical membrane where it strongly colocalizes with ace as previously described site (9) . a weak ace2 staining can be seen in the cytoplasm of cells from a captopril treated mice suggesting internalization of the protein whereas ace staining remains restricted to the luminal membrane ( figure 3c ). ace2 protein in lysates from telmisartan-treated mice was not significantly different from vehicle-treated mice (114±16%)( figure 3d ) whereas in isolated membranes there was a significant decrease in ace2 protein (76± 9% of the vehicle-treated mice p<0.05) ( figure 3e ).in lung tissue ace2 protein is low as demonstrated by us recently (25) attempts to perform western blots with either total lysates or isolated membranes did not produce a signal. therefore, the results are limited to ace2 activity which although low was consistently detected(figure 4).captopril treatment had no significant effect on ace2 activity either lung lysates ( figure 4a ) or isolated membranes ( figure 4b ) . likewise, telmisartan had no significant effect on ace2 activity in either lung lysates ( figure 4c ) or isolated membranes ( figure 4d) our findings in two different models of ace genetic ablation, global in the ace.4 mice and restricted to the kidney in the ace8/8 mice shows that lack of ace protein is associated with a significant reduction of kidney ace2 protein. the decrease in ace2 at the level of protein was not accompanied by a reduction in kidney ace2 mrna. this confirms that ace2 can be regulated post transcriptionally as previously reported by us(6) and others (29) . our finding that ace2 mrna was unchanged in ace deficient mice is also consistent with a previous report in another genetic model, the tisace-/-knockout mice, that lacks tissue ace and possess about 40% of normal circulating levels of ace (30) . similar to our results in two models of kidney ace deficiency, in tisace-/-mice kidney expression of ace2 mrna was not altered by ace depletion. ace2 protein abundance or activity, however, were not determined in this previous study (30) altogether, these findings suggest that changes in ace 2 occur post transcriptionally and are accompanied by changes in ace2 in the same direction such a decrease in kidney ace is apt to be associated with a decrease in kidney ace2. overall the directionally observed changes are consistent with a physiologic role of ace2 in terms of regulating its main substrate, angiotensin ii (5) . given the intense interest on ace2 as the sars-cov-2 receptor we next wanted to see if a similar directional change in ace2 occurs when an ace inhibitor or a at1 blocker is chronically administered.we reasoned that in terms of assessing ace2 as the sars-cov-2 receptor what matters the most is the relative abundance of full-length membrane bound ace2 protein . in polarized epithelia like the lungs, kidneys and intestine, ace2 in its full length form is anchored to the apical plasma membrane (9) . the effect of acei and arbs on ace2 protein expression in the lungs has not been previously studied and previous studies in kidney and other organs gave variable results (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) . here we show that captopril and telmisartan both decrease kidney ace2 protein in isolated membranes without significantly affecting protein abundance in total cell lysates ( figure   3 ). captopril in particular produced a marked decline in ace2 protein in isolated membranes while increasing cytosolic ace2( figure 3c ) . the latter result was somewhat unexpected because ang ii has been shown to produce internalization of ace2 in cultured cells (31) . the discrepancy between this previous study in ace2-transfected neuroblastoma cells and our findings with in vivo chronic administration of captopril are not apparent to us but clearly the experimental conditions are widely different .in lung tissue, the expression of ace protein is very low (25) . consistent with this previous study we could not detect ace2 by western analysis in lung lysates or isolated membranes. in terms of enzymatic ace2 activity there was no significant effect by either captopril or telmisartan.( figure 4 ). within lung tissue, ace2 protein is detectable only in type ii pneumocytes which makes it very difficult to assess the impact of ras blockers using lung membranes.in conclusion, genetic ablation and inhibition of ace are accompanied by a reduction of ace2 protein and enzymatic activity. in a transgenic model of cardiac ace overexpression and kidney ace ablation, ace2 protein in the kidney was also decreased. this suggest that changes in the expression in one enzyme may elicit similarly directional changes in the other homologue such that formation and degradation of ang ii can be coupled. the administration of an ace inhibitor and an at1 receptor blocker decreased ace2 protein expression in kidney isolated membranes and had no detectable effect on ace2 activity in lung isolated membranes where ace2 expression is very low. these findings altogether suggest that two potential target sites for sars-cov-2 infection where ace2 is expressed , the kidney and lung apical membrane, ras blockers decrease or had no effect on ace2 expression. we conclude that these medications do not increase ace2 expression in lung or kidney epithelia and therefore can no longer be considered to pose a risk for covid-19. this information supports the position of many medical societies and recent publications expressing the view that ras blockers should not be abandoned in covid-19 patients or the large number of people that can be potentially exposed . panel c . proximal tubule confocal microscopy showing ace2 (red) ace (green) and merged image ( yellow) ace2 is the apical site (arrow), but some ace2 staining is also seen in the cytoplasm (double arrow) of a captopril treated mice . the inset shows an increase in cytosolic ace 2 protein in captopril treated as compared to vehicle treated mice .panel d shows ace2 protein in total cell lysates from telmisartan-treated mice and panel e shows ace2 protein in isolated membranes from telmisartan-treated mice .* p<0.05, ** p<0.01. some authors recently suggested that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) should be discontinued, even temporarily, given the current pandemic of sars-cov-2 virus. the suggestion is based on the hypothesis that ace-inhibitors and arbs may favor the entry and diffusion of sars-cov-2 virus into the human cells. ace-inhibitors and arbs may increase the expression of ace2 receptors, which are the sites of viral entry into the human organism. ace2 receptors are ubiquitous, although they are extremely abundant on the cell surface of type 2 pneumocytes. type 2 pneumocytes are small cylindrical alveolar cells located in close vicinity to pulmonary capillaries and responsible for the synthesis of alveolar surfactant, which is known to facilitate gas exchanges. the increased expression of ace2 for effect of ace-inhibitors and arbs can be detected by increased production of angiotensin1-7 and mrna related to ace2. there is the fear that the increased expression of ace2 induced by ace-inhibitors and arbs may ultimately facilitate the entry and diffusion of the sars-cov-2 virus. however, there is no clinical evidence to support this hypothesis. furthermore, available data are conflicting and some counter-intuitive findings suggest that arbs may be beneficial, not harmful. indeed, studies conducted in different laboratories demonstrated that ace2 receptors show a down-regulation (i.e. the opposite of what would happen with ace-inhibitors and arbs) for effect of their interaction with the virus. in animal studies, down-regulation of ace2 has been found as prevalent in the pulmonary areas infected by virus, but not in the surrounding areas. in these studies, virus-induced ace2 down-regulation would lead to a reduced formation of angiotensin1-7 (because ace2 degrades angiotensin ii into angiotensin1-7) with consequent accumulation of angiotensin ii. the excess angiotensin ii would favor pulmonary edema and inflammation, a phenomenon directly associated with angiotensin ii levels, along with worsening in pulmonary function. such detrimental effects have been blocked by arbs in experimental models. in the light of the above considerations, it is reasonable to conclude that the suggestion to discontinue ace-inhibitors or arbs in all patients with the aim of preventing or limiting the diffusion of sars-cov-2 virus is not based on clinical evidence. conversely, experimental studies suggest that arbs might be useful in these patients to limit pulmonary damage through the inhibition of type 1 angiotensin ii receptors. controlled clinical studies in this area are eagerly awaited. this review discusses facts and theories on the potential impact of ace-inhibitors and arbs in the setting of the sars-cov-2 pandemic.[ace-inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers and severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by coronavirus].k nowledge of the underlying biology and physiology of ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) has accumulated over the last 20 years since its discovery and has provided a major stimulus to further our understanding of the renin-angiotensin system (ras). [1] [2] [3] [4] ace2 has distinct roles ranging from catalytic activities with various substrates, as functional receptors for severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronaviruses (sars-cov), and as an amino acid transporter. [5] [6] [7] [8] ace2 functions as a master regulator of the ras mainly by converting ang (angiotensin) i and ang ii into ang 1-9 and ang 1-7, respectively. 1, 4 both loss-of-function and gain-of-function approaches in experimental models of human diseases have defined a critical role for ace2 in heart failure (hf), systemic and pulmonary hypertension (ph), myocardial infarction (mi), and diabetic cardiovascular complications. 1 gut dysbiosis and altered gut permeability have emerged as an important mechanism of disease controlled by the ace2 axis in both vascular and lung diseases, 9, 10 as well as in diabetes mellitus. 11 clinical and experimental studies support a physiological and pathophysiological role for ace2 in cardiovascular disease (cvd), and increasing/activating ace2 may elicit protective effects against hypertension and cvd, although this has yet to be proven clinically. 1, [12] [13] [14] more recently, ace2 has garnered widespread interest as the cellular receptor of sars-cov-2, the causative virus of the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic, which emerged from wuhan, china, in late 2019. 4, 15, 16 ace2 offers protection in acute lung injury, suggesting that, although it facilitates viral entry at the epithelial surface, the ace2/ang 1-7 axis can be carefully manipulated to mitigate sars-induced tissue injuries, which represents a potential target for therapeutic intervention. 17, 18 in experimental models of lung disease, catalytically active ace2 alleviates pulmonary injury and vascular damage 17, 19 and prevent ph, decreased lung fibrosis, arterial remodeling, and improved right ventricular performance 12 due to a combination of direct action in the lungs and via the ace2-dependent gut-lung axis. 19, 20 in 2 phase ii clinical trials, administration of ace2 was shown to reduce systemic inflammation and shifted the ras peptide balance away from ang ii toward ang 1-7. 21, 22 ongoing global efforts are focused on manipulating the ace2/ang 1-7 axis to curtail sars-cov-2 infection while affording maximal protective effects against lung and cardiovascular damage in patients with in this review, we summarize the diverse roles of ace2, highlighting its role as the sars-cov-2 receptor and negative regulator of the ras, and the implications for the covid-19 pandemic. we also provide a framework for developing novel therapeutic strategies exploring the ace2 pathway as it relates to cvd and covid-19.following the initial and seminal discovery of renin in 1898 by tigerstedt and bergman, the ras now encompasses a complex network of enzymes, peptides, and receptors ( figure 1 ). 2, 3, 15, 16, [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] while many metallopeptidases cluster in small inter-related gene families (eg, the neprilysin [nep] family), unusually, no human homolog of the vasoactive zinc-peptidase ace (angiotensin converting enzyme) had been identified at the turn of the century. almost simultaneously, in 2000, 2 independent approaches searching for such ace homologs revealed the existence of a close relative of the ace gene designated aceh2 or ace2. 3 aceh was cloned from a human lymphoma cdna library and the identical ace2 from a human hf ventricular cdna library, the latter emphasizing a potential role for ace2 in cardiovascular pathologies. expression of the ace2 gene was initially established in the heart, kidney, and testis, but subsequent studies have shown a much broader distribution, including the upper airways, lungs, gut, and liver ( figure 2a ). sequence comparison of ace and ace2 strongly suggested that ace2, like ace, was an integral transmembrane protein (and ectoenzyme) with a transmembrane anchor close to the c-terminus (type i membrane protein). a close evolutionary relationship existed between the ace and ace2, genes and it was presumed that the 2 proteins would have similar substrate specificities and involvement in the ras.as it turned out, important differences occur, particularly in the active site regions of the enzymes, such that the 2 enzymes counterbalance rather than reinforce each other's actions. many subsequent studies over the next 20 years have revealed their inter-relationship, respective roles in the ras, and multiple physiological and pathological actions from vasoactive peptide metabolism, importantly including not only ang ii but also apelin, to intestinal amino acid transport affecting innate immunity, to lung function and brain amyloid metabolism (converting aβ43 to aβ42, a substrate for ace). 1, 4, 28 another unexpected twist in ace2 biology was its identification in 2003 as the cell-surface receptor for the then newly identified sars-cov that led to >8000 cases of sars and almost 800 deaths, 5 and as the receptor for sars-cov-2 that is currently devastating many countries worldwide. 29, 30 the ace2 gene and basic biochemistryunlike the ace gene, which is located on human chromosome 17, the 40kb ace2 gene is located on chromosome xp22 and contains 18 exons, most of which resemble exons in the ace gene. whereas somatic ace contains 2 active sites, ace2 possesses only a single catalytic domain. both ace and ace2 act as zinc metallopeptidases but of differing substrate specificities defining their distinct and counterbalancing roles in the ras. whereas ace cleaves c-terminal dipeptide residues from susceptible substrates (a peptidyl dipeptidase), ace2 acts as a simple carboxypeptidase able to hydrolyze ang i, forming ang 1-9 and ang ii to ang 1-7 ( figure 2b ). ace2 does not cleave bradykinin, further distinguishing its specificity from that of ace while it is also insensitive to conventional ace inhibitors. 2, 28 the c-terminal domain of ace2, which has no similarity with ace, is a homolog of a renal protein, collectrin, which regulates the trafficking of amino acid transporters to the cell surface, endowing ace2 with multiple and distinctive physiological functions. it is the multiplicity of physiological roles that ace2 plays that has allowed it to be hijacked by sars-cov-2 as a receptor, resulting in the covid-19 pandemic. 15, 16 structural studies have revealed the structures of both the sars-cov and much more recently, the sars-cov-2 in complex with ace2 ( figure 2b ). 31, 32 in the case of sars-cov-2, the major spike glycoprotein (s1) binds to the n-terminal region of ace2. the knowledge of the biology and physiology of ace2 accumulated over the last 20 years since its discovery should provide a major stimulus to understanding some of the key steps in sars-cov-2 infection and its ultimate prevention.on march 11, 2020, the world health organization declared the outbreak of sars-cov-2 a global pandemic, reporting community scale transmissions occurring in every continent outside antarctica. since then, the outbreak has escalated to well over one million cases and caused over 60 000 deaths worldwide by the start of april 2020. however, before the emergence of sars-cov in 2002, coronaviruses were conventionally viewed as inconsequential pathogens circulating in nature throughout various host and intermediate species that occasionally infected humans causing only mild upper respiratory tract infections and symptoms of the common cold. [33] [34] [35] as such, to better understand the renin was the first component of the ras discovered following the finding that extracts from rabbit kidney produced pressor effects (tigerstedt and bergman, 1898). constriction of the renal artery was then found to lead to hypertension (htn), thus driving the discovery of hypertensin and angiotonin (and later termed angiotensin; goldblatt et al 27 ; page and helmer 24 ). ang (angiotensin) was subsequently purified, and 2 forms were resolved: ang i and ang ii. therefore, the existence of a converting enzyme was predicted (ace) and subsequently isolated and characterized (skeggs et al 26 severity of global health risks posed by sars-cov-2 and optimize treatment for infected patients, we must recognize the role of ace2 in sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. in addition to respiratory involvement, multiorgan dysfunction occurs in response to sars-cov-2 infections. [36] [37] [38] while respiratory symptoms are predominant, acute cardiac and kidney injuries, arrhythmias, gut, and liver function abnormalities have all been documented in infected patients, suggesting myocardial, renal, enteric and hepatic damage in covid-19. similarly, sars-cov also resulted in systemic manifestations with damages to the heart, gastrointestinal, liver, kidney, and other tissues. 39, 40 ace2 as the receptor for sars-cov-2 sars-cov-2 differs from the original sars-cov by 380 amino acid substitutions, which translates to differences in five of the six vital amino acids in the receptor-binding domain between the viral spike (s) protein with surface expressed human ace2. 41 viral s-proteins are well established as a significant determinant of host tropism and represents a key target for therapeutic and vaccine development. additionally, host cell proteases are important for sars-cov-2 entry and infection of cells as both s-proteins and ace2 are proteolytically modified during the process. the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 with ace2 seems stronger than sars-cov, with alterations in several amino acid residues allowing for enhanced hydrophobic interactions and salt bridge formations, which may explain the considerably larger global influence of covid-19 than the initial sars. 16, 42 moreover, sars-cov-2 has evolved to utilize a wide array of host proteases including cathepsin l, cathepsin b, trypsin, factor x, elastase, furin, and tmprss2 (transmembrane protease serine 2) for s-protein priming and facilitating cell entry following receptor binding. 43 so far, tmprss2 and cathepsin l/b mediates s-protein priming of sars-cov-2, and camostat mesylate, a serine protease inhibitor combined with cathepsin l/b inhibitor, e-64d blocked sars-cov-2 entry. 44 the entry of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 into cells is facilitated by the interaction between viral s-protein with extracellular domains of the transmembrane ace2 proteins, followed by subsequent downregulation of surface ace2 expression ( figure 3 ). 5 ace2-derived peptides, small molecule inhibitors, ace2 antibody or single chain antibody fragment against ace2.in postmortem autopsy heart tissues from 20 patients who succumbed to sars-cov, 7 heart samples had detectable viral sars-cov genome, which was characterized by increased myocardial fibrosis, inflammation, and reduced myocardial ace2 expression. 46 these patients also had a much more aggressive illness associated with earlier mortality. additionally, bilateral pleural effusions were frequently observed during autopsy of sars-cov patients, further supporting the evidence of cardiac involvement. individuals with preexisting diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and lung disease are at particular risk of covid-19 infection 37, 47 and this is likely due to dysregulated ras that occurs in these conditions. 4, 48 significance of the sars-cov-2 infection in the cardiovascular system is reflected through incidences of acute myocardial injury (elevated high sensitivity troponin i levels and/or new ecg/echocardiogram abnormalities), arrhythmias, cardiac arrest, sepsis, septic shock, viral myocarditis, and hf (elevated nt-probnp levels, systolic dysfunction on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging). [49] [50] [51] [52] further abnormalities from laboratory tests, including elevation in d-dimers reflective of increased thrombosis risk, may lead to acute coronary syndrome, and sustained increased inflammatory cytokines levels throughout the clinical course suggest ongoing systemic and tissue inflammation in patients with covid-19. 36, 37, 47 gut dysbiosis and a possible link to disease progression in covid-19 patientsubiquitous expression of ace2 throughout the luminal surface of the gastrointestinal tract, and most prevalently in enterocytes, may serve as a secondary site for enteric sars-cov-2 infection (figure 2a ). leaky gastrointestinal ace2-mediated cardiovascular protection is lost following endocytosis of the enzyme along with severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (sars-cov-2) viral particles. ang ii (angiotensin ii) levels elevate with increased activity of angiotensin 1 receptors (at 1 r) at the cost of ace2/ ang 1-7 driven pathways leading to adverse fibrosis, hypertrophy, increased reactive oxygen species (ros), vasoconstriction, and gut dysbiosis. adam17 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17)-mediated proteolytic cleavage of ace2 is upregulated by endocytosed sars-cov-2 spike proteins. activation of the at 1 r by elevated ang ii levels also further increases adam17 activity. adam17 correspondingly also cleaves its primary substrate releasing soluble tnf-α (tumor necrosis factor-α) into the extracellular region where it has auto-and paracrine functionality. tnf-α activation of its tumor necrosis factor receptor (tnfr) represents a third pathway elevating adam17 activity. tnf-α along with systemic cytokines released due to sars-cov-2 infection and in conjunction with comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus and hypertension can lead to a cytokine storm. tmprss2 indicates transmembrane protease serine 2.conditions in experimental models of human disease can be ameliorated and worsened with either the gain or loss of ace2, respectively. 8, 11 patients with covid-19 also suffer from gastrointestinal discomfort and diarrhea, which may arise earlier than respiratory conditions concurrent with the detection of viral rna in feces, as seen with previous coronavirus outbreaks. 38, 47, [53] [54] [55] [56] moreover, common comorbidities of cvd, including diabetes mellitus and obesity, are known to affect the integrity of the gastrointestinal-blood barrier and result in gut dysbiosis, bacteremia, and systemic inflammation ( figure 4 ). development of gastrointestinal leakage and gut dysbiosis have correspondingly been linked to the onset of ph through the gut-lung axis and is closely related to hyperactivation of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r (angiotensin ii type 1 receptor) axis from ace2 loss. 20, 57 continued viral production by host enterocytes perpetuates this situation and deteriorates conditions in the gut-lung axis. 54, 55 evidence supports that sars-cov-2 infection potentially leads to degeneration of the gut-blood barrier leading to systemic spread of bacteria, endotoxins, and microbial metabolites likely affecting the host's response to covid-19 infection and cumulating in multisystem dysfunction and septic shock. 37, 38, 47 enteric involvement and associated worsening in patient outcomes were documented from the initial sars-cov outbreak in the early 2000s. fecal viral rna was detected in up to 70% of patients with viral shedding from the gastrointestinal tract associated with a more aggressive clinical course. 54, 55 in a separate study, sars-cov particles were detected within the cytoplasm and surface microvilli of apical enterocytes in the ileum and colon 55 while in patients with covid-19, sars-cov-2 was detected in feces suggesting fecal-oral transmission. 58 as such, the gastrointestinal tract of sars-cov, and possibly sars-cov-2 patients, acts as a staging ground for sustained viral replication concurrent with disruption of the enteric ace2 axis and adverse outcomes. 39, 47, 54, 55, 59, 60 in addition to the direct impact of the virus on the microbiome, the predisposing disease states such as diabetes mellitus 61 and pulmonary disease have their own adverse effects on the gut microbiome, 62,63 which may be worsened by sars-cov-2 infection. ang iidependent hypertension in animal models 64 and humans is associated with gut dysbiosis, increased gut leakiness, and gut wall pathology. 10, 63, 65, 66 there is broad support for these observations in pulmonary diseases including ph, copd, and asthma 67, 68 and in type 2 diabetes mellitus where dysbiosis characterized by decreased microbial richness and diversity, altered representation of bacterial metabolic pathways and modifications in the composition of firmicutes (f) and bacteroidetes (b). [69] [70] [71] ace2 disruption in biomedical models has shown us that gut dysbiosis is quite prevalent and that this change in microbial profiles can alter systemic pathways exacerbating diabetes mellitus and hypertension. we recently showed that ace2 deficiency magnifies diabetes mellitus-induced dysbiosis 11 characterized by an increase in peptidoglycan-producing bacteria and loss of gut barrier integrity in ace2 −/y -akita mice. we also identified a new role of bone marrow cells in the gut. in the ace2 −/y -akita or akita mice, the disrupted gut barrier was associated with reduced levels of circulating angiogenic cells, hematopoietic cells with reparative function. giving exogenous circulating angiogenic cells from wild-type mice corrected gut barrier dysfunction in ace2 −/y -akita or akita mice. thus, decreased enteric ace2 expression from sars-cov-2 infection may similarly reduce circulating angiogenic cells and compromise the integrity of the endothelium and gut epithelium leading to dysbiosis. further examination is required to validate this link and whether it is a direct or indirect effect of viral infection. 11 link between ace2, adam17, and inflammation proteolytic cleavage of ace2 by adam-17 tnf-α (tumor necrosis factor-α) is a cytokine implicated in chronic inflammation, and its extracellular domain shedding and activation is driven by the membrane-bound protease coined tace (tnf-α-converting enzyme), also known as adam-17 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17). 72,73 adam-17 is a type i transmembrane protein belonging to the adamalysin subfamily of zn-dependent metalloproteases. 74 following the discovery that adam-17 cleaves tnf-α, the substrate specificity of the enzyme has expanded to include various cytokines and receptors, many of which contribute to initiating and exacerbating inflammation. 75, 76 importantly, adam-17 was also found to mediate proteolysis and ectodomain shedding of ace2. 77 enhanced ace2 shedding resulting from ras overactivation, and subsequent adam-17 upregulation drives pathogenesis in hf, atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, and thoracic aortic aneurysm. 1, 13, 78, 79 ang ii-mediated activation of at 1 r triggers a signaling cascade, which culminates in the activation of p38 mapk (mitogen-activated protein kinase) and adam-17 phosphorylation by napdh oxidase 2-induced reactive oxygen species formation. 80, 81 phosphorylation enhances the catalytic activity of adam-17, thus increasing ace2 shedding, resulting in loss of ace2 at the membrane and impaired conversion of ang ii (into ang 1-7), leading to ras-mediated detrimental effects in a positive feedback cycle. 77, 82 importantly, depletion of ace2 at the cell surface is a critical pathological outcome of sars-cov-2 infection. sars-cov-2 is endocytosed by cells in complex with ace2; thus, the initial detrimental effects of viral infection begins with a loss of ace2-mediated tissue protection. 83 adam-17 activity is upregulated upon binding of sars-cov to ace2 and facilitates viral entry, while knockdown of adam-17 by sirna severely attenuated sars-cov cellular entry. 84 the molecular mechanisms of sars-cov and another human coronavirus that only causes mild respiratory symptoms, hnl63-cov, were compared. interestingly, although hnl63-cov also utilizes ace2 as a receptor for cellular entry, it does not induce adam-17 activation and ace2 ectodomain shedding. 84, 85 therefore, this study elucidates the unique role of adam-17 mediated shedding of ace2 in sars-cov infectivity and may inform the disparity in severity between coronavirus subtypes. furthermore, loss of membrane ace2 promotes ang ii accumulation, which also activates adam-17 activity, thus perpetuating membrane shedding of ace2, ras overactivation, and inflammation. 77the modulatory effects on the ang ii/at 1 r and ang 1-7/masr axes make ace2 a plausible target in preventing and treating chronic inflammation and inflammatory diseases, as highlighted by the recent covid-19 pandemic. 29 patients with covid-19 develop pneumonia with acceleration of injury in susceptible patients to multiple organ failure 30,86 driven in part by an inflammatory cytokine storm and is a notable cause of death in patients who are critically ill. 30, 86 when the immune system is activated due to factors such as sars-cov-2 infection, there is an imbalance of th17/treg cell function and overactivation of immune cells, which secrete a large number of proinflammatory cytokines. 17, 87, 88 imbalance in the ras system and the loss of ace2 in patients with covid-19 are further contributing factors to tissue and systemic inflammation. 30, 86 lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury decreased expression of ace2, precipitated inflammatory injury, and upregulated expression of renin, ang ii, ace, and at1 receptors. 89 after injection of rhace2, lung function and pathological injury improved with attenuation of inflammation. 89 in addition, rhace2 is beneficial and improves acute lung injury caused by sars-cov, acid inhalation, and sepsis. 17, 18, 88 ace2 knockout (ko) mice showed very severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards)/acute lung injury pathology, increased vascular permeability, increased pulmonary edema, neutrophil accumulation, and deterioration of lung function compared with normal wt control mice. 18,87 ace deficiency partially rescued the severe phenotype of mice with a single mutation of ace2 in acute lung injury by further deletion of the ace gene, 17 suggesting that the balance of ace2/ace levels is the key to lung injury/lung protection during an inflammatory storm. arbs (at1r blockers) induce ace2, ang 1-7, and mas expression in line with the reduction of proinflammatory cytokines and induction of il-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine. 88 we showed that ace2 ko hypertensive mice exhibited enhancement of proinflammatory cytokines, il-1β, il6, tnf-α, and chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 5 while administration of rhace2 rescued ang ii-induced t-lymphocyte-mediated inflammation. 90, 91 blockade of mas receptor by d-ala7-ang 1-7 (a-779) completely inhibited the ang 1-7 mediated anti-inflammatory effects while ave 0991, the agonist of ang 1-7 receptors, mimicked the actions of ang1-7. 88 negative regulator of the ras discovery of ace2 resulted in a paradigm-changing concept in all aspects of the ras. ace2 is a monocarboxypeptidase that converts ang i into a nonapeptide, ang 1-9, and ang ii into a heptapeptide, ang 1-7 (figure 5a ). this distinct enzymatic pathway for degradation of ang i and ang ii negatively regulates ras activation and mitigates the deleterious actions mediated by ang ii and at 1 r. 1 this is of particular significance in pathological conditions where the ras is overstimulated. ang 1-7 is a biologically active peptide whose vast array of effects are opposite to those attributed to ang ii. [92] [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] furthermore, ace2 can antagonize ace-independent formation of ang ii, such as from mast cell chymase. 13, 99 in 2003, an endogenous orphan receptor, mas receptor (masr), was identified as the ang 1-7 receptor, and a779, a masr antagonist was shown to inhibit the majority of ang 1-7 effects. 94,100-103 ang 1-9 has also shown beneficial biological effects via the at 2 r that result in cardioprotection. [104] [105] [106] [107] thus, the ace2/ang 1-7/masr axis has emerged as a physiological antagonist that counter-regulates the activated ras. 93, [108] [109] [110] [111] [112] the cardioprotective effects of ace2 taken together can be attributed to (1) degradation of ang i to ang 1-9, whereby limiting action of ace on its substrate, (2) reducing ang ii detrimental effects through degradation of the peptide, and (3) formation of ang 1-7 which exercises cardioprotective effects. formation of ang 1-7 is an important mechanism of ace2 mediated protection, as antagonism of ang 1-7 using a779 prevented beneficial effects of rhace2 in murine model of systolic dysfunction. 113 diminished ace2 activity results in activation of the ang ii/at1r axis, contributing to the increased progression of cvd. elevated ace2 level and activity result in the formation of ang 1-9 and ang 1-7, leading to protection against cvd ( figure 5a ).the apelin family of peptides act through the apelin receptors mediating protection against cvd. 114, 115 the x-linked apln gene encodes a 77 amino acids prepro-apelin that is subsequently cleaved by endopeptidases to various bioactive peptides from 13 to 36 amino acids in length. cvd, including hf and hypertension, is characterized by an apelin deficient state in both human myocardium and plasma. [116] [117] [118] apelin ko mice exhibit increased infarct size and systolic dysfunction following coronary ligation and reduced myocardial contractility concomitant with increased susceptibility to hf in pressure-overload models. 119, 120 reduced myocardial ace2 mrna and ace2 protein levels in apelin ko mice, which were rescued by infusion of apelin-13, suggest a crucial regulatory role of apelin in ace2 gene expression. 121 apelin signaling through the apelin receptors specifically increased ace2 promoter activity leading to an increase in ace2 mrna and protein. [121] [122] [123] these effects are consistent with the ability of the pyr-apelin-13 peptide to negatively regulate ang ii-mediated superoxide production, myocardial hypertrophy, dysfunction, and fibrosis 123 and analogs of apelin-17 preventing abdominal aortic rupture in lowdensity lipoprotein receptor ko models induced by ang ii infusion. 124 however, ace2, through its monocarboxypeptidase activity, cleaves and inactivates bioactive apelin peptides apelin-13 and apelin-36 through a negative feedback mechanism in the heart and vasculature (figure 5b) . 28, 125 due to the short half-life of endogenous apelin peptides in the plasma, synthetic apelin peptide analogs resistant to ace2 degradation and retaining their binding capability to endogenous apelin receptors elicit protection in the cardiovascular system are being explored as potential new therapies. 114, 124 ace2 as a chaperone protein for the amino acid transporter, b 0 at1 (slc6a19) b 0 at1 is highly expressed in the intestines and kidneys with function in the absorption of neutral amino acids. 126 the ace2-b(0)at1 complex is assembled as a dimer of heterodimers, with the collectrin-like domain of ace2 mediating homo-dimerization. 16 ace2 has a rasindependent function, regulating intestinal amino acid homeostasis, expression of antimicrobial peptides, and the gut microbiome. 8 ace2 is necessary for the expression of the hartnup transporter in the intestine, and the differential functional association of mutant b(0)at1 transporters with ace2 in the intestine regulates the phenotypic heterogeneity of human hartnup disorder. 126 cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death worldwide and a major public health concern. heart disease is characterized by the activation of several signaling pathways associated with pathological hypertrophy and maladaptive ventricular remodeling. in the heart, ace2 is localized to cardiomyocytes, cardiac fibroblasts, epicardial adipose tissue, and the coronary vascular endothelium 77, 127, 128 ; ang 1-7/masr is also present on cardiomyocytes, cardiac fibroblasts, and endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells. 100, [129] [130] [131] genetic ace2 deletion resulted in exacerbation of ang ii-mediated cardiorenal fibrosis and oxidative stress in the heart and kidney of hypertensive mice while administration of rhace2 (recombinant human ace2) remarkably rescued the ang ii-induced hypertension, pathological hypertrophy, oxidant injury, and cardiac dysfunction. 90, 91 various ace2 polymorphisms are linked to cvd. 132 post-mi remodeling and coronary artery disease are common causes of hf. 1, 133 notably, mi increases ace2 mrna expression in human, mice, and rat hearts, 134, 135 whereas genetic ace2 deletion results in worsening of mi-induced cardiac dysfunction, infarct size, mmp (matrix metalloproteinase)2/mmp9 activation, and extracellular matrix disruption. 134, 135 loss of ace2 leads to increased neutrophilic infiltration in the infarct and peri-infarct regions, resulting in upregulation of inflammatory cytokines, interferon-γ, il (interleukin)-6, and the chemokine, mcp-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1), as well as increased phosphorylation of erk1/2 (extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2) and jnk1/2 signaling pathways, changes that were blocked with an figure 5 . ace2 (angiotensin converting enzyme 2) role in the renin-angiotensin system peptide cascade and its interaction with the apelinergic peptide system. a, angiotensinogen is processed by renin into ang i (angiotensin i), which is further cleaved by ace or mast cell chymase into ang ii. ang ii can go on to affect the cardiovascular system predominantly through the angiotensin type 1 receptor (at 1 r) or via the angiotensin type 2 receptor (at 2 r). alternatively, ang ii can be degraded by the carboxypeptidase ace2 or the pcp (prolyl carboxypeptidase) into ang 1-7 (angiotensin 1-7). ang 1-7 mediates protective effects throughout tissues which host the mas receptor (masr). ang 1-7 can be further formed through the activity of ace2 on ang i forming ang 1-9 which is then cleaved by either ace or nep (neprilysin). b, stimulation of the apelin receptor by apelin peptides leads to cardiovascular protective effects while disrupting ang ii signaling by sequestration of the at 1 r through receptor heterodimerization. apelin is inactivated by ace2 cleavage of its c-terminal phenylalanine while stimulation of the apelin receptor promotes ace2 mrna transcription presenting apelin's role as a positive regulator of ace2. ros indicates reactive oxygen species. arb ultimately resulting in improvement in myocardial function. 135 in contrast, overexpression of ace2 and the action of ang 1-7 ameliorates mi-induced cardiac remodeling. 136, 137 importantly, heterozygote loss of ace2, as seen in explanted human hearts from patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, was sufficient to increase susceptibility to heart disease. 138 hf with preserved ejection fraction is a proinflammatory state closely linked to obesity-related cardiac and microvascular dysfunction for which there are no approved therapies. 128, 139, 140 epicardial adipose tissue is a primary source of inflammatory cytokines that could have detrimental effects on the heart. 139 loss of ace2 increases macrophage polarization to proinflammatory m1-phenotype (alternatively activated, cd11c + ) in epicardial adipose tissue from patients with hf with preserved ejection fraction, with decreases in polarization to anti-inflammatory, m2-phenotype macrophages, and worsening of hf with preserved ejection fraction in response to diet-induced obesity. 139 importantly, ang 1-7 decreased macrophage polarization in epicardial adipose tissue and preserved the cardiac function of obese ace2 ko mice. 128, 141 ang 1-7 has potent anti-inflammatory effects in adipose tissue of obese type 2 diabetic mice and protects against diabetic cardiomyopathy and nephropathy. [141] [142] [143] the ace2/ang 1-7 axis also promotes browning of adipose tissue leading to improved metabolic effects and weight loss, which can confer further benefits to the cardiovascular system. 144, 145 blockade of the deleterious arm of the ras has been the mainstay of the therapeutic management of hypertensive individuals. an increase in ace2 and the vasoprotective axis of the ras by ace inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) clearly reinforces this view (see section pharmacological antagonists of the ras and ace2 expression below). furthermore, increased ace2 expression protects against hypertension, while ace2 deficiency exacerbates hypertension. renal ace2 expression is inversely related to blood pressure in experimental models of hypertension. 25 in the spontaneously hypertensive rat and stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat, renal ace2 mrna levels are reduced compared with normotensive wistar-kyoto rats. 25 these studies support the essential role of ace2 in maintaining healthy blood pressure. lentiviral overexpression of ace2 results in increased expression of antihypertensive components of the ras and attenuates elevated blood pressure. 146, 147 pretreatment with rhace2 prevented hypertension induced by ang ii and decreased plasma ang ii while increasing plasma ang 1-7 levels. 148 ace2 and adam17 were selectively knocked down from all neurons (ac-n), which revealed a reduction of inhibitory inputs to ac-n presympathetic neurons relevant for blood pressure regulation. mice with ace2 selectively knocked down from sim1 neurons in mice exhibited a blunted blood pressure elevation and preserved ace2 activity during the development of salt-sensitive hypertension. 14 the metalloproteinase adam17 is responsible for mediating ace2 shedding from the cell membranebound domain, which can be promoted by ang ii, and release of ace2 as a soluble form in plasma 14, 77, 149 impairing brain ace2 compensatory activity and thus contributing to the development of neurogenic hypertension. 150 genetic ace2 deficiency is associated with the upregulation of putative mediators of atherogenesis and enhances responsiveness to proinflammatory stimuli suggestive of a key role of ace2 in suppressing vascular inflammation and atherosclerotic disease. 151 in addition, ace2 inhibition blocks neuropeptide catestatin-mediated protective effects in the development of atherosclerosis in apoe −/− mice fed a high-fat diet. 152the counter-regulatory role of the ace2/ang 1-7/ masr axis of the ras has been well characterized in the progression of diabetic complications, including cardiovascular and kidney disease. 1, 153, 154 support for the importance of ace2 in diabetes mellitus comes from its impact on diabetic complications wherein diabetes mellitus-induced vascular dysfunction is strongly associated with a shift in the ras axis toward the profibrotic, proinflammatory arm of ras with a reduction in the protective arm ( figure 6 ). loss of the protective effects of the ras is related to the regulation of tissue and circulating levels of ang ii and their sequelae in the context of diabetes mellitus. 155, 156 alterations within the ras are considered pivotal for the development of both diabetic micro and macrovascular complications. 1, 157 the blockade of the proinflammatory and profibrotic arms of the ras provides significant renoprotection in both experimental models of diabetes mellitus and in patients. while the loss of ace2 worsens diabetic kidney injury, 158 rhace2 is therapeutic in an animal model of diabetic nephropathy 153 and experimental alport syndrome. 159 ace inhibitors in t1d and angiotensin receptor blockade with losartan and irbesartan in t2d retard the progression of nephropathy. 160 in diabetic renal tubules, ace2 gene expression is decreased by ≈50%, which would reduce ang 1-7 formation and allow ang ii accumulation hence directly increasing the expression of tgf-β and ctgf (connective tissue growth factor), leading to tubulointerstitial fibrosis. 161 ras blockade retards renal damage and ace inhibitor therapy, as mentioned above, resulting in a compensatory increase in ace2, leading to renoprotection. 91 therefore, support for the loss of ace2 contributing to vascular complications in diabetes mellitus comes from strong clinical and experimental evidence. 1 retinopathy, the most common complication of diabetes mellitus and one of the leading causes of blindness in working-age adults is linked to activation of oxidative stress, profibrotic, and proinflammatory arm of the ras, which can be effectively curtailed by the ace2/ang 1-7 axis in experimental models. 162, 163 increased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines by bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells skews hematopoiesis toward the generation of an increased number of myelo-monocytic cells. 164 target tissues of diabetic complications secrete ccl2 in response to high glucose-induced stress 165 facilitating the homing of ccr2 + cells to these regions and promoting the development of vascular complications. [166] [167] [168] [169] [170] [171] in addition to an increase in myeloidosis, diabetics with complications have reduced bone marrow-derived vascular reparative cells and circulating angiogenic cells (cd34 + cells). 11 levels of ace2 mrna were also a significant predictor of the presence of microvascular disease in diabetic patients. 172 diabetic individuals who remained free of retinopathy despite >40 years of poor glycemic control had higher mrna levels for genes of the vasoprotective axis (ace2/mas) compared with age, sex, and glycemia-matched diabetics with retinopathy. 172 in dysfunctional cd34 + cells from diabetic individuals, activation of the protective arm of ras, by exposing the cells to ang1-7 corrected their dysfunction by restoring bioavailable no and reducing reactive oxygen species. ang1-7 gene modification of cd34 + cells restored the in vivo vasoreparative function of these cells in a mouse retinal ischemia-reperfusion injury model. 172 moreover, intraocular administration of aav-ace2 or ang1-7 reduced diabetes mellitus-induced retinal vascular leakage and inflammation, thus preventing retinopathy. 163 patients with diabetes mellitus have a dysregulated ras, which may influence their vulnerability to sars-cov-2. guan et al examined 1099 individuals with confirmed covid 19. of these individuals, 173 had severe disease, and of this, 16.2% were diabetics. 47 zhang et al studied 140 patients who were hospitalized due to the severity of their covid-19 infection, of these individuals, 12% had diabetes mellitus. it is interesting to speculate why diabetics may be more at risk for sars-cov-2 infection than the general population, and this may be due to the reduced ace2 levels that are typically observed in the vasculature of diabetic individuals and diabetic animal models. 173 indeed, loss of ace2 was associated with marked gut dysbiosis, which was further worsened in a model with type 1 diabetes mellitus. 11lung epithelial cells express high levels of ace2, which positively correlates with airway epithelial differentiation. 17, 19, 174 involvement of ace2 in ards, which is triggered by multiple diseases including sars-cov and sars-cov-2, has been established in multiple animal models. 18, 175 ace2 ko mice exhibit severe pathology of ards. 17, 19 additional ace deficiency, or treatment with ar1r blockers of ace2 ko mice rescues them from ards implicating the benefit of ace2 and the critical balance of the protective versus proinflammatory and fibrotic axes of the ras. 18 these findings are consistent with evidence of a beneficial effect of rhace2 on pulmonary blood flow and oxygenation in a pig model of lipopolysaccharide-induced ards. 176 age-related loss of ace2 in the lungs correlates with the increased mortality and worsened phenotype in elderly patients with covid-19. 174 ace2 has been implicated in acute lung injury by inducing an imbalance in the ras. evidence includes that in acute lung injury (1) a decrease in pulmonary ace2 and an increase in ang ii levels occurs; (2) supplementation with ace2 or inhibition of ang ii improves outcomes; and (3) a lack or decrease of pulmonary ace2 aggravates viral-induced acute lung injury. ace2 is also involved in ph and fibrosis. 19 increasing ace2 activity using rhace2 reduced bleomycin-induced inflammation and fibrosis, resulting in improved lung function and exercise capacity, 19 and the ace2 activator, dize, protects animals from ph and fibrosis. 177 moreover, oral feeding of a bioencapsulated form of ace2 protects and arrests the progression of ph. 12 validation of this protective effect comes from a small human study that showed that ph is characterized by reduced ace2 activity and supplementation of these individuals with rhace2 improved pulmonary hemodynamics and reduced oxidative and inflammatory markers. 21 collectively, these studies unequivocally establish the conceptual framework that ace2 is a central player in normal pulmonary function, and its imbalance leads to pulmonary diseases.pathological neurohormonal activation of the ras drives the development and progression of cvd. current pharmacotherapies aim to achieve multilevel ras inhibition through distinct modes of action. although ace2 is not the direct cellular target of these therapies, ace2 gene transcription, translation, and ultimately catalytic activities are modified due to the intricate nature of the ras. blocking the ace/ang ii/at 1 r axis through limiting the formation and actions of ang ii potentiates the effects of ace2 as the endogenous ras counter-regulator. the arbs consistently increased ace2 mrna expression, protein levels, and catalytic activities in the heart, kidneys, and thoracic aorta, but the translation to protein levels and activity differs between experimental models and tissues for ace inhibitors (table) . 77, [178] [179] [180] [181] [182] [183] [184] [185] combination of lisinopril and losartan treatment in normotensive lewis rats abolished the increase in ace2 mrna levels observed individually but retained losartan induced rise in ace2 activity in the heart. 179 moreover, lisinopril in normotensive lewis rats increased ace2 mrna without affecting ace2 activity in the heart, but the opposite was observed in the kidneys. 179, 180 these findings could be attributed to tissue-specific regulation of ace2, as higher ace2 protein levels were reported in the heart, but ace2 activity was higher in the kidneys of sprague-dawley rats, adding to the complexity of the tissue ras. 186 in type 1 diabetic akita angiotensinogen-transgenic mice, dual ras blockade with perindopril and losartan normalized diseasemediated reduction in kidney ace2 mrna expression and protein levels. 187 these findings suggest that the accumulation of ang ii in pathological conditions contributes to the modulatory effects of ras blockade on ace2.ang ii can regulate ace2 expression through the at 1 r. healthy hearts and kidneys are characterized by high levels of ace2 mrna and protein expression, with moderate expression of ace. 191 ras overactivation in cvd increases at1r stimulation by ang ii, promoting erk1/2 and p38 mapk signaling pathways to downregulate ace2 while upregulating ace expression. 191 activation of p38 mapk upregulates adam17 activity though posttranslational phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain results in shedding of surface ace2 in a positive feedback loop and could explain the observed effects of arbs in increasing ace2 protein levels and activity. 77, 80, 81 mechanisms behind the augmentation of ace2 mrna levels by ace inhibitors and arbs require further characterization. moreover, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists increased ace2 mrna expression and activity in samples from patients with chronic hf, wild-type mice, and rats to varying degrees among different tissues but not in the heart of a rat hypertensive disease model (table) . [188] [189] [190] spironolactone, a nonselective mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, prevented the increase in both ace and at 1 r mrna levels, and the associated increase in at 1 r density from aldosterone signaling in cardiomyocytes. 192, 193 activation of mineralocorticoid receptors also stimulates overlapping downstream signaling pathways with at 1 r, including the erk1/2 and p38 mapk pathways mentioned before. 194, 195 blocking these signaling pathways contributes to the observed effect of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist on ace2 gene expression, surface protein levels, and activity.promoting the ace2/ang 1-7/mas signaling by rhace2 or the ang 1-7 receptors agonist ave 0991 can have salutary therapeutic effects in cvd and lung disease from diverse etiologies. 1 the ang 1-7 receptors agonist ave 0991 has been shown to exert cardiorenal and pulmonary protective effects, 88 and treatment with rhace2 improved the symptoms of acute lung injury, cvd, and kidney injury in various preclinical models. 17, 87, 88, 90 maintaining ace2 levels in patients with or predisposed to common cvd states such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and obesity wards off the advancement of these comorbidities in instances where the patient contracts sars-cov-2 by maintaining a level of ace2/ang1-7/ masr negative counter-regulation. rhace2 functionally sequesters circulating viral particles to prevent s-protein interactions with endogenous ace2, while simultaneously regulating the systemic ras may provide therapeutic benefits in covid-19 and is moving into phase ii clinical trials in europe. 196 a potential limitation of rhace2 is the restricted penetrance and activity against tissue ras owning to its large molecular size. pharmacological ras blockade agents, arbs, in particular, are capable of modulating both systemic and tissue ras, and simultaneously increasing ace2 expression and activity in experimental models. the direct implications of ras inhibition in patients with covid-19 with hypertension remain elusive, and clinical evidence is desperately needed to determine the relative benefits and risks associated with usage of these medications. 197 nonetheless, introducing arbs to patients already infected by sars-cov-2 may be an effective therapeutic option in addressing the viral-mediated ras imbalance and is currently under investigation in several clinical trials (www.clinicaltrial.gov number nct04312009, nct04311177, and nct04318418). [198] [199] [200] potential for ace2 as a therapy is also facilitated by using the probiotic species lactobacillus paracasei (lp), which can be engineered to express recombinant ace indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme; and ras, renin-angiotensin system.proteins. mice treated with the recombinant lp expressing the secreted ace2 in fusion with the nontoxic subunit b of cholera toxin (acts as a carrier to facilitate transmucosal transport) showed increased ace2 activities in serum and tissues and reduced diabetic retinopathy. 201 these results provide proof of concept for using bioengineered probiotic species as live vectors for delivery of human ace2 with enhanced tissue bioavailability for treating diabetic complications but could potentially be repurposed for treating cvd and covid-19 infection.since the discovery of ace2 in 2000, tremendous progress has been made in elucidating its biochemical actions and fundamental role in cvd and, more recently, as the sars-cov-2 receptor. ace2 is a dominant mechanism for negative regulation of the ras by metabolizing ang ii into the beneficial peptide ang 1-7, and this important biochemical and physiological property is being harnessed as a potential therapy in patients with hf. the activation of the ras axis due to binding of sars-cov-2 to ace2, leading to direct loss of ace2 and indirectly via proteolytic processing and shedding, partly drives the systemic manifestations of covid-19. careful targeting of the ras axes is needed in these patients to optimize their clinical outcomes, including the use of at1 receptor blockers (arb). disease 2019 · renin-angiotensin system · severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2in late december 2019, several clusters of pneumonia cases of unknown aetiology were reported in the city of wuhan, people's republic of china. investigation of respiratory samples of these cases identified a novel coronavirus (cov) as the causative agent [1, 2] . nucleotide sequence analysis of the viral rna genome revealed it to be closely related to that of the betacoronavirus responsible for the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in asia pacific (and canada) in [2002] [2003] . from china, the new virus, which was designated sars-cov-2, has rapidly spread throughout the world with a total of 5,697,334 confirmed cases and 355,758 deaths as of 28 may 2020 [3] . these figures are likely a gross underestimation of the actual impact of sars-cov-2 due to limited virological testing and underreporting. the primary routes of sars-cov-2 transmission are respiratory droplets and direct contact. approximately 80% of sars-cov-2 infections are relatively mild (with flu-like symptoms) or even asymptomatic. some 15% of cases result in severe disease (so-called covid-19) characterised by pneumonia and dyspnoea, while~5% of sars-cov-2-infected individuals experience critical illness (i.e. acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), septic shock, (multi-)organ failure) and require intensive care.like the original sars-cov, host cell penetration by sars-cov-2 relies on the interaction of the viral spike (s) protein with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [4] . ace2 is a monocarboxypeptidase present on the surface of a wide variety of different cell types, including epithelial cells lining the respiratory tract, cardiac fibroblasts, cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells (vsmcs) [5, 6] . in the lungs, ace2 expression is mainly found fig. 1 overview of major ace and ace2 substrates and products, the g-protein-coupled receptors (gpcrs) activated by these products, the biological consequences of the stimulation of these gpcrs and the mode of action of ace inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin ii type-1 receptor blockers (arb). besides ace and ace2, other proteolytic enzymes are also in-volved in the processing of renin-angiotensin system components, e.g. angii can also be generated from angi by chymase (chy; secreted by mast cells) and ang1-7 can be produced from angi by neprilysin (also known as neutral endopeptidase (nep)) [8, 13] in alveolar macrophages and in the surfactant-producing type ii pneumocytes and to a lesser extent in bronchial and tracheal epithelial cells [5] . ace2 is a paralogue of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace). both these enzymes are zn 2+ -dependent transmembrane proteins involved in the production of vasoactive peptides [7, 8] . however, ace and ace2 generally have opposite effects, thus functioning as counterregulatory factors within the renin-angiotensin system (ras).ace converts angiotensin i (angi/angiotensin-(1-10)) into angiotensin ii (angii/angiotensin-(1-8)) ( fig. 1) . binding of angii to the angii type-1 receptor (at1r) has pro-inflammatory, pro-oxidative, proapoptotic and pro-fibrotic effects, increases vascular tone and leakage ( fig. 1 ) and is involved in pathophysiology of many different tissues and organs [9] . stimulation of at1r on the surface of vsmcs by angii results in the activation of signalling pathways that promote vsmc contraction. excessive angii-at1r signalling also induces the proliferation, migration and growth of vsmcs, promotes vascular remodelling and contributes to initiation and progression of atherosclerosis by inducing endothelial dysfunction [9] . activation of at1rs in cardiac myocytes induces cellular hypertrophy, while binding of angii to at1rs on the surface of cardiac fibroblasts results in cardiac fibrosis by stimulating the synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins, including collagen type i and iii, and by inducing proliferation and migration of cardiac fibroblasts [9] . unbalanced at1r signalling in the lungs is associated with airway inflammation, bronchial hyper-responsiveness, fibrosis and pulmonary hypertension. angii is also an important driving force in the inflammatory cascade and alveolar epithelial injury associated with ards [10, 11] . apart from binding to at1r, angii can also bind to the ang ii type-2 receptor (at2r) (fig. 1 ). stimulation of this receptor has effects that are largely opposite to those induced by angii-at1r signalling. under pathophysiological conditions, angii-at1r signalling is generally dominant over angii-at2r signalling.ace2 can cleave angi to generate angiotensin-(1-9) (ang1-9) and angii to produce angiotensin-(1-7) (ang1-7) (fig. 1 ). the conversion of angii into ang1-7 by ace2 not only reduces detrimental angii/at1r signalling but also generates the ligand for the mas receptor (masr), activation of which opposes the effects of at1r stimulation by angii (fig. 1) . recently, ang1-7 was shown also to exert beneficial effects by binding to the at1r and inducing β-arrestinbiased signalling through this receptor [12] . ang1-9 is another ace2 reaction product involved in counterbalancing angii/at1r signalling by stimulating at2r signalling (fig. 1 ).sars-cov-2 uptake by receptor-mediated endocytosis directly and indirectly lowers ace2 surface expression, reduces conversion of angii into ang1-7 and hence causes a misbalance in the activities of the ace/angii/at1r and ace2/ang1-7/masr axes. this, together with sars-cov-2-induced cell death, inflammation and thromboembolism, is responsible for the severe lung injury seen in critically ill covid-19 patients. a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (adam17) and ace secretase are membrane-bound proteases involved in the production, by enzymatic cleavage, of soluble (s) ace2 and ace, respectively. angii-at1r signalling increases adam17 expression, leading to a reduction in surface ace2 levels due to sace sheddingthe recognition of the adverse effects of unopposed angii-at1r signalling led to the development of ace inhibitors (aceis) and at1r blockers (arbs). as shown in fig. 1 , aceis inhibit the production of angi and thereby indirectly prevent harmful at1r signalling. analysis of plasma vasoactive peptide levels has shown a moderate decrease in angii and a large increase in ang1-7 (e.g. generated from angi by neprilysin) following acei treatment [8] , thus, aceis not only suppress detrimental angii-at1r signalling but also promote beneficial ang1-7 signalling. arbs, on the other hand, do not block angii production but selectively and competitively inhibit the binding of angii to at1r (fig. 1) . the blood plasma of patients receiving arbs contains strongly elevated angii and moderately increased ang1-7 levels [8] .due to their well-established anti-hypertensive, anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic and anti-hypertrophic effects, aceis and arbs have found widespread use in clinical practice. as a consequence, a large percentage of cardiovascular patients, including those suffering from systolic heart failure (hfref) receive aceis or arbs to lower their blood pressure by reducing systemic vascular resistance (and to slow down adverse cardiac remodelling). in europe, aceis are part of the first-line treatment of (a)symptomatic hfref patients unless contraindicated or not toler-ated [14] . in the latter case, aceis are commonly replaced by arbs. in the united states either aceis or arbs are recommended in the first-line pharmacological treatment of hfref [15] . the european society of cardiology guidelines recommend the use of at1rneprilysin inhibitors (arnis) instead of aceis or arbs when patients remain symptomatic in spite of optimal treatment with aceis/arbs, beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists and mineralocorticoid receptor blockers. the guidelines of the american college of cardiology and american heart association recommend the prescription of arnis to chronic symptomatic nyha class ii and iii hfref patients who tolerate aceis/ arbs to further reduce morbidity and mortality. the replacement of aceis/arbs by arnis is supported by a recent meta-analysis showing that arnis are superior to aceis and arbs in mediating reverse cardiac remodelling in hfref patients [16] .by analogy to what happens with sars-cov, it is widely assumed that infection of (airway epithelial) cells results in a strong reduction of ace2 expression at the plasma membrane but does not affect ace (surface) levels [17] . in the same study, the arb losartan attenuated sars-cov s-protein-induced lung injury in a mouse model. moreover, serum angii levels are significantly elevated in covid-19 patients and exhibit a linear positive correlation to viral load and lung injury as determined by oxygenation index [18] . this led to the hypothesis (hypothesis 1) that sars-cov-2-mediated downregulation of ace2 disturbs the balance between ace/angii/at1r and ace2/ang1-7/ masr signalling in the lungs and thereby contributes to the development of ards in covid-19 patients (fig. 2) . if so, aceis and arbs may have a beneficial effect on the course of covid-19 by reducing ace/ angii/at1r signalling and thereby restoring the local balance between the activities of the ace/angii/at1r and ace2/ang1-7/masr axes (fig. 3) . support for this idea comes from a study by henry et al. showing favourable effects of acei treatment during hospitalisation of patients with (non-corona)viral pneumonia [19] . also, several research groups have demonstrated that aceis and arbs can (1) attenuate the lung injury caused by (experimental) ards and (2) reduce pulmonary arterial hypertension [10, 11] .a number of scientists [20] has raised the opposite idea (hypothesis 2) that acei and arb pharmacotherapy may aggravate sars-cov-2-induced lung disease by increasing ace2 surface expression on airway epithelial cells (fig. 4) . several animal studies have indicated an increase of ace2 expression following treatment with aceis or arbs although, especially for aceis, decreases or no alterations in ace2 expression have also been reported (reviewed in [21] ). information on the effect of these anti-hypertensive drugs in humans is limited to the analysis of duodenal biopsies. collectively, the data show a more consistent upregulation of ace2 by arbs than by aces [21] in various tissues. however, whether ace2 expression is upregulated by either of these drugs in the primary target cells of sars-cov-2 in human lungs is not yet known.the hypotheses presented above are not mutually exclusive. in patients that are on aceis/arbs before infection with sars-cov-2, acei/arb-mediated upregulation of ace2 in airway epithelium could increase the risk of becoming infected with sars-cov-2 and may facilitate initial virus propagation/spread. in patients that receive aceis/arbs once they are infected with sars-cov-2, these drugs could mitigate the extent of lung injury by inhibiting detrimental angii/at1r signalling and hence restoring the balance with beneficial ang1-7/masr signalling.recently, a number of observational studies were performed to investigate the influence of acei and arb pharmacotherapy on sars-cov-2 infections [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . none of the studies showed use of these anti-hypertensive/cardioprotective drugs to be associated with an increased risk of (1) sars-cov-2 infection, (2) severe covid-19 or (3) sars-cov-2-related in-hospital death. conversely, in the small-scale study (205 patients) of bean and colleagues, a lower rate of death or transfer to a critical care unit within 7 days was found in patients on an ace-inhibitor [22] . likewise, in the study of mehra and co-workers involving 8910 covid-19 patients, the use of aceis was associated with better survival [25] . moreover, in the small-scale studies of meng et al. [26] and zhang et al. [28] , favourable effects of aceis/arbs on, respectively, severity of disease and all-cause mortality were observed. although each of these studies arrives at the same conclusion, namely that ace/arb pharmacotherapy is unlikely to be harmful for covid-19 patients (and may even have beneficial effects), small-scale studies have a high risk of chance associations and with observational studies there is always the possibility of confounding. because of this and some other weaknesses (e.g. use of different virological tests within one study, lack of information about the continuation of ace/arb treatment during hospitalisation, bias resulting from selective virological testing), randomised controlled trials will be required to definitively answer the question whether ras inhibitors or other blood-pressure-lowering drugs (e.g. arnis, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, thiazide diuretics) are harmful to covid-19 patients. ideally, these trials should also investigate the effect of different combinations of anti-hypertensive drugs and the timing of anti-hypertensive drug administration on the course of covid-19. of special interest is the effect of arnis on covid-19, as these drugs cause a large rise in plasma angii levels but do not increase the concentration of ang1-7 in blood plasma [8] .apart from further exploring the possible benefit of chemical renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors in covid-19 patients, another promising approach might consist of the treatment of covid-19 with human recombinant soluble ace2. this biological drug could inhibit virus entry into host cells by competing with the binding of the s protein to membrane-bound ace2 and at the same time increase ang1-7 levels at the expense of angii.conflict of interest a.a.f. de vries declares that he has no competing interests.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays a key role in maintaining blood pressure homeostasis, as well as fluid and salt balance in mammals (skeggs et al., 1980; inagami, 1994; weinberg et al., 2000; turner and hooper, 2002) . abnormal activation of the ras has been associated with the pathogenesis of cardiovascular and renal diseases such as hypertension, myocardial infarction and heart failure (ferrario, 1990; nicholls et al., 1998; fleming et al., 2006) . the protease renin cleaves angiotensinogen to generate angiotensin (ang) i. the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) is the critical protease the cleaves ang i to generate ang ii, which is a key regulator of the ras and exerts biological functions through two g-protein-coupled receptors, the ang ii receptor type 1 receptor (at1r) and ang ii receptor type 2 receptor (at2r) (skeggs et al., 1980; corvol et al., 1995) . although there exist alternative ang ii-generating enzymes (such as cathepsins and chymase) (belova, 2000; miyazaki and takai, 2006) , it has been thought that ace is the key and possibly sole enzyme in the regulation of ang ii production in the ras (skeggs et al., 1980; turner and hooper, 2002) .in 2000, a homologue of ace, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), has been discovered (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000) . accumulated evidences indicate that ace2 negatively regulates the activated renin-angiotensin system by degrading ang ii to the heptapeptide ang 1-7. several studies support a counter-regulatory role for ang 1-7 by opposing many at1 receptor-mediated actions, especially in vasoconstriction and cellular proliferation (santos et al., 2005; ferrario, 2006) . thus, ang 1-7 has become a key component of the ras system due to its beneficial effects in the cardiovascular system. in addition to its capacity to generate ang-(1-7), ace2 is a multifunctional enzyme and its beneficial effects may be a result of its ability to act on other vasoactive peptides (vickers et al., 2002) .intriguingly, peptidase-independent actions of ace2 have been recently elucidated. in particular, ace2 has been identified as an essential receptor for sars coronavirus infections as well as a protective molecule against lethal lung failure in sars (li et al., 2003; kuba et al., 2005) . interestingly, sars receptor function of ace2 is independent of its catalytic activities for ang ii degradation, whereas ace2-mediated ang ii degradation is still important for lung protection from sars pathogenesis . furthermore, ace2 and its homolog collectrin have been identified as essential molecules required for expression of neutral amino acid transporters on the cell surface of epithelial cells. collectrin might also have a role in insulin secretion in pancreatic β-cells and/or growth of islet cells. in this review we will discuss the 'classical' functions of ace2 in regulating the reninangiotensin system through its peptidase activity and its new, peptidase-independent functions.ace was termed a 'hypertensin-converting enzyme' when it was initially isolated in 1956 (skeggs et al., 1980) . the human ace gene, located on chromosome 17, encodes a 180 kda protein with two homologous domains. each domain has an active zinc-binding motif, his-glu-x-x-his (hexxh motif), which is found in many peptidases (skeggs et al., 1980; soubrier et al., 1988) (fig. 1 ). ace is a type-i transmembrane glycoprotein, which anchored to the plasma membrane through a single carboxy-terminal transmembrane domain. in humans, two distinct ace isoenzymes have been described, an abundant somatic form found on the endothelial surface of the lungs and on brush-border membranes of kidneys, intestine, placenta and choroid plexus, and the germinal form of ace found only in the testis (turner and hooper, 2002) . both ace isoforms are membranebound protein and, at the cell surface, they function as ectoenzymes which hydrolyze circulating peptides. ace can be cleaved from the cell surface and thereby act as a soluble enzyme. however, the biological significance of soluble ace remains unclear.ace2 consists of 805 amino acids and is type i transmembrane glycoprotein with a single extracellular catalytic domain. the human ace2 gene has been cloned and mapped to the x chromosome (crackower et al., 2002) . like ace, ace2 has two domains: the aminoterminal catalytic domain and the carboxy-terminal domain (fig. 1) . the catalytic domain has one active sitethe zinc metallopeptidase domainand shows 41.8% sequence identity with the amino domain of ace (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000; turner and hooper, 2002) . ace2's carboxy-terminal domain shows 48% sequence identity with collectrin (fig. 1) , a noncatalytic protein recently shown to have a critical role in amino acid re-absorption in the kidney (danilczyk et al., 2006; malakauskas et al., 2007; verrey et al., 2009) , pancreatic beta cell proliferation (akpinar et al., 2005) , and possibly insulin exocytosis (fukui et al., 2005) .early studies observed tissue localization of ace2 predominantly in the heart, kidneys and testes, and at a lower level in a wide variety of tissues, particularly the colon and lung (tipnis et al., 2000) , while later studies also indicated the significance of ace2 in other organs like liver and intestines (komatsu et al., 2002; hamming et al., 2004) . in the heart, ace2 is expressed in the endothelium (tipnis et al., 2000) as wells as cardiomyocytes . in kidney ace2 distributes to the luminal surface of tubular epithelial cells (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000) , and in testes, to the adult leydig cells (douglas et al., 2004) . ace2 localization was mapped to the apical surface of epithelial cells, which is in contrast to ace, which appears to be evenly distributed between the apical and basolateral membranes in polarized cells . moreover, the efficacy of a sars-cov infection was 10-fold increased when the virus was applied at the apical surface of ace2-expressing cells in vitro (tseng et al., 2005) .ace and ace2 both belong to the m2 family (clan ma) of metalloproteases, and have their active site domains exposed to the extracellular surface, facilitating the metabolism of circulating peptides. both ace and ace2 catalyze reactions by utilizing zinc, coordinated by conserved histidines within the active site, to facilitate nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl bond of the substrate by a water molecule, forming a noncovalently bound intermediate. in addition to the two histidines (located within the hexxh motif), a further glutamate residue is involved in coordinating the zinc ion; this is located 23 amino acids c-terminally to the hexxh motif in both ace and ace2 (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000) . structural analyses for native ace2 compared with inhibitor (mln 4760)-bound ace2 (dales et al., 2002) revealed a large 'hinge-bending' motion, in which the catalytic subdomains i and ii of the peptidase domain exhibit open-to-close transitions (fig. 2) . this movement is induced by binding of the inhibitor and repositions key residues for catalysis (towler et al., 2004) .despite the similarities, ace and ace2 function differently; ace releases a c-terminal dipeptide from its substrate (dipeptidylpeptidase), whereas ace2 cleaves a single amino acid (monocarboxypeptidase) (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000) . ace2 catalyzes peptides with a substrate preference for hydrolysis between proline and a hydrophobic or basic c-terminal residue (vickers et al., 2002) . while ace converts ang i to the potent vasoconstrictor ang ii (corvol et al., 1995) , ace2 cleaves ang i to generate the presumably inactive ang 1-9 peptide (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000) , which then can be converted to the vasodilator peptide ang 1-7 by ace or other peptidases (donoghue et al., 2000) . importantly, ace2 directly metabolizes ang ii to generate ang 1-7 with higher efficiency than each protein is a type i integral protein with a signal peptide, depicted in gray, and a transmembrane domain shown in black. the zinc-binding motif (hemgh) repeats two times in ace and once in ace2, and is located within the homology region denoted by the yellow box. regions of homology between ace2 and collectrin are denoted in green. the numbers refer to the amino acids in each human protein.converting ang i to ang 1-9 (vickers et al., 2002) . the resolution of the ace2 crystal structure revealed that these substrate specificity differences are a result of the smaller binding pocket in ace2 due to arginine-273 making a salt-bridge with the c-terminus of the substrate, whereas in ace this residue is substituted by a smaller glutamine residue (towler et al., 2004) . although there were already known ang 1-7-forming enzymes, such as neprilysin (yamamoto et al., 1992) , prolyl endopeptidase 24.26 (nozaki et al., 1992) , and thimet oligopeptidase (chappell et al., 2000) , the identification of ace2 has added further support to the biological significance of the ang 1-7 (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000; vickers et al., 2002) . this peptide has been shown to interact with the g-protein-coupled receptor mas to mediate its vasoprotective effects (santos et al., 2003; keidar et al., 2007; raizada and ferreira, 2007; alenina et al., 2008) . ace2 also acts on the c-terminus of the peptides apelin-13 and apelin-36 and cleaves an amino acid out from them with high catalytic efficiency in vitro (vickers et al., 2002) . apelin is synthesized as 77 amino-acid preprohormone, which is processed into the 36 amino acid peptide apelin-36; further proteolytic cleavage generates apelin-13 (tatemoto et al., 1998; lee et al., 2006) . systemic administration of apelin-13 prompts hypotension in rats and mice (tatemoto et al., 2001; ishida et al., 2004) . interestingly, modification of the c-terminal residue of apelin-13 (f13a) lost its hypotensive action and further antagonized the effect of wild type apelin-13 (lee et al., 2005) , implicating putative roles of ace2 in metabolism of apelin peptides.the requirement of chloride ions for the hydrolysis of ang i by ace has long been recognized (skeggs et al., 1956) . similarly, ace2 activity is also regulated by chloride ions (vickers et al., 2002) . however, the presence of chloride ions increases the hydrolysis of ang i by ace2, but inhibits cleavage of the vasoconstrictor ang ii (guy et al., 2003) . it has been proposed that chloride binding induces subtle changes in the conformation of the active site, which either facilitate or hinder substrate binding (ehlers and riordan, 1991) . an increase in [cl − ] above 100 mm which is the physiological concentration in human plasma increases ang i and decreases ang ii cleavage by ace2 and increases ang i cleavage by ace (rushworth et al., 2008) . this would have the effect of increasing the localized concentration of the vasoconstrictor ang ii in the kidney, where both ace and ace2 have high levels of expression and extracellular chloride ion levels fluctuate.a broad range of ace inhibitors, such as captopril and lisinopril does not affect the activity of ace2 (donoghue et al., 2000; tipnis et al., 2000) , whereas ace2 activity is inhibited by the dipeptide pro-phe (guy et al., 2003) , and specific ace2 inhibitors, such as the peptide analogues dx600 (huang et al., 2003) and mln 4760 ((s,s)-2-[1-carboxy-2-[3-(3,5-dichlorobenzyl)-3h-imidazol4-yl]-ethylamino]-4-methylpentanoicacid) have been developed (dales et al., 2002) . mln 4760 was the first rationally designed inhibitor of ace2, based on the c-terminal dipeptide of ang i (his-leu), and has high potency (k i = 0.44 nm) and specificity. a counter-regulatory axis of the ras by ace2 prompted researchers to investigate the impact of ace2 delivery on cardiovascular diseases in animal models (katovich et al., 2005) . ace2 treatment by means of gene therapy or recombinant protein indeed improved hypertension, atherosclerosis, and kidney diseases (diez-freire et al., 2006; dong et al., 2008; lovren et al., 2008; oudit et al., 2010) . in silico conformation-based drug screening identified two compounds of ace2 activator (a xanthenone and resorcinolnaphthalein) that moderately enhance ace2 activity (hernandez prada et al., 2008) . however, it is not clear how specific these compounds are.although ace2 functions as a peptidase to catalyze ang ii cleavage, recent studies demonstrate that transmembrane domain of ace2 has also biological functions. in 2003, the epidemics of sars threatened the world, and ace2 was identified as a functional receptor for a causative pathogen, the sars coronavirus ( fig. 4) (li et al., 2003; kuba et al., 2005) . cells expressing catalytic inactive mutants of ace2 are still permissive for sars-cov infection, indicating that the peptidase actions of ace2 are not necessary for sars entry into host cells. consistent with the biological result, structural analyses demonstrated that sars spike protein contacts the tip of subdomain i of the ace2 catalytic domain but does not affect the subdomain ii nor occludes the peptidase active site ( fig. 2) (li et al., 2005) . upon ligation of sars-cov to ace2, the ectodomain of ace2 is cleaved while the transmembrane domain is internalized for further virus particle-host cell fusions ( fig. 3) (inoue et al., 2007; haga et al., 2008; wang et al., 2008) . thus, although detailed mechanisms are still elusive, the transmembrane domain of ace2 is fig. 2 . schematic diagram of the role of ace2 in the renin-angiotensin system. angiotensin i (ang i; drvyihpfhl) serves as a substrate for ace, a dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase, and is converted to angiotensin ii (ang ii; drvyihpf), the main active peptide of the classical ras. ace2 catalyzes and inactivates angiotensin ii and produces the vasodilator peptide angiotensin 1-7 (ang 1-7; drvyihpf), which binds the mas receptor and/or is degraded to inactive peptides. red arrowheads indicate the ace cleavage site; blue arrowheads show the ace2 cleavage sites. it should be noted that ace2 is an unspecific protease and can cleave multiple additional substrates such as apelin.implicated to the traffic of sars-cov-receptor complex from cell membrane to the cytoplasm in sars-cov infections.expression analyses for rat kidneys isolated collectrin as an upregulated gene in regenerating collecting ducts. collectrin shares 47.8% identity with c-terminal end of ace2; however, unlike ace2, collectrin lacks active carboxypeptidase catalytic domains ( fig. 1 ) . the initial report documented that collectrin localized in the cytoplasm of collecting duct epithelial cells, but further studies indicated the predominant localization of collectrin in brush borders of the proximal tubular epithelial cells (danilczyk et al., 2006) . danilczyk et al. also serendipitously identified collectrin as an essential regulator of neutral amino acid transporters by genetargeting studies in mice. excess amounts of neutral amino acids (tyrosine and phenylalanine) appeared in the urine of collectrin knockout mice. biochemical studies indicated that collectrin binds to b 0 at1 neutral amino acid transporters and plays critical roles for proper expression of these transporters on cell surface required for amino acid re-absorption in proximal tubules of the kidney (danilczyk et al., 2006; malakauskas et al., 2007) . despite its structural similarity, ace2 does not bind to amino acid transporters in kidneys, but in intestines, where ace2 is highly expressed and amino acids are absorbed. in the gut, ace2 does bind to the b 0 at1 amino acid transporter and contributes to absorption of neutral amino acids . importantly, the peptidase activity of ace2 is not necessary for pairing with the amino acid transporter.ace2 was originally cloned using a cdna library of human failing heart ventricle (donoghue et al., 2000) , and ace2 mrna levels changing dynamically depending on the physiological and pathological conditions (zisman et al., 2003; kuba et al., 2006; koitka et al., 2008; oudit et al., 2009) . although transcriptional regulation of ace2 is still elusive, accumulating evidences have indicated that inhibition of ras by ace inhibitors or at1 receptor blockers upregulates ace2 mrna expression (ishiyama et al., 2004; ferrario et al., 2005) . for instance, downregulation of ace2 mrna levels in rat proteinuric renal injury model was reversed by pharmacological inhibition of the nf-κb transcription factor, which operates downstream of ang ii receptor and cytokine signaling (takase et al., 2005) . inhibition of mineralcorticoids (or aldosterone) increased ace2 mrna in macrophages likely through suppression of oxidative stress, which is associated with ang ii and/or nf-κb signaling (keidar et al., 2005) . consistently, interferon-γ and interleukin-4 downregulate expression of ace2 mrna levels in epithelial cells (de lang et al., 2006) . thus, inflammatory signals, including ang ii, cytokines, and nf-κb, are likely to suppress ace2 transcription.our early studies observed the upregulation of hypoxia-inducible genes in the hearts of ace2 knockout mice (crackower et al., 2002) . tissue local hypoxia increases ace2 expression in human and rat myocardial infarction (burrell et al., 2005) , although in another model of rat, myocardial infarction changes in ace2 mrna levels were not observed (ishiyama et al., 2004) . ace2 overexpression counteracts and inhibits hypoxia-induced collagen production by cardiac fibroblasts (grobe et al., 2007) . in pulmonary smooth muscle cells subjected to hypoxia, ace2 mrna levels increased during the early stages of hypoxia and decreased to near-baseline levels at the later stages after hif-1α accumulation (zhang et al., 2009) . thus, the regulation ace2 expression under hypoxia is still elusive and may be context or cells/organ-dependent. all-trans retinoic acid has also been shown to elevate ace2 mrna levels in spontaneously hypertensive rats (zhong et al., 2004) . hepatocyte nuclear factor 1β (hnf-1β, tcf2) is a tissue-specific transcription factor whose mutation in humans leads to renal cysts, genital malformations, pancreas atrophy and maturity onset diabetes of the young (mody5). in cell lines, ace2 was identified as a direct target gene for hnf-1β, but not hnf-1α (tcf1), and there are multiple hnf-1β binding sites in ace2 promoter regions (senkel et al., 2005) . the ace2 homologue collectrin, located close to ace2 locus on the x chromosome, is also a target gene for hnf-1 transcription factors; hnf-1α in pancreatic β cells (fukui et al., 2005) and hnf-1β in kidney epithelial cells . thus, one can speculate that ace2 and collectrin gene expression is coordinately regulated by hnf-1 transcription factors.ace2 was identified as a sars receptor (li et al., 2003) and is has been reported that ace2 as an intact molecule and/or its transmembrane domain are internalized together with sars-cov upon infection, since endocytosis is essential for establishment of the virus entry (blau and holmes, 2001; inoue et al., 2007) . the internalization can take place fig. 3 . post-translational modifications of ace2; internalization and shedding. sars coronavirus (sars-cov) binds to and internalizes with ace2 for its cellular entry in a clathrin-dependent manner. membrane fusion is mediated via activation of spike by proteases, such as trypsin or furin, and viral rnas are released into cytoplasm, establishing sars infection. the transmembrane proteinase (adam17) cleaves the extracellular juxtamembrane region of ace2, releasing the catalytically active ectodomain into the extracellular milieu. whether such ace2 cleavage contributes to sars pathogenesis is not known yet. fig. 4 . interaction of ace2 with the b 0 at1 amino acid transporter. ace2 interacts with the b 0 at1 amino acid transporter (slc6a19) which is required for polarized surface expression of the transporter in gut epithelial cells. whether ace2 cleavage contributes to supplying neutral amino acids for the b 0 at1 is not known yet. even when recombinant sars spike protein, the sars-cov surface ligand for receptor binding, interacts with ace2 wang et al., 2008) . clathrin-dependent and -independent entry of sars-cov into target cells has been proposed (inoue et al., 2007; wang et al., 2008) . however, the role of the cytoplasmic tail of ace2 is controversial; for instance, deletion of the cytoplasmic tail of ace2 did not affect sars-cov entry (inoue et al., 2007) , whereas it attenuated sars-cov entry in another study (haga et al., 2008) . similar to ace (parkin et al., 2004) , ace2 is subject to a juxtamembrane cleavage events (shedding) which releases the catalytically active ectodomain . the process can be stimulated by phorbol ester, ionomycin, endotoxin, il-1β or tnfα. shedding is mediated by a promiscuous 'sheddase', adam17 (or tace, tnf-α converting enzyme; fig. 3 ) jia et al., 2009 ) and adam17-null cells are reduced in ace2 shedding (iwata et al., 2009) . moreover, calmodulinbinding sites were identified in the cytoplasmic tail of ace2 (lambert et al., 2008) , and inhibition of calmodulin increased the release of the ace2 ectodomain to the culture supernatants (lambert et al., 2008; lai et al., 2009) . although the physiological role of ace2 ectodomain shedding remains elusive as roles for circulating ace2 and remnant cterminal domain have yet to be identified, shedding seems to be involved in sars-cov cellular entry and replication and an adam17 inhibitor suppresses sars-cov replication in vitro (glowacka et al., 2010; haga et al., 2008) .5. ace2 as a negative regulator of ras in the cardiovascular systemthe ace2 gene was mapped to a quantitative trait locus (qtl) on the x chromosome in three different rat models of hypertension. these hypertensive rats show reduced ace2 transcripts and protein expression in heart and kidney (crackower et al., 2002) . consistently, transgenic ace2 overexpression in vessels of shrsp rats reduces blood pressure and improves endothelial function , and neuronal overexpression of ace2 also attenuates hypertension (yamazato et al., 2007; feng et al., 2008) . in humans, several studies have shown a strong association of ace2 polymorphisms to hypertension in female chinese patients with metabolic syndrome (zhong et al., 2006) or essential hypertension (yi et al., 2006; fan et al., 2007; niu et al., 2007) . thus, together with biochemical data that ace2 degrades ang ii to generate ang 1-7, ace2 plays a profound role in controlling blood pressure. however, genetic inactivation of ace2 using homologous recombination results in no apparent alterations in blood pressure in basal levels (crackower et al., 2002) . in another ace2 knockout mouse line blood pressure was significantly increased following ang ii infusions . this is a sharp contrast to spontaneous hypotension observed in ace knockout mice (krege et al., 1995) , suggesting that, in addition to the ang ii system, ace2 might regulate blood pressure through other peptide systems, such as bradykinin and/or apelin. nevertheless, exogenous supplementation of ace2 by gene transfer decreased blood pressure in shr hypertensive rats , and recombinant ace2 treatment attenuated ang ii-induced hypertension specifically (wysocki et al., 2010) . thus, ace2 is a negative regulator of ras in blood pressure control. in addition to hypertension, ace2 gene delivery has also shown beneficial effects on atherosclerosis in animal models, suggesting that ace2 confers endothelial protection (dong et al., 2008; lovren et al., 2008) .the heart is a major organ, which abundantly expresses ace2, and many literatures have shown its importance in heart failure. ace2 null mice displayed impaired cardiac contractility which is associated with aging and/or cardiac pressure overload in several different ace2 knockout mouse lines (crackower et al., 2002; yamamoto et al., 2006; nakamura et al., 2008) . heart contractility impairment was correlated with elevated cardiac and plasma ang ii levels, and double knockout mice of ace and ace2 genes or treatment with at1 receptor blockers reversed the cardiac phenotype in ace2 knockout mice (crackower et al., 2002; yamamoto et al., 2006; nakamura et al., 2008) . similarly, in myocardial infarction loss of ace2 accelerates maladaptive left ventricular remodeling (kassiri et al., 2009) . mechanistically, the agedependent cardiomyopathy in ace2 knockout mice is likely mediated by ang ii-induced oxidative stress and inflammation through at1 receptor downstream pi3k (phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase) signaling . of note, one study reported that their knockout mouse line did not show alterations in cardiac function, although these mice were not investigated under conditions of cardiac like pressure overload gurley and coffman, 2008) . however, these differences were resolved and appear to be dependent on modifier genes in different mouse background . thus, ace and ace2 balance ang ii levels and contribute to maintaining heart functions through at1 receptor.in addition to counterbalancing ang ii with ace, the involvement of ang 1-7 and apelin in the actions of ace2 on controlling heart function has been postulated. increasing evidences have shown the beneficial effects of ang 1-7/mas receptor axis in pathological settings of the heart. treatment with ang 1-7 peptide has been shown to improve myocardial performance, cardiac remodeling, and even survival in rodent heart failure models, including ischemia/reperfusion injury, myocardial infarction, hypertension-induced cardiomyopathy (ferreira et al., 2001; santos et al., 2004) . the nonpeptide ave-0991, a selective ligand for mas receptor, has actions similar to the cardioprotective effects of ang 1-7 peptide , and knockout mice of mas receptor displayed a reduced heart contractility (alenina et al., 2008) . although there are accumulating literatures on ace2-ang 1-7-mas axis, most of them are correlative studies on ace2 relationships with ang 1-7-mas system. we still miss direct evidence linking functional causal relationships between ace2 and ang 1-7-mas system. for instance, whether ang 1-7 peptide or mas agonist can rescue ace2 knockout mouse heart phenotypes is not even challenged. a connection of ace2 and ang 1-7-mas system is still elusive. in addition to ang ii, ace2 also acts on the peptides apelin-13 and apelin-36 with high catalytic efficiency in vitro (vickers et al., 2002) . apelin-13 and apelin-36 are overlapped c-terminus fragments of 77 amino-acid apelin preprohormone and are generated from it by proteolytic cleavage (tatemoto et al., 1998; lee et al., 2006) . although systemic administration of apelin peptides prompts hypotension in rats and mice (tatemoto et al., 2001; ishida et al., 2004) , apelin knockout mice and apj (apelin receptor) knockout mice both showed little alterations in blood pressure at baseline. interestingly, apelin knockout mice showed aging-or stress-associated cardiac contractility defects, similar to the heart phenotype of ace2 knockout mice, implicating a potential in vivo interaction of ace2 with apelin (kuba et al., 2007) . nevertheless, there are no direct evidences of in vivo catalysis of apelin peptides by ace2, and further studies are awaited.in humans, ace2 gene polymorphisms associate with parameters of left ventricular hypertrophy in men (lieb et al., 2006) , and soluble ace2 activity is increased in patients with myocardial dysfunction and correlates with disease severity (epelman et al., 2008) , implicating physiological roles of ace2 in patients. for therapeutic applications of ace2 using transgenic overexpression of ace2 in the hearts, the phenotypes are controversial; one study showed that cardiac overexpression of ace2 protects the heart from ischemia-induced heart failure (der sarkissian et al., 2008) , whereas in the others overexpression of ace2 was not beneficial, leading to fatal arrhythmia and severe fibrosis (donoghue et al., 2003; masson et al., 2009) . the latter harmful effects may be due to the artifacts of transgenic gene overexpression, since utilizing recombinant ace2 protein for therapeutic models has been recently shown to be beneficial in various disease models (oudit et al., 2010; treml et al., 2010; wysocki et al., 2010) . neuronal control of heart function by ace2 in brains has also been demonstrated. injections of the ace2 inhibitor mln4760 into the nucleus tractus solitarii reduced the baroreceptor reflex for reflex bradycardia in rats (diz et al., 2008; xia and lazartigues, 2008) , suggesting a role for ace2 and ras in controlling baroreceptor reflex.in kidney, ace2 is abundantly expressed (crackower et al., 2002) , and the activity of ace2 is even higher in the kidney cortex than in heart tissue . ace2 has emerged as a protective molecule against kidney diseases in the context of negative regulation of the ras (soler et al., 2008; oudit et al., 2009) . for instance, deletion of ace2 leads to late-onset nephrotic glomerulosclerosis spontaneously (oudit et al., 2006) and accelerates diabetic kidney injury in akita diabetic mice (wong et al., 2007) and in streptozocin-induced diabetic mice . in line with these results, pharmacological ablation of ace2 by mln-4760 resulted in increased albuminuria and glomerular pathology in the kidneys of db/db diabetic mice and streptozocininduced diabetic mice soler et al., 2007) . these phenotypes are at least in part dependent on ang ii signaling and can be rescued by at1 receptor blockade soler et al., 2007) . thus, these data definitely indicate that ace2 is physiologically renoprotective. in hypertensive shr rats, with the onset of hypertension, the tubular expression of ace2 in the kidneys is downregulated compared to control rats. diabetic nephropathy in experimental models has been shown to alter both glomerular and tubular expressions of ace2. in a long-term diabetic rat model, renal ace2 expression is decreased (tikellis et al., 2003) , whereas there is an early increase in ace2 expression and activity in the kidneys of diabetic db/db (ye et al., 2004; wysocki et al., 2006) and akita (wong et al., 2007) mice. the highest expression of the ace2 mrna found in renal proximal tubules was significantly reduced in the tubules from diabetic rats (tikellis et al., 2003) . thus, reduced ace2 expression might contribute to the pathogenesis and progression of kidney diseases (tikellis et al., 2003; mizuiri et al., 2008; reich et al., 2008) . renal expression of ace2 may play a more profound role in controlling local ras rather than regulating systemic blood pressure. therefore, ace2 counterbalances ace function, negatively regulates ang ii levels and thereby controls local kidney homeostasis.6. ace2 is a sars receptor -ace2 in the respiratory systemacute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is the most severe form of acute lung injury, which affects approximately one million individuals worldwide/year and has a mortality rate of at least 30-50% (hudson et al., 1995; ware, 2006) . ards can be triggered by multiple diseases such as sepsis, aspiration, trauma, acute pancreatitis, or pneumonias following infections with sars coronavirus or avian and human influenza viruses. previous studies of ace insertion/deletion (i/d) polymorphism correlation with severity of ards in humans (marshall et al., 2002; jerng et al., 2006) and ace inhibitor treatments in rodent ards models (raiden et al., 2002) have suggested that the ras could have a role in ards/acute lung injury.intriguingly, despite its normal lung structures and functions, ace2 knockout mice exhibited very severe pathology of ards/acute lung injury compared with wild type control mice ; enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, neutrophil accumulation, and worsened lung function. at1 blocker treatment or additional ace gene deficiency on an ace2 knockout background rescues the severe phenotype of ace2 single mutant mice in acute lung injury . importantly, treatment with catalytically active, but not enzymatically inactive, recombinant ace2 protein improved the symptoms of acute lung injury in wild type mice as well as in ace2 knockout mice . furthermore, in a recent study of large animals in sepsis ards models, recombinant ace2 protein significantly improved the respiratory failure and increased the oxygen levels of ards in pigs (treml et al., 2010) . thus, in animal models of acute lung injury, ace, ang ii, and at1 receptor function as lung injury-promoting factors, while the negative regulation of ang ii levels by ace2 protects from lung injury . moreover, in other lung injury models like bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis and monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension, ace2 has recently been shown to protect from chronic lung injuries, fibrosis, and pulmonary vasoconstriction yamazato et al., 2009) . these results suggest that ace2 may serve as an entirely novel therapeutic for chronic lung diseases as well as acute lung injury, and the efficacy of recombinant ace2 protein or at1 receptor blockers on lung diseases should be further tested in clinical settings.during several months of 2003, a newly identified illness termed severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) spread rapidly through the world. international cooperative teams swiftly isolated a novel coronavirus as the sars pathogen (sars-cov) and determined the sars-cov genome sequence (marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003) . surprisingly, ace2 was identified as a functional receptor in vitro by using co-immunoprecipitation techniques (li et al., 2003) , and subsequently, in a mouse sars infection model with ace2 knockout mice, ace2 was indeed identified as the essential receptor for sars infections in vivo .interaction of sars-cov with ace2 is initiated via trimers of the sars spike protein which extends into a hydrophobic pocket of ace2 catalytic domain (li et al., 2005) . this ace2-spike interaction leads to endocytosis of virus particles through internalization with ace2, induces the fusion of virus and host cells, and establishes sars-cov infection. however, this process does not require nor affect the peptidase activity of ace2, since cells expressing enzymatically inactive ace2 can still be infected with the sars-cov and ace2 substrates are still accessible to the catalytic pocket of ace2 when the sars spike protein is bound. furthermore, in the structure of sars spike-bound ace2, the catalytically active site of ace2 was not blocked by the sars spike protein (li et al., 2005) . therefore, ace2 functions as a sars receptor independently of its peptidase activity.one mystery of sars-cov is why, in contrast to the other coronaviruses, such infections trigger severe lung disease with such high mortality. accumulating evidence indicates that severe sars infections are dependent on the burden of viral replication as well as on the immunopathologic consequences of the host response (lau and peiris, 2005; perlman and dandekar, 2005) . in addition to the aberrant activation of the immune system, our own studies have implicated a direct involvement of ace2 in sars pathogenesis. intriguingly, both sars-cov infection and challenge with recombinant sars-spike protein triggered a marked downregulation of ace2 expression in lungs and in cell culture . thus, sars-cov-infected or spike protein-treated mice resemble ace2 knockout mice. similar to ace2 mutant mice, spike-treated wild type mice show markedly more severe pathology in acute lung injury . therefore, downregulation of the sars receptor ace2 expression by sars-cov infection activates the renin-angiotensin system and contributes to pathogenesis of severe ards/acute lung injury in sars.one of the clinical features of sars patients is the progressive and rapid deterioration of lung function and the obvious loss of lung repair capacity after the viral load has declined (peiris et al., 2003) . although many studies demonstrated that sars receptor ace2-expressing cells are alveolar type-1 or type-2 pneumocytes or vascular endothelial cells, a couple of recent studies suggested that lung epithelial stem/ progenitor cells are also important for sars infection. mouse oct-4+ lung epithelial progenitor cells, which arise from in vitro cultures of enzyme-released cells from neonatal lung tissues, express ace2 and are the target cells for sars-cov infection in vitro and support active virus replication leading to their own destruction (ling et al., 2006) . detailed expression analyses for mouse lungs revealed the highest expression of ace2 in late embryonic days (e18.5) which declines after birth (wiener et al., 2007) and further supporting a role for ace2 in progenitor cells. in sars-infected human patient lungs, cd34+ oct4+ lung progenitor cells are also positive for sars-cov antigens using immunohistochemistry, while mature pneumocytes appear to be negative for sars-cov antigens . interestingly, in rabbit atherosclerosis models, co-localization of ace2 in cd34+ oct4+ cells was also observed in the atherosclerotic plaques (zulli et al., 2006) . however, it should be noted that ace2 expression is downregulated by sars infection at the transcriptional and posttranslational level (glowacka et al., 2010; inoue et al., 2007; haga et al., 2008; wang et al., 2008) , and therefore one would actually expect low ace2-immunoreactivity in sars-cov infected cells. nevertheless, these observations suggest a potential role of ace2 for lung stem/ progenitor cells, in addition to type-1/type-2 pneumocytes, in the continued destruction of lung tissues and apparent loss in the capacity for lung repair after sars-cov infections. further studies are, however, required.homology searches have shown that ace2 is a chimeric protein that has emerged from the duplication of two genes: homology with ace at the catalytic domain and homology with collectrin in the transmembrane c-terminal domain. the collectrin gene (gene name transmembrane protein 27; tmem27) is located in immediate proximity to the ace2 locus on the x chromosome and both genes share similar transcription factor binding sites. collectrin was shown to be expressed in β-cells of the pancreas under the transcriptional control of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (hnf1), and its function was implicated as insulin exocytosis or β-cell proliferation (akpinar et al., 2005; fukui et al., 2005) . surprisingly, using gene-targeting studies of collectrin, the physiological in vivo function of collectrin turned out to be a critical binding partner for amino acid transporters. collectrin physically associates with numerous apical amino acid transporters in the kidney and controls their expression and transport functions (danilczyk et al., 2006) . as a consequence collectrin mutant mice exhibit a marked defect in re-absorption of amino acids in the proximal tubules of the kidneys. biochemically, collectrin binds to b 0 at1-family amino acid transporters and controls polarized expression of these transporters on the cell surface (danilczyk et al., 2006; malakauskas et al., 2007) .due to the high homology at its transmembrane with collectrin, ace2 was also anticipated to play a role in amino acid re-absorption in kidneys. however, this was not the case; rather ace2 binds to the b 0 at1 amino acid transporter in the intestine but not in the kidney (kowalczuk et al., 2008; camargo et al., 2009) . in ace2 knockout mice, luminal expression of b 0 at1 in the intestine is completely lost, suggesting that ace2 is essential for expression of b 0 at1 in cell surface of the intestine ). thus, ace2 and collectrin are both binding partners for b 0 at1 and contribute to absorption of neutral amino acids in intestine and kidney, respectively, although reasons for tissue-specific bindings of b 0 at1 to ace2 or collectrin are unknown. hartnup disorder is a hereditary familial disease, characterized by a pellagra-like light-sensitive rash, cerebellar ataxia, emotional instability, and amino aciduria (baron et al., 1956) . gene mutations in the b 0 at1 (slc6a19) neutral amino acid transporter were identified as one cause of hartnup's disorder (kleta et al., 2004; seow et al., 2004) . despite crucial roles of ace2 and collectrin in expression of this amino acid transporter, gene mutations of ace2 and collectrin have not been identified in hartnup's disease. among the human hartnup mutations of b 0 at1, the a69t and r240q missense mutants were shown in vitro defective for activation of transport function by ace2 and collectrin. in in vitro xenopus oocyte expression system the b 0 at1 mutants alone show similar levels of amino acid uptake to wild-type one, although the transport rates are low (seow et al., 2004; camargo et al., 2009) . however, when the mutants were co-expressed with ace2, transport function was not activated by the binding partners, while the coexpression of ace2 and b 0 at1 dramatically activates transport functions. thus, mutations in hartnup disorder patients interfering with the interaction between b 0 at1 and ace2 may explain the disease in some individuals. on the other hand, ace2 knockout mice were not reported for any phenotypes recapitulating hartnup disorder. also in hartnup patients, for instance, a compound heterozygous for a69t and the original hartnup mutation ivs8+2t-ng showed only seizures but not other symptoms like pellagra or ataxic gaits . therefore, the physiological significance of this impaired activation of the mutants by ace2 is yet elusive, and further analyses for the role of the mutations would be needed.studies of ace2 knockout mice and gene transfer or administration of recombinant ace2 protein have demonstrated that ace2 is an in vivo negative regulator of the both systemic and local effects of the ras systems through peptidase activity. the carboxypeptidase activity of ace2 appears to limit the availability of ang ii, generates counter-regulatory vasodilator peptides such as ang 1-7, and may even act on other peptide systems such as apelin and dynorphin. importantly, ace2 was also identified as a key sars receptor and plays a protective role in sars-mediated ards. these findings are now providing the opportunity to develop a potential novel medicine for the treatment of ards, an often lethal condition that can develop in emerging infectious lung diseases such as avian influenza (h5n1) or the swine flu (h1n1). during the course of studying ace2 function, we also made an entirely unexpected finding: ace2 and collectrin are essential for expression of amino acid transporters in the gut and kidney, respectively.the discovery and functional characterization of ace2 have shown that the ras system is far more complex and that this system is tightly connected to other peptide systems and even amino acid transport functions. an understanding of such complexity and molecular crosstalks will not only broaden our knowledge on the evolution and biology of cardiovascular systems, but will also offer a chance to develop new and refined therapeutic strategies for various diseases.the covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) infecting one million and killing more than 50'000 people worldwide as of april 2, has fueled enormous interest in the mechanisms whereby this new coronavirus causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiorgan failure. the estimated 79% infection rate from undocumented cases in covid-19 patients , and the high lethality of the infections, along with its enormous socio-economic impact, emphasize the importance of fully understanding these mechanisms for developing effective treatment strategies.early in 2020 reports of the full rna sequence of the sars-cov-2 virus highlighted its remarkable similarity with the sars-cov virus, which was responsible for a global outbreak that killed 774 people in 2003 (xu et al., 2020; zhou et al., 2020) . as the processes whereby the sars-cov virus infects the lung cells had been already identified , and it was held that sars-cov-2 uses identical mechanisms, these discoveries allowed an unprecedented acceleration of knowledge.acid sequence of the spike (s) protein of the envelope that both viruses use to infect mammalian cells. with a 4 amino acid residue difference the sars-cov and the sars-cov-2 s protein share an almost identical 3-d structure of the receptor binding domain (xu et al., 2020) and, moreover, binds to ace-2 with even higher affinity than sars-cov (wrapp et al., 2020) , which may explain its virulence and predilection for the lungs.upon binding to ace-2, both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 activate the transmembrane serine protease-2 (tmprss2), which is highly expressed in the lungs. through fusion of its envelope with the cell membrane, the virus penetrates into the cells (figure 1 , panel a) (heurich et al., 2014; hoffmann et al., 2020) . of note, sars-cov-2 entry can be prevented by sars convalescent sera containing neutralizing antibodies, or by tmprss2 inhibitors such as camostat (hoffmann et al., 2020) and nafamostat mesylate, both approved in japan for clinical use for other indications (yamamoto et al., 2016) . these seminal discoveries suggested several potential therapeutic strategies to prevent sars-cov-2 entry into pulmonary cells (figure 1, panel a) .what is the role of ace-1 and ace-2 in infections caused by sars-cov and sars-cov-2?are there similarities between ace-1, the target of aceis, and ace-2, the target of sars-cov and sars-cov-2? this is obviously the essential question for physicians using aceis or angiotensinreceptor blockers (arbs), which are frequently prescribed in a multitude of patients.both ace-1 and ace-2 cleave angiotensin peptides ( figure 1 , panel b). however, they differ markedly: ace-1 cleaves the dipeptide his-leu from angiotensin i, thus generating angiotensin (ang) ii, which causes vaso-and broncho-constriction, increases vascular permeability, inflammation, and fibrosis and thereby promotes the development of ards and lung failure in patients infected with the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (yang et al., 2015) (figure 1, panel b) .compelling evidence from animal models of ards, lung fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive lung disease indicate that these effects are essential for ards to develop and that both aceis and arbs block the disease-propagating effect of ang ii (dhawale et al., 2016; imai et al., 2005; kaparianos and argyropoulou, 2011) .ace-2, which is expressed more abundantly on the apical than the basolateral side of polarized alveolar epithelial cells (jia et al., 2005) , shares only 42% amino acid sequence homology with ace-1 (harmer et al., 2002) . it cleaves only one amino acid residue (leu or phe) from ang i and ang ii, respectively, to generate ang (1-9) and ang(1-7) ( figure 1, panel b) . importantly, ang(1-7) counteracts the at 1 r-mediated aforementioned detrimental effects induced by ang ii in the lungs. accordingly, genetic deletion of ace-2 worsens experimental ards , while ang(1-7) and aceis or arbs administration improve it wö sten-van asperen et al., 2011) . thus, blunting the ace-1-ang ii-at 1 r axis while enhancing the ace-1-ang ii-at 2 r, the ace-2-ang(1-7)-at 2 r or the ace-2-ang(1-7)-masr receptor axes ( figure 1 , panel b) likely protects from ards triggered by infectious pathogens, including coronaviruses (dhawale et al., 2016; imai et al., 2005; kaparianos and argyropoulou, 2011; meng et al., 2014) .after ace-2 was identified as the sars-cov-2 receptor (hoffmann et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020) , unexpectedly, and almost immediately, it was contended that treatment with aceis and arbs would be harmful for covid-19 patients. this hypothesis was quickly spread in the public, causing confusion and fear in patients taking these drugs, who started asking themselves, and their doctors if they should discontinue these medications and replace them with of antihypertensive drugs of other classes.the confusion caused in the medical community and the public was due to the publication of two commentaries containing simple hypotheses in the absence of supporting evidence. in one commentary ace-2 was suggested to be secreted at higher amounts in patients with cardiovascular disease than in healthy individuals, and in another, it was also stated that 'ace-2 levels can be increased by the use of aceis' , albeit no evidence of this occurring in the lungs mechanisms of covid-19 by which the sars-cov-2 virus infects the lower airway cells and modalities to increase circulating soluble ace-2 for therapeutic use. (a) by binding to endothelial and type 2 alveolar epithelial cells that express ace-2 at high levels, the virus activates proteases, such as tmprss2. this allows fusion with the virus' envelope to the cell membrane facilitating the virus to enter and infect the cell. of note, type 2 alveolar epithelial cells are well equipped with a molecular machinery that allows rapid replication of the viruses thus enhancing pulmonary spreading of the infection. once infected by sars-cov-2 the lung cells downregulates expression of ace-2. therefore, the lungs remain exposed to, and are unprotected from, the detrimental actions of angiotensin ii acting via the at 1 r. increasing circulating soluble ace-2 levels represents a potential new therapeutic principle to treat sars-cov-2 infection. this can be achieved using different strategies: either by increasing adam-17-dependent shedding of ace-2 facilitating its removal from tissue (strategy a) or by intravenous administration of recombinant soluble ace-2 to capture and thereby inactivate sars-cov-2 in plasma and preventing it from entering the cell (strategy b). (b). the renin-angiotensin system in the pathophysiology of sars-cov-2-associated ards. ang ii -via the at 1 r -promotes inflammation, vasoconstriction, cell proliferation, and vascular leakage and eventually, pulmonary fibrosis. these effects are counteracted by ace-2 dependent formation of ang(1-7) activating the at 2 r, masr, and mrgd and formation of ang(1-9) activating the at 2 r. the potential beneficial effects of aceis and arbs entail rescuing the downregulated ace-1-ang ii-at 2 r and the ace-2-ang(1-7)-at 2 r and ace-2-ang(1-7)-masr pathways in the lungs and capturing the virus in the circulation, thus impeding its binding to the lung cells and preventing damage to the lungs. abbreviations used: ace-1, angiotensin converting enzyme-1; ace-2, angiotensin converting enzyme-2; aceis, angiotensin converting enyzme inhibitors; arbs, angiotensin at 1 receptor blockers; at 1 r, angiotensin ii type 1 receptor; at 2 r, angiotensin ii type 2 receptor; nep, neutral endopeptidase/neprilysin; mrgprd, g-protein-coupled receptor mrgd; rhace-2, recombinant soluble human ace-2; soluble rbd of ace-2, soluble receptor-binding domain of ace-2; tmprss2, transmembrane serine protease-2.exists. these hypothetical phenomena were put forward to suggest and enhanced susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection, and thus to warn patients about taking these drugs. correspondence to the lancet respiratory medicine suggested that patients with cardiac diseases, as hypertension and/or diabetes treated with 'ace-2-increasing drugs' would be at higher risk for severe sars-cov-2 infection, because treatment with aceis and arbs would raise ace-2 (fang et al., 2020) . to support their contention, the authors quoted a review article that however did not report such evidence (li et al., 2017) . to the contrary, a search of the literature revealed that no data that would support such notion exist. in fact, evidence of ace-2 upregulation applies to the heart, likely as a compensatory phenomenon to underlying conditions, for example myocardial infarction (burrell et al., 2005; ishiyama et al., 2004; ocaranza et al., 2006) , rather than to the drug treatment per se.moreover, in neither commentary the authors considered the fact that increased plasma levels of ace-2 (generated by delivering soluble forms of rhace-2 and/or increasing shedding of ace-2 from the cell membrane) can capture the s protein of sars-cov-2 (and sars-cov) in plasma, thus preventing the virus from binding to lung cells, two strategies that have been suggested to protect against sars-cov-2 infection of the lungs (kruse, 2020; zhang et al., 2020) (figure 1, panel a) .nonetheless, the publication of simple hypotheses unsubstantiated by any data spread so fast in public and news portals that scientific societies, including the european society of hypertension (esh), the italian society of cardiology and the italian society of arterial hypertension were required to release statements to confirm that there is no evidence that aceis and arbs could jeopardize covid-19 patients, and there is no need to recommend discontinuing treatment. to date, italy is the country with the highest number of sars-cov-2-positive individuals in the european union and the highest official number of deaths in the world. on march 17 th , 2020 a joint statement of the presidents of the hfsa/acc/aha (bozkurt et al., 2020) , followed by one of the european medicines agency (2020), and several experts' opinion articles reported and affirmed that there is no evidence to support discontinuing aceis and arbs (danser et al., 2020; greene et al., 2013; perico et al., 2020) , a notion also shared by the editors of the new england journal of medicine (rubin et al., 2020) .in our view these neutral recommendations could even be an understatement. in fact, in two large meta-analysis, and a case-control study involving over 21,000 patients in several high-risk categories of patients, including stroke survivors (shinohara and origasa, 2012) , in an asian population (caldeira et al., 2012; liu et al., 2012) , and also in patients with parkinson's disease , aceis were superior to other antihypertensive agents in pneumonia prevention.the experimental data obtained for the sars-cov virus also show that these drugs can be protective rather than harmful, which lead to the proposition of specifically enhancing the protective arm of the renin-angiotensin system as a novel therapeutic strategy for pulmonary diseases (tan et al., 2018) . moreover, abrupt withdrawal of raas inhibitors in high-risk patients, including those who have stage 3 arterial hypertension, heart failure or who had myocardial infarction, may result in clinical instability and adverse health outcomes as pointed out recently (vaduganathan et al., 2020) .the at 1 r-mediated detrimental effects of ang ii were demonstrated in several models of ards sars-cov-induced acute respiratory failure kuba et al., 2006; kuba et al., 2005) . moreover, with its vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative and antifibrotic effects, activation of the ace-2-ang(1-7)-at 2 r ace-2-ang(1-7)-masr pathways counterbalances the harmful effects of the ace-1-ang ii-at 1 r pathway on the lungs. a reduced ratio of ace-1/ace-2 has been documented in ards; furthermore, experimentally ards and lung fibrosis can be prevented by administration of ang(1-7) (cao et al., 2019 ), or arbs (wö sten-van asperen et al., 2011 , indicating that ace-2 activation limits pulmonary disease progression. this implies not only that aceis and arbs are unlikely to be detrimental in covid-19 patients, but that they likely will be protective. whether the same applies to drugs that block the mineralocorticoid receptor and antagonize aldosterone, another downstream mediator in the ace-1-ang ii-at 1 r pathway, remains unknown.in endothelial and lung type 2 alveolar epithelial cells, sars-cov-2 downregulates ace-2 and thereby the ace-2-ang(1-7)-masr pathway (imai et al., 2008) . this would also suggest that aceis and arbs can be beneficial by blunting the ace-1-ang ii-at 1 r pathway and counterbalancing the down-regulation of ace-2 ( figure 1) . administration of recombinant soluble human ace-2 (rhace-2) to capture sars-cov-2 in the bloodstream may prevent its binding to lung cells, and enhance ace-2 activity in lung tissue (figure 1, panel a) , which could be beneficial for covid-19 patients with ards, possibly even at a late stage of the infection for patients in intensive care requiring assisted ventilation. along these lines, in 2017 a pilot trial in patients with ards conducted in ten u.s intensive care units supports the value of this strategy in that rhace-2 increased levels of both ang(1-7) and alveolar surfactant protein d levels, and tended to lower the concentrations of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (khan et al., 2017) .in summary, a disbalance between the ace-1-ang ii-at 1 r and the ace-1-ang ii-at 2 r and the ace-2-ang(1-7)-at 2 r and the ace-2-ang(1-7)-masr pathways contributes to the pathogenesis of ards and acute lung failure which likely is also relevant for covid-19 patients. therefore, it seems reasonable to conclude that rebalancing the system by blunting the deleterious effects of ang ii using aceis and arbs while enhancing the ace-2 axis is a valuable strategy to minimize the harmful effects of sars-cov-2 on the lungs. in the majority of patients with cardiovascular diseases, mainly hypertension, heart failure, or ischemic heart disease, who are on aceis or arbs and at risk of becoming infected, or have been infected by sars-cov-2 but do not need mechanical ventilation, there is no evidence for deleterious effects of acei or arbs. in fact, discontinuing these life-saving medications potentially can be harmful.competing interests matthias barton: senior editor, elife. the other authors declare that no competing interests exist. the funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.gian paolo rossi, conceptualization, supervision, methodology, writing -original draft; viola sanga, resources, data curation; matthias barton, supervision, writing, validation