the scientific community is called to respond to a pandemic of respiratory disease that has spread with impressive rate among people of all the world. the new coronavirus has been called sars-cov-2 and the related disease indicated as covid-19. who reports that positive patients in the world increased from 1,353,361, with 79,235 ascertained deaths (9 april 2020) to 10,021,401, with 499,913 confirmed deaths (29 june 2020) in less than 3 months, due to covid-19 complications. it also appears that these numbers might be a smaller number of real cases due to our inability in quantifying rescued or asymptomatic people.to limit death rate and sars-cov-2 spread, it needs to develop a vaccine and to identify new small molecules able to prevent or treat covid-19 complications, as well as to prepare new quick diagnosis kits, able to quantify the real number of people exposed to sars-cov-2. among the main actors of sars-cov-2 infection, sars-cov-2 spike proteins, rna-dependent rna polymerases, and proteases deserve to be mentioned. indeed, rna-dependent rna polymerase has become one of the main targets of a nucleoside analog antiviral drug, the remdesivir, already used for reducing complications due to ebola, dengue, and mers-cov infections [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . at the same time, viral protease inhibitors [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] are under investigation for their ability in preventing virus protein cleavage (with specific reference to spike protein cleavage) [13] leading to the fusion of virus proteins with host cell membranes. also, anti-inflammatory antibodies/drugs in combination with anticoagulant molecules are under investigation for limiting coagulopathies [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] and cytokine signaling impressively triggered by sars-cov-2 infection [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] . finally, the same sars-cov-2 spike protein has become the most investigated target due to its ability in forming interactions with the human ace2 receptor, causing fusion events that make possible for the virus to penetrate host human cells [24] [25] [26] [27] .the crucial role played by the spike protein is also due to the possibility to use the recombinant sars-cov-2 spike protein for triggering an immune response, working as a vaccine, that may help in preventing and treating covid- 19 , similarly to what recently proposed [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] .for clarifying sars-cov-2 infection mechanisms, several research groups have recently solved the structure of the entire sars-cov-2 spike protein (6vsb.pdb [24] ; 6vxx. pdb and 6vyb.pdb [25] ), in pre-fusion conformation, and/ or sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain in complex with the human ace2 (6vw1.pdb; 6lzg.pdb).in light of the available cited crystallized/cryo-em solved structures, here we propose a strategy for identifying/drawing new sars-cov-2 therapeutic antibodies directed against the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein that could be used for contrasting sars-cov-2 infection, aiming to prevent pre-/post-fusion spike conformation interconversion, responsible for virus invasion, and to provide a molecular structural context for studying new diagnosis kits based on the interactions between our engineered antibodies and the human sars-cov-2 spike rbd.cov-spike and ace2 homologous protein-crystallized structures were searched using the folding recognition methods implemented in pgenthreader and i-tasser. with this aim, the amino acid sequence of the sars-cov-2 spike protein monomer (fasta sequence of the monomer taken from 6vsb.pdb, chain a) and of the ace2 (fasta sequence of the monomer taken from 6m18.pdb, chain b) were used as query sequences for running pgenthreader (http://bioin f.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipr ed/) and i-tasser (https :// zhang lab.ccmb.med.umich .edu/i-tasse r/) to screen the pdb, searching for the most similar deposited crystallized structures [35] [36] [37] [38] .the sequences of the retrieved 48 crystallized structures (with reference to those crystallized structures indicated with "certain" or "high" confidence level in the pgenthreader output) were aligned using clustalw [39] implemented in the jalview package [40] . the 3d coordinates from the 48 crystallized structures were superimposed using the "super" command available in pymol [41] . the "super" command allows aligning the selected proteins under investigation for performing a comparative structural analysis, due to its ability in providing a sequence-independent structure-based pairwise alignment. notably, the "super" command is more robust than the "align" command because it successfully performs also superimposition of proteins with a lower sequence similarity [37, 42] .protein-protein and protein-ligand binding regions were highlighted by selecting residues within 4 å at the protein-protein interface or from the investigated ligands, in the superimposed structures.all the generated 3d all-atom models were energetically minimized using the yasara minimization server [43] or the rosetta "relax" application within the rosetta "scoring and prep" tools (https ://www.roset tacom mons. org/demos /lates t/tutor ials/scori ng_and_prep/scori ng_and_ prep) [57] [58] [59] , independently.the 3d comparative model of sars-cov-2 spike trimer in post-fusion conformation was built by multi-template modeling using modeller [44] . more in detail, the human sars-cov-2 spike protein sequence was aligned to the sequences of the available entire post-fusion conformation of the murine coronavirus spike protein (6b3o.pdb, [45] ) and the remaining available crystallized subdomains of other coronavirus spike proteins in post-fusion conformations (5yl9.pdb [46] ; 1wyy.pdb [47] and 1wdf.pdb [48] ). sequences of the cited crystallized structure fragments were used as query sequences for sampling the corresponding entire spike monomer sequences, by reciprocalblastp, to be aligned with sequences of the investigated structures for comparative purposes. the obtained msa was used for driving the multi-template modeling.then, a complex 3d model representing the pre-fusion spike trimer interacting with three ace2 functional receptor units was built by superimposing the recently solved cryo-em prefusion structure of sars-cov-2 spike trimer complex (6vsb.pdb, [24] ; 6vyb.pdb and 6vxx.pdb [25] ), the sars-cov-2 spike rbd crystallized in complex with the human ace2 (6vw1.pdb; 6lzg.pdb) the sars-cov-1 spike trimer interacting with one ace2 functional receptor (conformations 1-3, 6acg.pdb, 6acj.pdb, 6ack.pdb, [49] and 6cs2.pdb, [50] ), the sars-cov-1 spike-rbd crystallized in complex with the human ace2 (2ajf.pdb, [51] ).for investigating pre-/post-fusion conformation interconversion, we superimposed the pre-fusion available crystallized structures of sars-cov2 spike proteins and the generated 3d models about the pre-fusion conformation of the spike trimer in complex with three ace2 units, to the obtained 3d model of the post-fusion conformation. all the generated 3d all-atom models were energetically minimized using the yasara minimization server [43] or the rosetta "relax" application within the rosetta "scoring and prep" tools (https ://www.roset tacom mons.org/demos /lates t/tutor ials/scori ng_and_prep/scori ng_and_prep) [57] [58] [59] , independently.starting from the 3d atomic coordinates of the crystallized neutralizing antibodies m396 (2dd8.pdb [52] ) and s230 (6nb7.pdb, [53] ), both complexed with the sars-cov-1 spike rbd domain, we modelled the interactions of m396 and s230 (6nb7.pdb, [53] ) with sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain, by superimposing the fragment antigen-based (fab) portions of m396 (2dd8.pdb [52] ) and s230 (6nb7. pdb, [53] ) with the sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain, complexed with ace2 (6vw1.pdb), using pymol.for creating a more specific antibody directed against sars-cov-2 spike rbd, we replaced residues of the cdr regions of the m396 crystallized fab portion with residues that may complement and fulfill better the sars-cov-2 rbd surface, also based on interactions observed in the crystallized structures of sars-cov-2-rbd-ace2 protein complex. mutagenesis analyses and modeling of the incomplete residues within the crystallized structures were performed using spdbv [54] and/or pymol [55] .the proposed complete igg chimeric antibodies were obtained by superimposing the above-cited m396 and the resulting engineered fab portions, in complex with sars-cov-1/2 rbd, to the 3d atomic model of a crystallized igg, available on the pdb (1igt.pdb, [56] ) using spdbv and pymol. more in detail, m396, and the engineered fab portions were superimposed, through the pymol "super" command, to the fab portions of the crystallized structure of an igg (1igt.pdb) starting from the structural alignment of their backbones. then, it was possible to model missing residues located at the fab-fc interface, solving clashes and breaks in the backbone [37, 38, 42] by using spdbv.each glycosylation ladder coming from the crystal structures here investigated (1igt.pdb; 2dd8.pdb; 6nb7.pdb) was alternatively retained within the generated structural models.after superimposition operations, allowing backbone connections, we renumbered all the atoms and the residues present in the resulting final pdb file, using an in-house developed perl script. all the generated 3d all-atom models were energetically minimized using the yasara minimization server [43] or the rosetta "relax" application within the rosetta "scoring and prep" tools (https ://www.roset tacom mons.org/demos /lates t/tutor ials/scori ng_and_prep/scori ng_ and_prep) [57] [58] [59] , independently. the obtained final models were examined in vmd, pymol, and spdbv by visual inspection searching for putative unsolved clashes [38, 42] .the foldx analysecomplex assay was performed to determine the interaction energy between the four generated antibodies and the rbd domains of sars-cov-1/2 spike proteins, but also for determining the interaction energy between ace2 and the interacting spike rbds for comparative purposes.the way the foldx analysecomplex operates is by unfolding the selected targets and determining the stability of the remaining molecules and then subtracting the sum of the individual energies from global energy. more negative energies indicate a better binding. positive energies indicate no binding [60, 61] . the energy calculated for the crystallized m396-sars-cov-1 rbd protein complex was used as a reference value.rosetta applications combine several tools to model and analyze macromolecular structures (https ://www.roset tacom mons.org/docs/lates t/home). we chose to use the "residue_energy_breakdown" and the "interfaceanalyzer" applications (https ://www.roset tacom mons.org/demos / lates t/tutor ials/scori ng_and_prep/scori ng_and_prep) from rosetta "scoring and prep" tools for analyzing sars-cov-2 spike rbd-ace2 interface interactions. the rosetta "resi-due_energy_breakdown" application was used to examine the contribution of each protein residue to the score for the lowest energy backbone relaxed structures, whereas the rosetta "interfaceanalyzer" application was used for evaluating interactions across the antibody-receptor interface [57, [62] [63] [64] .the main event that allows virus envelop fusion with the host human cell plasma membrane concerns a conformational change occurring at the sars-cov-2 spike protein that converts from pre-fusion conformation to post-fusion conformation after interactions with ace2 and spike protein cleavage. while sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer has been resolved by cryo-em (6vsb.pdb [24] ; 6vxx.pdb and 6vyb. pdb [25] ), the post-fusion conformation is not available yet. according to [13] coutard et al., protein cleavage at site s1/s2 and s2′ produces the division of the spike protein in two subdomains, i.e. the n-ter s-i ectodomain (containing the rbd interacting with ace2) and the c-ter s-ii membrane-anchored subdomain, that will form the sars-cov-2 spike protein in post-fusion conformation, able to trigger the fusion of the viral envelope with host cell plasma membrane determining host cell invasion.for modelling 3d post-fusion conformation of sars-cov-2 spike protein, we searched for sars-cov-2 spike protein homologous structures and found that 48 crystallized structures that included poses of the whole sars-cov-2 spike proteins or about protein domains of sars-cov-2 spike proteins in complex with protein interactors (i.e. ace2), several pre-fusion conformations of other coronavirus spike proteins, one spike protein in post-fusion conformation and three further protein subdomains about spike proteins in post-fusion conformation (supplementary table 1 ).thus, we built an msa by aligning the sequence of the human sars-cov-2 spike protein, the sequence of the available whole post-fusion conformation of a spike protein (6b3o.pdb, [45] ), sequences of the remaining crystallized subdomains of other virus spike proteins in post-fusion conformations (5yl9.pdb [46] ; 1wyy.pdb [47] and 1wdf.pdb [48] ), together with their complete counterpart sequences sampled by reciprocal-blastp (fig. 1 ).in the provided msa ( fig. 1) , it is possible to observe the conserved s1/s2 and s2′ cleavage sites, according to [13] and the sequence of the c-terminal domain resulting from the cleavage. furthermore, it is also possible to observe several clusters of conserved residues ( fig. 1 ) that were used as anchor points of the proposed sars-cov-2 spike sequence/ multi-template-structure alignment for building the 3d model of a monomer of sars-cov-2 spike protein in postfusion conformation (fig. 2) . among those conserved protein regions, six clusters of residues host conserved cysteine residues (fig. 2) forming disulfide bridges crucial for stabilizing both pre-fusion and post-fusion sars-cov-2 spike protein conformation [45] . the modelled sars-cov-2 spike post-fusion conformation consists of residues 704-771 and 922-1147, yp_009724390.1 residues numbering, resulting from protein cleavage [13] . those protein fragments are the main constituents of the post-fusion conformation, and also the only fragments which can be modelled using as a protein template the unique/greatest existing solved post-fusion conformation structure of a sequence/structure related spike protein (6b3o.pdb, amino acids 741-807 and 972-1248, np_045300.1/6b3o.pdb residues numbering) [45] .the trimer of the sars-cov-2 spike protein in postfusion conformation was obtained by duplicating two times the obtained monomer and superimposing the resulting three sars-cov-2 spike protein monomers on the three spike protein monomers reported in 6b3o.pdb (fig. 2) . the releaxed 3d comparative model of sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer built by multi-template comparative modeling showed an rmsd lower than 0.5 å with the available spike protein in post-fusion conformation (6b3o.pdb). the resulting model ( fig. 2 ) appeared elongated and narrow (with respect to the pre-fusion conformation), according to what observed in fragments of the spike proteins crystallized in post-fusion conformations, whose sequences are reported in fig. 1 and whose pdb_ids are listed in supplementary table 1 .the resulting sars-cov-2 spike post-fusion spike conformation was obtained following the loss of the cited n-terminal domain (residues 1-703, black cartoon, yp_009724390.1 residues numbering fig. 3 ) and of a middle protein portion (residues 772-921, black cartoon). the resulting post-fusion structure shows regions that underwent few conformational changes, with respect to the prefusion structure [i.e. see residues 715-771 (yellow cartoon), 983-1028 (red cartoon), 1029-1126 (magenta cartoon), yp_009724390.1 residues numbering, fig. 3 on the other hand, the important conformational changes observed at regions 704-715 and 1127-1146 appears to be related to the loss of the n-terminal portion (residues 1-703, black cartoon), which causes the reorientation of the 704-715 peptide, involved in the perturbation of the 1127-1146 protein region that can re-orient itself in the cyan boxes indicate the cluster of residues conserved in the sampled sequences and maintained in the post-fusion conformation, considered as anchor points for preparing the 6b3o.pdb based sars-cov-2 spike sequence-structure alignment, used for building the 3d comparative model of sars-cov-2 spike protein in post-fusion conformation (amino acids s704-a771, see a; amino acids l922-s1147, see b; yp_009724390.1 residues numbering) free space, due to the n-terminal missing residues. similarly, the important conformational changes observed at the 922-982 protein region (fig. 3 ) appears to be due to the loss of the middle protein region (residues 772-921, black cartoon fig. 3 ), whose removal causes the reorientation and the relaxation of the 922-982 amino acid protein region (green cartoon, fig. 3 ), that may occupy the space previously occupied by the cleaved n-terminal region (1-703 residues, black cartoon).notably, a further stabilization of the post-fusion conformation depends on the re-orientation of the c-terminal 1121-1196 protein region (orange and cyan cartoon, fig. 4) . indeed, the c-terminal portion (with specific reference to residues 1179-1196) of each monomer is deeply involved in intermonomer hydrophilic and ionic interactions with residues of the 922-982 re-oriented amino acid protein region (with specific reference to residues 926-949), of the close monomers. notably, the 1147-1196 protein region was not solved in the pre-fusion structure (fig. 4 ), but the previous protein segment, i.e. residues 1121-1146, showed a completely different orientation in the available pre-fusion structures.among the sampled crystallized structures, it was possible to observe three pdb_ids about the entire sars-cov-2 spike proteins and two about sars-cov-2 spike rbd protein interacting with the human ace2 (supplementary  table 1 ). furthermore, it was possible to highlight several crystallized structures about sars-cov-1 and mers-cov spike proteins as single proteins or in complex with their receptors or dedicated antibodies (supplementary table 1 ). notably, among the sampled structures, also the four entries used for building the 3d comparative model of the post-fusion conformation, were considered (supplementary table 1 ).for modeling main interactions occurring between sars-cov-2 spike proteins and ace2, thanks to the high percentage of identical residues shared by spike rbd from several cov strains (fig. 5) , it was possible to structurally align three objects consisting of the human ace2-sars-cov-1 spike-rbd protein complex (2ajf.pdb) to the human ace2-sars-cov-2 spike-rbd protein complex (6vw1.pdb, 6lzg.pdb) and the sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer (6vsb.pdb; 6vxx.pdb; 6vyb.pdb). more in detail, the superimposition performed using pymol was led by the structural alignment of the rbd of ace2-sars-cov1 (2ajf.pdb) and ace-2-sars-cov-2 (6vw1.pdb, 6lzg.pdb) spike proteins (fig. 6) , followed by the structure alignment with sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer (6vsb.pdb; 6vxx.pdb; 6vyb.pdb). notably, we obtained an efficient superimposition of the two rbd domains (rmsd lower than 0.5 å) of the human sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike proteins also due to their high percentage of identical residues (> 75%).it was possible to superimpose the crystallized sars-cov-2 spike protein in pre-fusion conformation and the modelled sars-cov-2 spike protein trimers in post-fusion conformation for showing the deep conformational changes occurring along conformation interconversion (fig. 6 ). indeed, it is known that rbd subunits are further mobile being able to exhibit multiple conformational states that modulate the accessibility of rbds, triggering interactions with receptor proteins of the host cell plasma membranes [53] . in the proposed conformational changes reported in the scheme of fig. 6 , the sars-cov-2 spike protein goes from a closed state in which rbd residues interacting with ace2 are not accessible (fig. 6a, g) , to a partially open state with one ( fig. 6b , h) or two (fig. 6c , i) rbd accessible subunits, till a final open state in which rbd residues interacting with ace2 at each rbd subunits are accessible and ready to establish interactions with ace2 ( fig. 6d, j) . the established (fig. 6e, k) , known for being anchored to the plasma membrane and involved in internalization events [8, 49, 52, 53, 65] .from the available crystallized structures and from the obtained 3d structure models, it was possible to highlight sars-cov-1 spike rbd (2ajf.pdb) and sars-cov-2 spike rbd residues (6) involved in the binding of the human colors and residues numbering reflect the localization in the sars-cov-2 spike protein sequence of the below reported protein domain 3d structures (yp_009724390.1 residues numbering). uh upstream helix; fp the region hosting the fusion peptide; hr1 heptad repeat 1; ch central helix; bh β-hairpin region; cd connector domain; hr2 heptad repeat 2, according to [45] . a, f lateral views of the sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer in pre-/post-fusion conformation, respectively, are reported in colored cartoon representation. b, g lateral views of the sars-cov-2 spike monomer in pre-/post-fusion conformation, respectively, are reported in colored cartoons. c, h indicate the zoomed views of the q926-k1028 protein region (green/red cartoon representation). d, i indicate the zoomed views of the m1029-d1146 protein region (magenta/orange cartoon representation). e, j indicate the zoomed views of the s704-i771 protein region (yellow cartoon representation). yellow sticks in d, e, i, j indicate disulfide bridges. residue labels indicate residues to be used as a reference for identifying quickly the cited protein region terminal portions or cysteine residues involved in disulfide bridges. notably, yellow, magenta and red cartoon indicate the monomer regions involved in few conformational changes, whereas green and orange cartoon indicate regions involved in large conformational changes. black cartoon portions in b indicate protein regions lost after cleavage events and/or not available in the crystallized structures. cyan cartoon portion in g indicates the 1146-1197 protein region and was obtained by comparative modeling using as a protein template the only available sars-cov-1 spike protein with a solved structure for the corresponding protein region in the post-fusion conformation, as observed in 6b3o.pdb. notably, the corresponding protein region was solved in none of the investigated crystallized spike proteins in pre-fusion conformations (supplementary table 1) ace2 ( fig. 7 and supplementary table 1) . notably, ionpair interactions observed between sars-cov-1 spike rbd and the human ace2 are also observed between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and the human ace2. the reported data represent an updated/integrated analysis of a similar one reported in [66] , in light of the recently deposited sars-cov-2 spike rbd in complex with the human ace2 (6vw1.pdb).rbd from sars-cov-1 was crystallized in complex with the fab domain of two different antibodies, namely m396 (2dd8.pdb, [52] ) and s230 (6nb7.pdb, [53] ). both of them show high affinity for sars-cov-1 spike rbd [52, 53] . nevertheless, they show different peculiarities in their mechanism of action.indeed, s230 after binding rbd, similarly to ace2, can trigger the sars-cov spike transition to the post-fusion conformation and it is not clarified yet, if virus-cell fusion may be triggered by s230 also when s230-rbd interactions occur close to the surface of the host cell plasma membrane protein targets of the sars-cov-1 [53] . at variance with s230, the m396 antibody appears to be able to prevent sars-cov-1 spike-ace2 interactions and sars-cov-1 spike pre-/post-fusion conformation transition, neutralizing virus attack [52] .thanks to the high percentage of identical residues (> 75%) between sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd domains and to their highly similar tertiary structure, as observed from the rmsd of 0.5 å between the coordinates of rbds from sars-cov-1 (6nb7.pdb, [53] and 2dd8.pdb, [52] ) and sars-cov-2 (6vw1.pdb [67] and 6vsb. pdb, [24] ) spike proteins, it was possible to evaluate interactions between m396 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd and to propose a sequence/structure of an ideal fab m396-based fig. 3 chimeric antibody for targeting sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain, preventing fusion events with ace2 and thus the following infection.with this aim, we first highlighted the different rbd portions bound to the known antibodies. then, we superimposed sars-cov-1 rbd to sars-cov-2 rbd for highlighting differences in residues involved in direct interactions with m396 cdr regions and with s230 cdr regions ( fig. 8 and table 1 ).due to the uncertain data concerning fusion events and mechanism of action of s230 antibody, we built a new sars-cov-1/2 rbd-directed antibody focusing and starting from the analysis of monomer-monomer interface interactions observed between the m396 antibody crystallized in complex with sars-cov-1 rbd [52] , superimposed to sars-cov-1 spike rbd/ace2 complex (2ajf.pdb), and by comparing them with monomer-monomer interface interactions observed between the modelled m396 antibody in complex with sars-cov-2 rbd, superimposed to sars-cov-2 rbd/ace2 (6vw1.pdb; 6lzg.pdb) protein complex (fig. 9) .then, we highlighted m396 cdr residues (table 2 ) for replacing them aiming to increase m392 affinity versus sars-cov-1/2 spike rbds. residues to be mutated/ replaced were chosen according to space-restraints and chemical needs for better complementing sars-cov-1/2 spike rbd surface, based on the available sars-cov-1/2 rbd structures in complex with ace2, aiming to produce something that resembled ace2 surface (tables 1, 2) . some of the proposed mutated residues (table 3) are surely allowed because already observed at the corresponding sites of other known antibodies, according to chotia/kabat rules (http://www.bioin f.org.uk/abs/choth ia.html; [68] ).residue replacement was directly performed in the newly generated 3d model hosting the interacting m396-sars-cov-2 spike rbd. similarly, a complex of the modified m396 antibody interacting with sars-cov-1 rbd was also created. all m396 cdr mutated residues are reported in table 3 . furthermore, mutated residues within m396 cdr interacting with sars-cov-2 spike rbd residues can be observed in fig. 10 .the engineered fab portions were, thus, aligned and superimposed on the fab portion of a crystallized igg (1igt. pdb, [56] ). the sequence of the chimeric antibodies can be observed in supplementary fig. 1 , whereas their complete structure can be observed in supplementary fig. 2 .the interaction energies calculated between the sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain and m396 native antibody fab portion give a negative value (table 4 ), confirming that there might be a binding interaction between m396 native antibody fab portion and sars-cov-2 spike rbd. this result is encouraging, also due to the indirect validation obtained by getting similar interaction energies for the crystallized sars-cov-1 rbd in complex with m396 (2d88.pdb) and for sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd domains crystallized in complex with ace2 (2ajf.pdb and 6vw1. pdb, respectively) ( table 4) . furthermore, a strong interaction (in terms of interaction energies calculated by foldx analyse complex assay) is also predicted between sars-cov-2 spike rbd (but also sars-cov-1 spike rbd) and the modified m396 antibody (see table 4 ), suggesting that the engineered m396 might be more efficient than the native m396 in binding the sars-cov-2 (more than sars-cov-1) spike rbd.the rosetta "relax" application was used for relaxing energetically the investigated crystallized structures and 3d models in the rosetta force field and for each relaxation run table 5 . the "residue_energy_breakdown" tool confirmed that the m396/sars-cov-2 spike rbd complex might have a number of interchain interactions comparable to those observed at the interface of the crystallized m396/sars-cov-1 spike rbd complex (supplementary tables 2 and 3) . furthermore, the proposed mutations favor new interactions at the interface of the m396-based mutated antibody and sars-cov-1/2 spike rbds, at the level of the proposed ten mutations and in their neighborhoods (supplementary tables 2-5) .then, the investigated crystallized structures and 3d models were analysed with the rosetta "interfaceanalyzer" application, for estimating interchain binding energies. the fab antibodies (see a for colors). c, d super zoomed and rotated views of the crystallized sars-cov-1 spike rbd residues interacting with s230 ab. e, f super zoomed and rotated views of sars-cov-2 spike rbd predicted residues interacting with s230 ab. g, h super zoomed and rotated views of the crystallized sars-cov-1 spike rbd residues interacting with m396 ab. i, j super zoomed and rotated views of sars-cov-2 spike rbd predicted residues interacting with m396 ab. c-j residues at the rbd-ab interface in the 3.5-4 å distance range are reported in sticks representation. white sticks indicate rbd residues; orange and blue sticks indicate m396 ab residues, yellow and pink sticks indicate s230 ab residues analyses provided negative binding energies (see dg_separated parameter, table 5 ) for all the investigated structures, indicating a binding interaction between m396 native antibody fab portion and sars-cov-2 spike rbd, comparable in terms of binding energy, to the ones calculated for the crystallized sars-cov-1 spike rbd/m396 protein complex. notably, the resulting binding energies obtained for the 3d models hosting the investigated m396 and m396-based modified antibodies in complex with sars-cov-1/2 spike rbd domains were comparable (see dg_separated parameter, table 5 ) to the binding energies calculated for the 3d models hosting the crystallized sars-cov-1/2 spike rbd domains in complex with ace2 (2ajf.pdb and 6vw1.pdb, respectively) ( table 5; supplementary tables 2-7 ).the indicated pipeline has allowed to set up a molecular framework hosting sars-cov-2 spike protein, ace2 receptor, and different antibodies in the same pdb session that could be handled with different molecular visualizers. in this molecular framework, it is possible to study and predict, at molecular level, interactions between the different "pieces" of the framework that may help in understanding virus invasion mechanisms, developing new vaccines or antibodies, identifying small molecules with high affinity for viral proteins and establishing quick/safe diagnosis selective/specific kits. indeed, the scientific community is now focused in the development of new weapons for containing sars-cov-2 spread and covid-19 complications as it could be observed in the enormous effort in developing new vaccines based on a virus protein/nucleic acid portion able to induce an efficient and specific immunogenic response [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] , or in developing a neutralizing therapeutic antibody highly specific for sars-cov-2 spike rbd [29, 30, [74] [75] [76] [77] , maybe starting from antibodies isolated from hyperimmune plasma from convalescent patients [78] , or in identifying chemicals with high affinity for sars-cov-2 crucial proteins [1] [2] [3] [79] [80] [81] [82] , maybe chosen also among repositories of inhibitors of proteases or rna-dependent polymerases [83] [84] [85] . notably, it needs to develop trustable titer serologic assay kits, for table 1 list of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd residues interacting with the reported ace2 residues bold black residues delimited by borders indicate a pair or a cluster of residues involved in polar inter-protein interactions. normal black residues indicate residues at the spike-rbd.vs.ace2 protein interface distant less than 4 å. the longest chains were chosen within those crystallized structures with multiple chains, for highlighting the listed interacting residues ace2.interacting.residues.with sars-cov-1.rbd (2ajf.pd)b ace2.interacting.residues.with sars-cov-2.rbd (6vw1.pdb) establishing the level of the antibodies in different biological samples. indeed, the most important question, i.e. the ones about the real number of people exposed to the virus, has not a clear answer, yet [77, [86] [87] [88] .within the presented molecular framework, we have highlighted a set of possible efficient interactions between the crystallized m396 antibody and sars-cov-2 spike rbd, raising the question about the possibility to test directly m396 on cultured cells exposed to the virus and then, hopefully, on patients.starting from that observation, we have also proposed a set of modifications of m396 cdr residues resulting in a higher specific antibody, to be expressed and tested on cultured cells. along the development of our antibody engineering modeling session, an important paper was published and another is under revision in support of the hypothesis table 2 list of sars-cov-1/2 rbd residues within 4 å from s230/m396 antibody residues bold residues indicate sars-cov-1 residues interacting alternatively with both ace2 and/or m396/s230 in the crystallized available structures. distance range below 4 å. bold underlined residues indicate sars-cov-2 residues interacting with ace2 and predicted to interact with m396 in a distance range below 4 å [74, 75] . foldx and rosetta analyses employed independently for monitoring binding energies at the antibody receptor interface, provided coherent results, strengthening the hypothesis that the original m396 antibody might have high affinity also against sars-cov-2 spike protein, as indicated by the calculated negative binding energy (see the foldx interaction energy parameter or the rosetta dg_separated parameter). furthermore, the employed tools indicate a local break down in structural energy in correspondence of the proposed mutated sites at the antibody-receptor complex interfaces, reflecting an increased affinity (in terms of newly established interactions) among the investigated m396-based mutated antibodies and sars-cov-1/2 spike rbds.although the calculated binding energies cannot be considered an absolute estimation of the real affinity between the investigated proteins, the binding energies obtained for the analysed crystallized structures and 3d engineered models, were of the same order of magnitude suggesting that the original m396 and the m396-based modified antibody might be very efficient in binding the sars-cov-2 (as well as sars-cov-1) spike rbd.it was also possible to pose in the proposed molecular framework the recent proposed sars-cov-2 spike rbd directed cr3022 fab antibody (6yla.pdb; 6w41.pdb, [75] ), showing that it binds a different site of rbd that protrudes towards the central cavity of the spike protein trimer (data not shown). it appears that the rbd-antibody interaction table 4 energy calculations on crystallized structures or 3d comparative models of the investigated protein complexes the "pdb.chain" indicates the chain of the pdb used within the indicated analyses on the cited crystallized structures or models obtained by superimposition with the indicated chains. the longest chains were chosen for the "interaction energy" analyses for those crystallized structures with multiple chains. chain e, f, and s indicate the rbd chain within the investigated pdb_ids. chain a and b indicate the ace2 chain within the investigated pdb_ids. chain h, l indicate the heavy and light chain of the investigated antibody (wild type and engineered variants), according to the indicated pdb_id. premin and postmin refer to models prior and after energy minimization performed on the yasara minimization server. bold numbers indicate interdomain interaction energies of energetically relaxed complexes the pdb.chains used in the analyses with rosetta were the same indicated in table 4 . a list of the energy terms taken from https ://www. roset tacom mons.org/docs/lates t/roset ta_basic s/scori ng/score -types ; and https ://www.roset tacom mons.org/docs/lates t/appli catio n_docum entat ion/ analy sis/inter face-analy zer follows. energy terms obtained from relax/score_jd2 app: dslf_fa13 indicates disulfide geometry potential; fa_atr indicates lennard-jones attractive between atoms in different residues; fa_dun indicates the internal energy of sidechain rotamers; fa_elec indicates coulombic electrostatic potential with a distance-dependent dielectric; fa_intra_rep indicates lennard-jones repulsive between atoms in the same residue; fa_rep indicates lennard-jones repulsive between atoms in different residues; fa_sol indicates lazaridis-karplus solvation energy; hbond_bb_sc indicates sidechain-backbone hydrogen bond energy; hbond_lr_bb indicates backbone-backbone hbonds distant in primary sequence; hbond_sc indicates sidechain-sidechain hydrogen bond energy; hbond_sr_bb indicates backbone-backbone hbonds close in primary sequence; pro_close indicates proline ring closure energy and energy of psi angle of preceding residue; rama indicates ramachandran preferences; ref indicates reference energy for each amino acid. energy terms obtained from interfaceanalyzer app: complex_normalized indicates the average energy of a residue in the entire complex; dg_separated, reported in bold characters, indicates the change in rosetta energy when the interface forming chains are separated (binding energy), versus when they are complexed. dsasa_int, indicates the solvent accessible area buried at the interface, in square angstroms. dg_separated/dsasax100, separated binding energy per unit interface area × 100 to make units fit in score file. scaling by dsasa controls for large interfaces having more energy; delta_unsathbonds indicates the number of buried, unsatisfied hydrogen bonds at the interface; hbond_e_fraction indicates the amount of interface energy (dg_separated) accounted for by cross interface h-bonds; hbonds_int indicates the total cross-interface hydrogen bonds found; nres_all indicates the total number of residues in the entire complex; nres_int indicates the number of residues at the interface; per_residue_energy_int; indicates the average energy of each residue at the interface; side1_score indicates the energy of one side of the interface; side2_score indicates the energy of the other side of the interface; side1_ normalized indicates the average per-residue energy on one side of the interface; side2_normalized indicates the average per-residue energy on the other side of the interface. rosetta energy terms are expressed in rosetta energy units (reu) according to https ://www.roset tacom mons.org/ docs/lates t/roset ta_basic s/units -in-roset ta [75] . dedicated studies are necessary for understanding if steric hindering problems might arise using the whole antibody, and deepening the comprehension of the not competitive mechanism that would be observed between cr3022 and rbd in presence of ace2 receptor. studying all the cited interactions in the same pdb-molecular session has allowed highlighting the most crucial ace2 portions involved in direct interactions with sars-cov-2 rbd, suggesting that the administration of the recombinant rbd, a spike monomer or the entire spike trimer, if correctly folded, might result in the efficient triggering of antibody production from our plasma b-cells, reducing covid-19 complications (supporting what has been recently proposed [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] ).at the same time, the ace2-rbd interaction estimated in our molecular framework has strengthened the hypothesis to use the recombinant ace2 for limiting covid-19 infection complications (according to what recently proposed [89, 90] ).a molecular framework like the ones here proposed will also help in studying the putative role of ace inhibitors in perturbing ace2-rbd interactions. indeed, it was recently proposed that patients treated with ace inhibitors might be more exposed to sars-cov-2 infection [91] . although ace1 (refseq accession number: np_068576.1, representing the main target of ace inhibitors) and ace2 (np_690043.1, testis isoform or np_000780, somatic isoform, among the most studied isoforms) share the 40% of identical residues, few uncertain data about ace inhibitors and a possible greater selectivity for ace1 versus ace2, or on their effect on ace1/2 expression regulation are available in the literature [91, 92] . from a structural comparison, it is observed that the rmsd of the crystallized native ace2 coordinates (1r42.pdb, [93] ) and ace1 coordinates (1o8a. pdb, [94] ) is lower than 2.5 å.notably, the presence of ace inhibitors captopril and enalaprilat (1uze.pdb [95] , 4c2p.pdb, [96] ) and lisinopril (1o86.pdb, [94] ) produces an rmsd lower than 0.3 å in the atomic coordinates of the cited crystallized structures with reference to the native ace2 (1r42.pdb, [93] ).conversely, we cannot establish if the slightly higher rmsd observed between the native ace2 (1r42.pdb) and ace2 complexed with sars-cov-1 spike rbd (0.41 å, 2ajf.pdb) and sars-cov-2 spike rbd (1.2 å, 6vw1.pdb) can be attributed exclusively to interactions with sars-cov-1/2 spike rbds because the observed rmsds are of the same order of magnitude of the experimental resolution of the investigated crystallized structures.however, also admitting that ace1 inhibitors at the employed dosage would target ace2, with the same efficiency observed versus ace1, the presence of those inhibitors in ace2 binding cavity should not be able to induce an important conformational change in ace2, which might favor a greater affinity of ace2 versus sars-cov-2 spike rbd.thus, the only mechanism for which, patients treated with ace inhibitors would be more exposed to sars-cov-2, would rely on a positive feedback induced by ace inhibitors in ace2 expression. nevertheless, pieces of evidence in support of this hypothesis need to be deepened [92, 97] . along with manuscript revisions, a couple of interesting papers have been published on this concern showing that patients treated with ace inhibitors show a slightly less severe set of complications due to covid-19 than patients that do not use ace inhibitors [98, 99] .in conclusion, the presented analysis highlights the importance to use fold recognition tools along the approach to a drug design problem according to a rational protocol (similar to what previously reported [37, 38, 42] ), like the ones presented. indeed, in this case, fold recognition tools have helped us in identifying crystallized structures of ace2 and sars-cov spike proteins similar to those under investigation in just 2 days. furthermore, performing structural comparative analysis has allowed us to identify a possible good starting point, like the ones represented by m396, already crystallized in complex with sars-cov-1 spike rbd, for building the proposed antibodies in just few weeks. the same strategy might be promptly applied also for future infections by those researchers involved in drawing new antibodies and/or developing new vaccines, i.e. for dealing with future coronaviruses outbreaks.to the best of our knowledge, the reported sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer 3d model is the first model describing a possible conformational change leading to a reliable sars-cov-2 spike protein in post-fusion conformation. the proposed model, based on the only available spike protein (6b3o.pdb) crystallized in post-fusion conformation, will help in understanding the mechanism allowing the virus envelop fusion with host cell plasma membranes, through and following interactions with ace2. notably, it was possible to propose a 3d model for the main states reached by the sars-cov-2 spike protein through the cited conformational changes, leading to the post-fusion conformation, because a closed state in which rbd residues interacting with ace2 are not accessible, a partially open state with one or two rbd accessible subunits, a final open state, in which rbd residues interacting with ace2 at each rbd subunits are accessible and ready to establish interactions with ace2, and a post-fusion conformation, were already described for mers-cov (6nb3.pdb; 6nb4.pdb) and sars-cov-1 (6nb6.pdb; 6nb7.pdb; 6b3o.pdb) spike proteins [45, 53] . considering that ace2 works as a dimer and the spike protein consists of a trimer, it might be even speculated that a fusion complete mechanism might involve three ace2 dimers and two spike trimers, simultaneously.notably, since 27 may 2020, three crystallized structures of sars-cov-2 spike protein in the closed conformation (with not accessible rbd subunits) or in the partially open conformations (with one or two accessible rbd subunits, without ace2 interacting subunits) have been deposited (6x2a.pdb, 6x2b.pdb, and 6x2c.pdb) and are coherent with our proposed corresponding models. indeed, the rmsd between the coordinates of the crystallized (6x2c. pdb) closed state and our starting crystallized structures (6vsb.pdb; 6vxx.pdb) depicting a possible closed state of sars-cov-2 spike protein is lower than 1.3 å. furthermore, the rmsd between the coordinates of the crystallized partially open states of sars-cov-2 spike protein (6x2b.pdb, showing two accessible rbds and 6x2a.pdb, showing one accessible rbd) and our corresponding 3d models, showing two or one accessible rbds, is lower than 1.4 å, in both cases.our analysis through the provided 3d model in postfusion conformation, coherently to the crystallized 3d structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein in pre-fusion conformation, further confirms the presence and stability of a sort of channel at the interface of the three monomers that could represent a good target site for a virtual screening of a chemical/drug library, aiming to identify a small molecule/ peptide with high affinity for the central region of the spike protein trimer, which should be able to block conformational changes leading to post-fusion conformation. indeed, it was recently observed that a peptide named ek1 (5zvm. pdb, [100] ), showing high affinity for the 920-935 protein region (yp_009724390.1 residues numbering), was able to prevent conformational changes and post-fusion conformation stabilization. the screening of a drug/peptide library would help in identifying an already approved drug/peptide, maybe structurally related to ek1, with high affinity for the spike trimer central channel, that might be immediately translated to the patient bed-side, after successful in silico analyses, in the context of the drug-repositioning approaches [101, 102] .notably, the provided molecular framework for investigating/drawing new antibodies, based on space-restraints needs, would be used for the set-up of new antibodies based on the available tissue-specific immunoglobulin structures, as the proposed igg2a (1igt.pdb, [56] ) or other specialized antibodies, already optimized for targeting specific cells or receptors (i.e.1hzh.pdb, [103] ), also among those that may successfully target the respiratory tract (1r70.pdb, [104] or 2qtj.pdb [105] or 6ue7.pdb [106] ), that might be administered even by aerosol [107, 108] . at the same time, already at the preclinical level, the administered vaccines based on the administration of the entire sars-cov-2 spike protein ( [69] [70] [71] or on the administration of the single sars-cov-2 spike rbd, will induce the production of specific antibodies that might be sequenced and modelled in silico. on this concern, the provided molecular network will help in quantifying interactions between sars-cov-2 spike rbd (also in cases of different rbd variants [109] ) and the newly investigated antibodies, i.e. lower the calculated binding energy in the modelled complex, higher the likelihood to obtain strong rbd-antibody interactions, that would result in more efficient treatments.the discovered antibodies with the highest affinity for the spike rbd might also be implemented in an antibody titer serologic kit for diagnosis, aiming to the early identification and quantification of sars-cov-2 in sera, also in asymptomatic people.conversely, a new diagnosis kit could also be based on the native rbd or a modified synthetic rbd, with greater affinity for the detected human antibodies directed against sars-cov-2 spike rbd protein, for determining the real number of healthy people already exposed to the virus in the population, by quantifying anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies in sera/plasma of rescued patients and/or asymptomatic peoples.the lacking knowledge about the real number of people exposed to the virus (including asymptomatic people, people with mild symptoms and rescued people that never needed hospitalization or quarantine) is the only important data that we still miss. without data about the real number of people, exposed to the virus, in the population, coming back to normal life will be extremely slow.scientific community is called to respond to a pandemic of respiratory disease that has spread with impressive rate among people of all the world. the new coronavirus has been called sars-cov-2 and the related disease indicated as covid-19. who reports that positive patients in the world are 1353361 with 79235 (april 9 th , 2020) ascertained died people due to covid-19 complications. it also appears that these numbers might be a smaller number of real cases due to our inability in quantifying rescued or asymptomatic people.in order to limit death rate and sars-cov-2 spread, it needs to develop a vaccine and to identify new small molecules able to prevent or treat covid-19 complications, as well as to prepare new quick diagnosis kits, able to quantify the real number of people exposed to sars-cov-2. among the main actors of sars-cov-2 infection the sars-cov-2 spike proteins, rna dependent rna polymerases and proteases deserve to be mentioned. indeed, rna dependent rna polymerase has become one of the main targets of a nucleoside analog antiviral drug, the remdesivir, already used for reducing complications due to ebola, dengue and mers-cov infections (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) . at the same time viral protease inhibitors (7) (8) (9) (10) are under investigation for their ability in preventing virus protein (with specific reference to spike proteins) cleavage (11) leading to the fusion of virus proteins with host cell membranes. also anti-inflammatory antibodies/drugs in combination with anticoagulant molecules are under investigation for limiting coagulopathies (12) (13) (14) (15) and cytokine signaling impressively triggered by sars-cov-2 infection (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) . finally, the same sars-cov-2 spike protein has become the most investigated target due to its ability in forming interactions with the human ace2 receptor, causing fusion events that make possible for the virus to penetrate host human cells (21) (22) (23) .the crucial role played by the spike protein is also due to the possibility to use the recombinant sars-cov-2 spike protein for triggering immune response, working as a vaccine, that may help in preventing and treating covid- 19 , similarly to what proposed recently (24) (25) (26) .for clarifying sars-cov-2 infection mechanisms, several research groups have recently solved the crystallized structure of the entire sars-cov-2 spike protein (6vsb.pdb (21) ; 6vxx.pdb and 6vyb.pdb (22) ), in pre-fusion conformation, and/or sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain in complex with the human ace2 (6vw1.pdb; 6lzg.pdb).in light of the available cited crystallized/cryo-em solved structures, here we propose a strategy for identifying/drawing new sars-cov-2 antibodies directed against the rbd of sars-cov-2 that could be used for contrasting sars-cov-2 infection, aiming to prevent pre-/post-fusion spike conformation interconversion, responsible for virus invasion, and to provide a molecular structural context for studying new diagnosis kits based on the interactions between our engineered antibodies and the human sars-cov-2 spike rbd.cov-spike and ace2 homologus protein-crystallized structures were searched by using the folding recognition methods implemented in pgenthreader and i-tasser according to our validated protocols (27) (28) (29) (30) .the sequences of the retrieved 48 crystallized structures (with reference to those crystallized structures indicated with "certain" or "high" confidence level in pgenthreader output) were aligned by using clustalw (31) implemented in the jalview package (32) . the 3d coordinates from the 48 crystallized structures were superimposed for comparative purposes by using pymol (33) according to our validated protocols (29, 34) .protein-protein and protein-ligand binding regions were highlighted by selecting residues within 4 å at the protein-protein interface or from the investigated ligands, in the superimposed structures.all the generated 3d all atom models were energetically minimized by using the yasara minimization server (35) .the 3d comparative model of sars-cov-2 spike trimer in post-fusion conformation was built by multi-template modeling by using modeller (36) . more in detail, the human sars-cov-2 spike protein sequence was aligned to the sequences of the available entire post fusion conformation of the murine coronavirus spike protein (6b3o, (37) ) and the remaining available crystallized subdomains of other coronavirus spike proteins in post fusion conformations (5yl9.pdb (38) ; 1wyy.pdb (39) and 1wdf (40) ). sequences of the cited crystallized structure fragments were used as query sequences for sampling the corresponding entire spike monomer sequences, by reciprocalblastp, to be aligned with sequences of the investigated structures for comparative purposes. the obtained msa was used for driving the multi-template modeling.then a complex 3d model representing the pre-fusion spike trimer interacting with three ace2 functional receptor units was built by superimposing the recently solved cryo-em prefusion structure of sars-cov-2 spike trimer complex (6vsb.pdb, (21); 6vyb.pdb and 6vxx.pdb (22) ), the sars-cov-2 spike rbd crystallized in complex with the human ace2 (6vw1.pdb; 6lzg.pdb) the sars-cov-1 spike trimer interacting with one ace2 functional receptor (conformations 1-3, 6acg.pdb, 6acj.pdb, 6ack.pdb, (41) and 6cs2.pdb, (42) ), the sars-cov-1 spike-rbd crystallized in complex with the human ace2 (2ajf.pdb, (43) ).for investigating pre-/post-fusion conformation interconversion we superimposed the pre-fusion available crystallized structures of sars-cov2 spike proteins and the generated 3d models about pre-fusion conformation of the spike trimer in complex with three ace2 units, to the obtained 3d model of the post fusion conformation. all the generated 3d all atom models were energetically minimized by using the yasara minimization server (35)starting from the 3d atomic coordinates of the crystallized neutralizing antibodies m396 (2dd8.pdb (44) ) and s230 (6nb7.pdb, (45) ) directed against the sars-cov-1 spike rbd domain, we modelled the interactions of m396 and s230 (6nb7.pdb, (45) ) with sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain, by superimposing the fragment antigen based (fab) portions of m396 (2dd8.pdb (44) ) and s230 (6nb7.pdb, (45) (both complexed with sars-cov-1 rbd) with the sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain, complexed with ace2 (6vw1.pdb), by using pymol.for creating a more specific antibody directed against sars-cov-2 spike rbd, we replaced residues of the cdr regions of the m396 crystallized fab portion with residues that may complement and fulfill better the sars-cov-2 rbd surface. mutagenesis analyses and modeling of the incomplete residues within the crystallized structures were performed by using spdbv (46) and/or pymol (47) .the proposed complete igg chimeric antibodies were obtained by superimposing the above cited m396 and the resulting engineered fab portions, in complex with sars-cov-1/2 rbd, to the 3d atomic model of a crystallized igg, available on the pdb (1igt.pdb, (48)) by using spdbv and pymol, according to our validated protocols (29, 30, 49) , that allow to model missing residues, solving clashes and breaks in the backbone.each glycosylation ladder coming from the crystal structures here investigated (1igt.pdb; 2dd8.pdb; 6nb7.pdb) was alternatively retained within the generated structural models.after superimposition operations, allowing backbone connections, we renumbered all the atoms and the residues present in the resulting final pdb file, by using an in-house developed perl script. the obtained final models were examined in vmd, pymol, and spdbv according to our protocols (30, 49) . all the generated 3d all atom models were energetically minimized by using the yasara minimization server (35).the foldx analysecomplex assay, was performed to determine the interaction energy between the four generated antibodies and the rbd domains of sars-cov-1/2 spike proteins, but also for determining the interaction energy between ace2 and the interacting spike rbds for comparative purposes.the way the foldx analysecomplex operates is by unfolding the selected targets and determining the stability of the remaining molecules and then subtracting the sum of the individual energies from the global energy. more negative energies indicate a better binding. positive energies indicate no binding (50, 51) . the energy calculated for the crystallized m396-sars-cov-1 rbd protein complex was used as a reference value.the main event that allows virus envelop fusion with the host human cell plasma membrane concerns a conformational change occurring at the sars-cov-2 spike protein that converts from pre-fusion conformation to post-fusion conformation after interactions with ace2 and spike protein cleavage. while sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer has been resolved by cryo-em (6vsb.pdb (21); 6vxx.pdb and 6vyb.pdb (22) ), the post-fusion conformation is not available, yet. according to (11) coutard et al., protein cleavage at site s1/s2 and s2' produces the division of the spike protein in two subdomains, i.e. the n-ter s-i ectodomain (containing the rbd interacting with ace2) and the c-ter s-ii membrane anchored subdomain, forming the sars-cov-2 spike protein in post fusion conformation, able to trigger the fusion of the viral envelope with host cell plasma membrane determining host cell invasion. in the provided msa ( fig. 1) it is possible to observe the conserved s1/s2 and s2' cleavage sites, according to (11) and the sequence of the c-terminal domain resulting from the cleavage.starting from the cited multi-template sequence alignment and according to our validated protocols about multi-template 3d modeling (30, 36) , we built the 3d model of a monomer of sars-cov-2 spike protein in post fusion conformation (fig. 2) . the modelled sars-cov-2 spike post-fusion conformation consists of residues 704-771 and 922-1147, yp_009724390.1 residues numbering, resulting from protein cleavage (11) and also the only protein fragments with a solved structure in 6b3o.pdb aligned (aminoacids 741-807 and 972-1248, np_045300.1/6b3o.pdb residues numbering) counterpart (37) .the trimer of the sars-cov-2 spike protein in post fusion conformation was obtained by duplicating two times the obtained monomer and superimposing the three sars-cov-2 spike protein monomers on the three sars-cov-1 spike protein monomers reported in 6b3o.pdb (fig. 2) . the 3d comparative model of sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer built by multi-template comparative modeling showed an rmsd lower than 0.5 å with the murine coronavirus spike protein in post-fusion conformation (6b3o.pdb). the resulting model (fig. 2 ) appeared elongated and narrow, according to what observed in fragments of the spike proteins crystallized in post-fusion conformations, whose sequences are reported in fig. 1 and whose pdb_id are listed in supp. tab. 1. for modeling main interactions occurring between sars-cov-2 spike proteins and ace2, thanks to the high percentage of identical residues shared by spike rbd from several cov strains (fig. 3) , it was possible to structurally align three objects consisting of the human ace2-sars-cov-1 spike-rbd protein complex (2ajf.pdb) to the human ace2-sars-cov-2 spike-rbd protein complex (6vw1.pdb, 6lzg.pdb) and the sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer (6vsb.pdb; 6vxx.pdb; 6vyb.pdb).more in detail, the superimposition performed by using pymol was leaded by the structural alignment of the rbd of ace2-sars-cov1 (2ajf.pdb) and ace-2-sars-cov-2 (6vw1.pdb, 6lzg.pdb) spike proteins (fig. 4) , followed by the structure alignment with sars-cov-2 spike protein trimer (6vsb.pdb; 6vxx.pdb; 6vyb.pdb). notably, we obtained an efficient superimposition of the two rbd domains (rmsd lower than 0.5 å) of the human sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike proteins also due to their high percentage of identical residues (> 75%).it was possible to superimpose the crystallized sars-cov-2 spike protein in pre-fusion conformation and the modelled sars-cov-2 spike protein trimers in post-fusion conformation for showing the deep conformational changes occurring along conformation interconversion (fig. 4) . apparently, the post-fusion conformation appears to be elongated and narrower than the pre-fusion conformation.the top portion of the post-fusion conformation locates beyond ace2 receptors (fig. 4) , known for being anchored to plasma membrane and involved in internalization events (7, 41, 44, 45, 52) . from the available crystallized structures and from the obtained 3d structure models it was possible to highlight sars-cov-1 spike rbd (2ajf.pdb) and sars-cov-2 spike rbd residues (6) involved in the binding of the human ace2 ( fig. 5 and supp. tab. 1). notably, ion pair interactions observed between sars-cov-1 spike rbd and the human ace2 are also observed between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and the human ace2. the reported data represents an updated/integrated analysis of a similar ones reported in (53) , in light of the recently deposited sars-cov-2 spike rbd in complex with the human ace2 (6vw1.pdb). tab. 1 list of sars.cov.1 and sars.cov2 rbd residues and of ace2. bold black residues delimited by borders indicate a pair or a cluster of residues involved in polar inter-protein interactions. normal black residues indicate residues at the spike-rbd.vs.ace2 protein interface distant less than 4 å. the longest chains were chosen within those crystallized structures with multiple chains, for highlighting the listed interacting residues.rbd from sars-cov-1 was crystallized in complex with the fab domain of two different antibodies, namely m396 (2dd8.pdb, (44) ) and s230 (6nb7.pdb, (45) ). both of them show high affinity for sars-cov-1 spike rbd, being able to block attachment to ace2 (44, 45) . nevertheless, they show different peculiarities in their mechanism of action.indeed, s230 after binding rbd, similarly to ace2, is able to trigger the sars-cov spike transition to the post-fusion conformation and it is not clarified yet, if virus-cell fusion may be triggered by s230 also when s230-rbd interactions occurs close to the surface of the cells target of the sars-cov-1 (45) . at variance with s230, m396 antibody appears to be able to prevent sars-cov-1 spike-ace2interactions and sars-cov-1 spike pre-/post-fusion conformation transition, neutralizing virus attack (44) .thanks to the high percentage of identical residues (> 75 %) between sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd domains and to their highly similar tertiary structure, as observed from the rmsd of 0.5 å between the coordinates of rbds from sars-cov-1 (6nb7.pdb, (45) and 2dd8.pdb, (44) ) and sars-cov-2 (6vw1.pdb (54) and 6vsb.pdb, (21)) spike proteins, it was possible to evaluate interactions between m396 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd and to propose a sequence/structure of an ideal fab m396-based chimeric antibody for targeting sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain, preventing fusion events with ace2 and thus the following infection.with this aim, we firstly highlighted the different rbd portions bound to the known antibodies. then, we superimposed sars-cov-1 rbd to sars-cov-2 rbd for highlighting differences in residues involved in direct interactions with m396 cdr regions and with s230 cdr regions ( fig. 6 due to the uncertain data concerning fusion events and mechanism of action of s230 antibody, we built a new sars-cov-1/2 rbd directed antibody starting from the analysis of monomer-monomer interface interactions observed between the m396 antibody crystallized in complex with sars-cov-1 rbd (44), superimposed to sars-cov-1 spike rbd / ace2 complex (2ajf.pdb), and by comparing them with monomer-monomer interface interactions observed between the modelled m396 antibody in complex with sars-cov-2 rbd, superimposed to sars-cov-2 rbd/ace2 (6vw1.pdb; 6lzg.pdb) protein complex (fig. 7) . (55)).residues replacement was directly performed in the newly generated 3d model hosting the interacting m396-sars-cov-2 spike rbd. similarly, a complex of the modified m396 antibody interacting with sars-cov-1 rbd was also created. all m396 cdr mutated residues are reported in tab. 3. furthermore, mutated residues within m396 cdr interacting with sars-cov-2 spike rbd residues can be observed in fig. 8 . the engineered fab portions were thus aligned and superimposed on the fab portion of a crystallized igg (1igt.pdb, (48) ). the sequence of the chimeric antibodies can be observed in supp. the interaction energies calculated between the sars-cov-2 spike rbd domain and m396 native antibody fab portion gives a negative value (tab. 4), confirming that there might be a binding interaction between m396 native antibody fab portion and sars-cov-2 spike rbd. this result is encouraging, also due to the indirect validation obtained by getting similar interaction energies for the crystallized sars-cov-1 rbd in complex with m396 (2d88.pdb) and for sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd domains crystallized in complex with ace2 (2ajf.pdb and 6vw1.pdb, respectively) (tab. 4). furthermore, a strong interaction (in terms of interaction energies calculated by foldx analyse complex assay) is also predicted between sars-cov-2 spike rbd (but also sars-cov-1 spike rbd) and the modified m396 antibody (see tab. 4), suggesting that the engineered m396 might be more efficient than the native m396 in binding the sars-cov-2 (more than sars-cov-1) spike rbd. the indicated pipeline has allowed to set-up a molecular framework hosting sars-cov-2 spike protein, ace2 receptor and different antibodies in the same pdb session that could be handled with different molecular visualizers. in this molecular framework it is possible to study and predict, at molecular level, interactions between the different "pieces" of the framework that my help in a molecular framework like the ones here proposed will also help in studying the putative role of ace inhibitors in perturbing ace2-rbd interactions. indeed, it was recently proposed that patients treated with ace inhibitors might be more exposed to sars-cov-2 infection (70) . although ace1(refseq accession number: np_068576.1, representing the main target of ace inhibitors) and ace2(np_690043.1, testis isoform or np_000780, somatic isoform, among the most studied isoforms)share the 40 % of identical residues, few uncertain data about ace inhibitors and a possible greater selectivity for ace1 versus ace2, or on their effect on ace1/2 expression regulation are available in literature (70, 71) . from a structural comparison it is observed that the rmsd of the crystallized native ace2 coordinates (1r42.pdb, (72) ) and ace1 coordinates (1o8a.pdb, (73)) is lower than 2.5 å.notably, the presence of ace inhibitors captopril and enalaprilat (1uze.pdb,(74); 4c2p.pdb, (75) ) andlisinopril (1o86.pdb, (73)) produces an rmsd lower than 0.3 å in the atomic coordinates of the cited crystallized structures with reference to the native ace1 (1r42.pdb, (72) ).conversely, we cannot establish if the slightly higher rmsd observed between the native ace2 however, also admitting that ace1 inhibitors at the employed dosage would target ace2, with the same efficiency observed versus ace1, the presence of those inhibitors in ace2 binding cavity should not be able to induce an important conformational change in ace2, which might favour a greater affinity of ace2 versus sars-cov-2 spike rbd.thus, the only mechanism for which, patients treated with ace inhibitors would be more exposed to sars-cov-2, would rely in a positive feedback induced by ace inhibitors in ace2 expression.nevertheless, evidences in support of this hypothesis need to be deepened (71, 76) .in conclusion, the presented analysis highlights the importance to use fold recognition tools along the approach to a drug design problem according to a rational protocol (similar to what previously reported (29, 30, 49) ), like the ones presented. high affinity for the spike channel, that might be immediately tested on the bed-side, in the context of the drug-repositioning approaches (78, 79) .notably, the provided molecular framework for investigating/drawing new antibodies based on space-restraints needs, would be used for the set-up of new antibodies based on the available tissue-specific immunoglobulin structures, as the proposed igg2a (1igt.pdb, (48) ) or other specialized antibodies, already optimized for targeting specific cells or receptors (i.e.1hzh.pdb, (80)), also among those that may successfully target the respiratory tract (1r70.pdb, (81) or 2qtj.pdb (82) or 6ue7.pdb (83) ), that might be administered even by aerosol (84, 85) .at the same time, already at the preclinical level, the administered vaccines based on the administration of the entire sars-cov-2 spike protein ( (56) (57) (58) or on the administration of the single sars-cov-2 spike rbd, will induce the production of specific antibodies that might be sequenced and modelled in silico. on this concern, the provided molecular network will help in quantifying interactions between sars-cov-2 rbd (also in cases of different rbd variants (86) ) and the newly investigated antibodies, i.e.lower the calculated binding energy in the modelled complex, higher the likelihood to have more success with the investigated vaccines/antibodies.the discovered antibodies with the highest affinity for rbd might also be implemented in a diagnosis kit aiming to the early identification of sars-cov-2 in sera, also in asymptomatic people.conversely, a new diagnosis kit could also be based on the native rbd or a modified synthetic rbd, with greater affinity for the detected human antibodies directed against sars-cov-2 spike rbd protein, for determining the real number of healthy people already exposed to the virus in the population.the lacking knowledge about the real number of people exposed to the virus (including asymptomatic people, people with mild symptoms and rescued people that never needed hospitalization or quarantine) is the only important data that we still miss. without data about the real number of people, exposed to the virus, in the population, coming back to normal life will be extremely slower.detailed instructions for the set-up of the shown molecular framework have been provided in the manuscript. nevertheless, we can also provide free assistance for academic analyses, upon request. we can also provide dedicated technical support for analyses requested by private companies through our browser s.r.l. spin-off (in this case, please, write to info@browser-bioinf.com and to clp in cc). coronaviruses (covs) have been responsible for several outbreaks over the past two decades, including sars-cov in 2002-2003, mers-cov in 2012 [1] , and the current covid-19 pandemic, caused by sars-cov-2, which began in late 2019 [2] . the scale of the covid-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented efforts by the research community to rapidly identify and test therapeutics and vaccines, and to understand the molecular basis of sars-cov-2 entry, pathogenesis, and immune targeting.from february to may 2020, a large number of sars-cov-2 protein structures were released in the protein data bank (pdb) [3] : 20 spike glycoprotein structures, over 100 main protease structures, and over 50 structures of other sars-cov-2 proteins, including nucleocapsid and rna dependent rna polymerase, the target of the drug remdesivir. these high-resolution protein structures are of immense importance for understanding viral assembly and to aid rational vaccine and therapeutic design. the first structures of the sars-cov-2 trimeric spike glycoproteins (the major target of sars-cov-2 vaccines and antibody therapeutics) were reported in february and early march 2020 [4, 5] . previously determined spike glycoprotein structures have enabled advances including rational stability optimization of sars-cov and mers-cov spikes, yielding improved protein expression and immunogenicity [6] . given that the rapid rate of coronavirus protein structural determination and deposition is likely to continue, a simple and updated resource detailing these structures would provide a useful reference.here we describe a new database of experimentally determined coronavirus protein structures, cov3d. cov3d is updated automatically on a weekly basis, as new structures are released in the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. the main components of the cov3d database are interrelated tables, datasets, and tools for coronavirus protein structures and spike glycoprotein sequences. a schematic of the cov3d input, organization, and contents is shown in figure 1 . the structure portion of the database includes dedicated pages and tables for:• spike glycoprotein structures in addition to a table of all known structures of cov spike proteins and their interactions, cov3d provides a viewer with sars-cov-2 spike rbd interactions with antibodies and the ace2 receptor superposed by rbd in a common reference frame (figure 2a ). this viewer permits users to assess overlapping or shared rbd binding modes among antibodies and ace2.one antibody of interest is s309, which is a human antibody that was cloned from an individual who was infected with sars-cov in 2003, and potently neutralizes sars-cov-2 [7] .comparing its rbd binding with ace2 in the rbd interaction viewer (figure 2a ) highlights how s309 engages the rbd at a distinct site from ace2, in accordance with their lack of . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint 6 observed rbd binding competition [7] . the epitope targeted by s309 is dominated by rbd residues 334-346 (circled in figure 2a ). on the cov3d sequence logo generator page, users can enter spike residue ranges, and generate sequence logos that represent positional residue propensities and conservation for regions of interest, based on sets of cov spike sequences. a sequence logo generated from a reference set of spike proteins from 18 sars-like covs ( figure   2b ) is shown in figure 2c , indicating the conservation of the n-glycosylation site (nxs/nxt sequon) at position 343, and amino acid variability at position 340, which is glutamic acid (e) in sars-cov-2. both the n343 glycan and the e340 side chain are directly engaged by s309 in the recently determined complex structure [7] .cov3d provides easily accessible information on identified sars-cov-2 spike polymorphisms, and their mapping onto the spike glycoprotein structures. under "sequences", users can navigate to "spike polymorphisms" where a table is shown with observed single and multiple substitutions in the spike glycoprotein, along with the counts of sequences containing them. the d614g variant is currently the most prevalent, with more occurrences than the reference sequence that is represented in current spike glycoprotein structures (1553 sequences, versus 920 sequences, as of may 26, 2020). viewing the position of this substitution on the spike glycoprotein can provide some indication of its possible structural and functional impact. by clicking "view" next to this substitution, users can visualize the position of this substitution,showing that it is located on the spike surface, and is not located within or adjacent to the receptor binding domain (rbd; figure 3a ). however, this site is closer to the rbd than the site of another less prevalent sars-cov-2 spike variant (t791i; figure 3b ).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint 7 example usage: visualizing modeled glycosylation n-glycosylation of viral glycoproteins can play a key role by masking the glycoprotein from the immune system, or affecting function [8] . experimentally reported protein structures often lack n-glycans, or large portions thereof, due to limitations from resolution or intrinsic glycan dynamics or heterogeneity. to enable visualization and additional analysis or modeling of glycosylated spike glycoproteins, cov3d includes sets of structures with modeled n-glycans at all predicted glycosylation sites, with n-glycans built onto the glycoprotein structures and refined using new tools in rosetta based on rosettacarbohydrates [9] . examples of glycosylated structures that can be visualized in cov3d are shown in figure 4 , and these can be downloaded directly by users for further processing. this permits users to view features such as the nglycosylation present on the ace2 surface ( figure 4a ) and the relatively high glycosylation of the spike glycoprotein stem (bottom in figure 4b ). presently, these structures include uniform oligomannose glycoforms that were found to be prevalent on the sars-cov spike based on previous mass spectroscopy analysis [10] , with five branched mannose sugars. in the future, we plan to include more spike structures with modeled glycans, and to include glycoforms that reflect recent mass spectroscopy experimental characterization of the sars-cov-2 spike [11] .we have constructed the cov3d database as a reference for the research community, providing a simple and updated interface to all coronavirus 3d structures, with integrated molecular viewers and other useful features. this will allow researchers to identify and analyze new coronavirus protein structures as they are released, particularly for sars-cov-2, while allowing . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint 8 insights into sequence features, polymorphisms, as well as glycosylation. a recent study combining coronavirus structural and sequence analysis revealed insights regarding the determinants of ace2 recognition [12] , and recent sars-cov-2 spike-antibody complex structures have shown mechanisms of cross-reactive cov spike targeting and neutralization [7, 13, 14] . importantly, as new spike-antibody structures continue to delineate determinants of effective immune recognition of the spike glycoprotein, we will update our multi-structure viewer to include those structures to facilitate comparison with previously determined ones, and will explore adding annotations including structure-based classification of spike-antibody interactions based on their features. this database should be helpful to virologists, computational biologists, immunologists, and those interested in learning about and targeting sars-cov-2 proteins with small molecules and antibodies, as well as those engaged in vaccine design.cov3d is implemented using the flask web framework (https://flask.palletsprojects.com/) and the sqlite database engine (https://www.sqlite.org/).structures are identified from the pdb on a weekly basis using ncbi blast command line tools [15] , with coronavirus protein reference sequences from sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 as queries. the spike glycoprotein reference sequences (genbank identification [16] . structural visualization is performed using ngl viewer [17] . n-glycans are modeled onto spike glycoprotein structures using a glycan modeling and refinement protocol in rosetta [9] . an example command line and rosetta script for this glycan modeling protocol is provided as supplemental information.sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequences and sequence information were downloaded from ncbi virus [18] , followed by filtering out sequences with missing residues. sequence polymorphism information was obtained by blast search using a reference sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequence (qhd43416.1). to develop spike glycoprotein alignments, betacoronavirus spike glycoprotein sequences were downloaded from ncbi virus [18] and aligned with clustal omega [19] in seaview [20] . sequences that were redundant (>95% similarity) or contained missing residues were removed, with the remaining 70 sequences forming the pan-betacoronavirus alignment. a subset of 18 sequences from the panbetacoronavirus alignment was used to generate the sars-like sequence alignment, which contains every sequence from the pan-betacoronavirus alignment with >70% sequence similarity to the sars-cov-2 spike. sequence logos are generated dynamically for user-specified residue ranges using the command-line version of weblogo [21] . phylogenetic trees representing spike reference sequences were generated using clustalx [22] , and visualized using the ape package [23] in r (www.r-project.org). [14] , and a sars-cov membrane protein peptide in complex with the human major histocompatibility complex (mhc) protein hla-a2 (pdb code 3i6k) [24] . also shown is a sequence logo generated on cov3d for a spike glycoprotein subsequence. [7] and ace2 (pdb code 6lzg) [25] in cov3d, with spike colored magenta, s309 cyan, ace2 green, and an interacting region of interest on the rbd (residues 334-346) circled for reference. for clarity, only the s309-rbd region of the s309-spike complex structure is shown. (b) unrooted phylogenetic tree generated using 18 reference spike sequences from sars-like covs used in the cov3d sequence logo generator. figure generated using the ape package in r [23] , and scale bar is shown in lower left, representing 5% sequence divergence. (c) cov3d sequence logo generation interface, and logo for spike residues 334-346.the logo was generated using 18 sars-related spike glycoprotein reference sequences and the command-line version of weblogo [21] . the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint substitution. polymorphisms are shown in the context of a prefusion spike structure [4] (pdb code 6vsb) (gray), with sites in spacefill representations of the wild-type residue on each spike trimer subunit, colored by atom type (cyan: carbon, blue: nitrogen, red: oxygen). the receptor binding domains (residues 331-529) are shown in magenta, and red dashed circles denote mutation sites, for reference. rbd-ace2 complex [25] (pdb code 6lzg) with rbd and ace2 shown as red and blue cartoons, respectively, with modeled n-glycans shown as gray, red, and blue spheres. one nglycan is modeled on the spike rbd and six are modeled on ace2. (b) a trimeric spike structure in rbd-closed conformation [5] (pdb code 6vxx) with spike shown as gray surface and modeled n-glycans shown as gray, red, and blue spheres. 48 modeled n-glycans are present on the spike structure.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted june 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprintcoronaviruses (covs) have been responsible for several outbreaks over the past two decades, pandemic, caused by sars-cov-2, which began in late 2019 (2) . the scale of the covid-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented efforts by the research community to rapidly identify and test therapeutics and vaccines, and to understand the molecular basis of sars-cov-2 entry, pathogenesis, and immune targeting.since february 2020, a large number of sars-cov-2 protein structures have been released in the protein data bank (pdb) (3) . as of june 17th, 2020, this includes 28 spike glycoprotein structures, over 150 main protease structures, and over 60 structures of other sars-cov-2 proteins. these high-resolution protein structures are of immense importance for understanding viral assembly and to aid rational vaccine and therapeutic design. the first structures of the sars-cov-2 trimeric spike glycoproteins (the major target of sars-cov-2 vaccines and antibody therapeutics) were reported in february and early march 2020 (4, 5) . previously determined spike glycoprotein structures have enabled advances including rational stability optimization of sars-cov and mers-cov spikes, yielding improved protein expression and immunogenicity (6) . given that the rapid rate of coronavirus protein structural determination and deposition is likely to continue, a simple and updated resource detailing these structures would provide a useful reference.here we describe a new database of experimentally determined coronavirus protein structures, cov3d. cov3d is updated automatically on a weekly basis, as new structures are released in the pdb. structures are classified by cov protein, as well as bound molecule, such as monoclonal antibody, receptor, and small molecule ligand. to enable insights into the spike glycoprotein, we also include information on sars-cov-2 residue polymorphisms, overall coronavirus sequence diversity of betacoronaviruses mapped onto spike glycoprotein structures, and structures of spike glycoproteins with modeled glycans, as a reference or for subsequent modeling. this resource can aid in efforts for rational vaccine design, targeting by immunotherapies, biologics, and small molecules, and basic research into coronavirus structure and recognition. cov3d is publicly available at https://cov3d.ibbr.umd.edu.cov3d is implemented using the flask web framework (https://flask.palletsprojects.com/) and the sqlite database engine (https://www.sqlite.org/).structures are identified from the pdb on a weekly basis using ncbi blast command line tools (7) visualization is performed using ngl viewer (9) . n-glycans are modeled onto spike glycoprotein structures using a glycan modeling and refinement protocol in rosetta (10). an example command line and rosetta script for this glycan modeling protocol is provided as supplemental information.root-mean-square distances (rmsds) between all pairs of full cov spike glycoprotein chains were computed using the fast structure alignment program (11) . the resultant distance matrix was input to r (www.r-project.org) which was used to perform hierarchical clustering, and the dendrogram was generated using the dendextend r package (12) . the spike chains were classified into two clusters based on this analysis, corresponding to open and closed spike states.sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequences were downloaded from ncbi virus (13), followed by filtering out sequences with missing residues. sequence polymorphism information was obtained by blast search using a reference sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequence (qhd43416.1). to develop spike glycoprotein alignments, betacoronavirus spike glycoprotein sequences were downloaded from ncbi virus (13) and aligned with clustal omega (14) in seaview (15) . sequences that were redundant (>95% similarity) or contained missing residues were removed, with the remaining 70 sequences forming the pan-betacoronavirus alignment. a subset of 18 sequences from the pan-betacoronavirus alignment was used to generate the sarslike sequence alignment, which contains every sequence from the pan-betacoronavirus alignment with >70% sequence similarity to the sars-cov-2 spike. sequence logos are generated dynamically for user-specified residue ranges using the command-line version of weblogo (16) .phylogenetic trees representing spike reference sequences were generated using clustalx (17) , and visualized using the ape package (18) in r (www.r-project.org).the main components of the cov3d database are interrelated tables, datasets, and tools for coronavirus protein structures and spike glycoprotein sequences. a schematic of the cov3d input, organization, and contents is shown in figure 1 . the structure portion of the database includes dedicated pages and tables for:• spike glycoprotein structures in addition to a table of all known structures of cov spike proteins and their interactions, cov3d provides a viewer with sars-cov-2 spike rbd interactions with antibodies and the ace2 receptor superposed by rbd in a common reference frame ( figure 3a) . this viewer permits users to assess overlapping or shared rbd binding modes among antibodies and ace2.one antibody of interest is s309, which is a human antibody that was cloned from an individual who was infected with sars-cov in 2003, and potently neutralizes sars-cov-2 (20) .comparing its rbd binding with ace2 in the rbd interaction viewer (figure 3a ) highlights how s309 engages the rbd at a distinct site from ace2, in accordance with their lack of observed rbd binding competition (20) . the epitope targeted by s309 is dominated by rbd residues 334-346 (circled in figure 3a) . on the cov3d sequence logo generator page, users can enter spike residue ranges, and generate sequence logos that represent positional residue propensities and conservation for regions of interest, based on sets of cov spike sequences. a sequence logo generated from a reference set of spike proteins from 18 sars-like covs is shown in figure 3b , indicating the conservation of the n-glycosylation site (nxs/nxt sequon) at position 343, and amino acid variability at position 340, which is glutamic acid (e) in sars-cov-2. both the n343 glycan and the e340 side chain are directly engaged by s309 in the recently determined complex structure (20) .n-glycosylation of viral glycoproteins can play a key role by masking the glycoprotein from the immune system, or affecting function (21) . experimentally reported protein structures often lack n-glycans, or large portions thereof, due to limitations from resolution or intrinsic glycan dynamics or heterogeneity. to enable visualization and additional analysis or modeling of glycosylated spike glycoproteins, cov3d includes sets of structures with modeled n-glycans at all predicted glycosylation sites, with n-glycans built onto the glycoprotein structures and refined using new tools in rosetta based on previously developed glycan functionality (10) .examples of glycosylated structures that can be visualized in cov3d are shown in figure 4 , and these can be downloaded directly by users for further processing. this permits users to view features such as the n-glycosylation present on the ace2 surface ( figure 4a ) and the relatively high glycosylation of the spike glycoprotein stem (bottom in figure 4b) . presently, these structures include uniform oligomannose glycoforms that were found to be prevalent on the sars-cov spike based on previous mass spectroscopy analysis (22) , with five branched mannose sugars. in the future, we plan to include more spike structures with modeled glycans, and to possibly include glycoforms that reflect mass spectroscopy experimental characterization of the sars-cov-2 spike (23).we have constructed the cov3d database as a reference for the research community, providing a simple and updated interface to all coronavirus 3d structures, with integrated molecular viewers, structural classification, and a variety of other useful features. this will allow researchers to identify new coronavirus protein structures as they are released, particularly for sars-cov-2, while enabling insights into spike glycoprotein antibody recognition, sequence features, polymorphisms, and glycosylation. recently released sars-cov-2 spike-antibody complex structures have revealed mechanisms of cross-reactive cov spike targeting and neutralization (20, 24, 25) , and many ongoing antibody identification and characterization studies are likely to result in many more antibody-spike structures in the near future. cov3d facilitates the use of these growing structural datasets in analysis, modeling, and structure-based design efforts by collecting and annotating these structures and their conformations, and by providing inline structural viewing of single and multiple complexes. and suggestions. the institute for bioscience and biotechnology research computing facility and staff, including christian presley, provided resources and assistance with server implementation and web hosting. this work was supported in part by nih r01 gm126299 (to bgp). coronaviruses (covs) have been responsible for several outbreaks over the past two decades, pandemic, caused by sars-cov-2, which began in late 2019 (2) . the scale of the covid-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented efforts by the research community to rapidly identify and test . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint therapeutics and vaccines, and to understand the molecular basis of sars-cov-2 entry, pathogenesis, and immune targeting.since february 2020, a large number of sars-cov-2 protein structures have been released in the protein data bank (pdb) (3) . as of june 17th, 2020, this includes 28 spike glycoprotein structures, over 150 main protease structures, and over 60 structures of other sars-cov-2 proteins. these high-resolution protein structures are of immense importance for understanding viral assembly and to aid rational vaccine and therapeutic design. the first structures of the sars-cov-2 trimeric spike glycoproteins (the major target of sars-cov-2 vaccines and antibody therapeutics) were reported in february and early march 2020 (4, 5) . previously determined spike glycoprotein structures have enabled advances including rational stability optimization of sars-cov and mers-cov spikes, yielding improved protein expression and immunogenicity (6) . given that the rapid rate of coronavirus protein structural determination and deposition is likely to continue, a simple and updated resource detailing these structures would provide a useful reference.here we describe a new database of experimentally determined coronavirus protein structures, cov3d. cov3d is updated automatically on a weekly basis, as new structures are released in the pdb. structures are classified by cov protein, as well as bound molecule, such as monoclonal antibody, receptor, and small molecule ligand. to enable insights into the spike glycoprotein, we also include information on sars-cov-2 residue polymorphisms, overall coronavirus sequence diversity of betacoronaviruses mapped onto spike glycoprotein structures, and structures of spike glycoproteins with modeled glycans, as a reference or for subsequent modeling. this resource . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint can aid in efforts for rational vaccine design, targeting by immunotherapies, biologics, and small molecules, and basic research into coronavirus structure and recognition. cov3d is publicly available at https://cov3d.ibbr.umd.edu.cov3d is implemented using the flask web framework (https://flask.palletsprojects.com/) and the sqlite database engine (https://www.sqlite.org/).structures are identified from the pdb on a weekly basis using ncbi blast command line tools (7) visualization is performed using ngl viewer (9) . n-glycans are modeled onto spike glycoprotein structures using a glycan modeling and refinement protocol in rosetta (10) . an example command line and rosetta script for this glycan modeling protocol is provided as supplemental information.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprintroot-mean-square distances (rmsds) between all pairs of full cov spike glycoprotein chains were computed using the fast structure alignment program (11) . the resultant distance matrix was input to r (www.r-project.org) which was used to perform hierarchical clustering, and the dendrogram was generated using the dendextend r package (12) . the spike chains were classified into two clusters based on this analysis, corresponding to open and closed spike states.sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequences were downloaded from ncbi virus (13), followed by filtering out sequences with missing residues. sequence polymorphism information was obtained by blast search using a reference sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequence (qhd43416.1). to develop spike glycoprotein alignments, betacoronavirus spike glycoprotein sequences were downloaded from ncbi virus (13) and aligned with clustal omega (14) in seaview (15) . sequences that were redundant (>95% similarity) or contained missing residues were removed, with the remaining 70 sequences forming the pan-betacoronavirus alignment. a subset of 18 sequences from the pan-betacoronavirus alignment was used to generate the sarslike sequence alignment, which contains every sequence from the pan-betacoronavirus alignment with >70% sequence similarity to the sars-cov-2 spike. sequence logos are generated dynamically for user-specified residue ranges using the command-line version of weblogo (16) .phylogenetic trees representing spike reference sequences were generated using clustalx (17) , and visualized using the ape package (18) in r (www.r-project.org).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprintthe main components of the cov3d database are interrelated tables, datasets, and tools for coronavirus protein structures and spike glycoprotein sequences. a schematic of the cov3d input, organization, and contents is shown in figure 1 . the structure portion of the database includes dedicated pages and tables for:• spike glycoprotein structures unsupervised clustering based on spike root-mean-square distances (rmsds) automatically classifies the spike structures into two broad clusters (figure 2) , corresponding to open and closed conformations (also referred to as "up" and "down" conformations); these forms are relevant for receptor binding and vaccine design (4, 5) , and annotations of those states based on in addition to a table of all known structures of cov spike proteins and their interactions, cov3d provides a viewer with sars-cov-2 spike rbd interactions with antibodies and the ace2 receptor superposed by rbd in a common reference frame ( figure 3a) . this viewer permits users to assess overlapping or shared rbd binding modes among antibodies and ace2.one antibody of interest is s309, which is a human antibody that was cloned from an individual who was infected with sars-cov in 2003, and potently neutralizes sars-cov-2 (20) .comparing its rbd binding with ace2 in the rbd interaction viewer (figure 3a ) highlights how s309 engages the rbd at a distinct site from ace2, in accordance with their lack of observed rbd binding competition (20) . the epitope targeted by s309 is dominated by rbd . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint residues 334-346 (circled in figure 3a ). on the cov3d sequence logo generator page, users can enter spike residue ranges, and generate sequence logos that represent positional residue propensities and conservation for regions of interest, based on sets of cov spike sequences. a sequence logo generated from a reference set of spike proteins from 18 sars-like covs is shown in figure 3b , indicating the conservation of the n-glycosylation site (nxs/nxt sequon) at position 343, and amino acid variability at position 340, which is glutamic acid (e) in sars-cov-2. both the n343 glycan and the e340 side chain are directly engaged by s309 in the recently determined complex structure (20) .n-glycosylation of viral glycoproteins can play a key role by masking the glycoprotein from the immune system, or affecting function (21) . experimentally reported protein structures often lack n-glycans, or large portions thereof, due to limitations from resolution or intrinsic glycan dynamics or heterogeneity. to enable visualization and additional analysis or modeling of glycosylated spike glycoproteins, cov3d includes sets of structures with modeled n-glycans at all predicted glycosylation sites, with n-glycans built onto the glycoprotein structures and refined using new tools in rosetta based on previously developed glycan functionality (10) .examples of glycosylated structures that can be visualized in cov3d are shown in figure 4 , and these can be downloaded directly by users for further processing. this permits users to view features such as the n-glycosylation present on the ace2 surface ( figure 4a ) and the relatively high glycosylation of the spike glycoprotein stem (bottom in figure 4b) . presently, these structures include uniform oligomannose glycoforms that were found to be prevalent on the sars-cov spike based on previous mass spectroscopy analysis (22) , with five branched . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprint mannose sugars. in the future, we plan to include more spike structures with modeled glycans, and to possibly include glycoforms that reflect mass spectroscopy experimental characterization of the sars-cov-2 spike (23).we have constructed the cov3d database as a reference for the research community, providing a simple and updated interface to all coronavirus 3d structures, with integrated molecular viewers, structural classification, and a variety of other useful features. this will allow researchers to identify new coronavirus protein structures as they are released, particularly for sars-cov-2, while enabling insights into spike glycoprotein antibody recognition, sequence features, polymorphisms, and glycosylation. recently released sars-cov-2 spike-antibody complex structures have revealed mechanisms of cross-reactive cov spike targeting and neutralization (20, 24, 25) , and many ongoing antibody identification and characterization studies are likely to result in many more antibody-spike structures in the near future. cov3d facilitates the use of these growing structural datasets in analysis, modeling, and structure-based design efforts by collecting and annotating these structures and their conformations, and by providing inline structural viewing of single and multiple complexes. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 25, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091983 doi: biorxiv preprintwhereas mers-cov spike protein attaches with dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4). 6, 7 recently, several structures of sars-cov-2 spike protein complexed with human ace2 have been resolved (pdbids: 6lzg, 6vw1, 6m17), highlighting the critical residues involved in the intermolecular interactions between the viral spike protein and its receptor. 7 as the virus has been transmitted in humans from bats and/ or other intermediate hosts, considerable work has been conducted to explore the sequence and structural variations in the spike proteins and animal host ace2 receptors. [8] [9] [10] it has been shown that variations in both viral spike protein and host ace2 sequences may act as a barrier for viral infection across species. 2, 8, 9 this, in turn, raises two interesting possibilities: first, do the natural genetic polymorphism in human ace2 gene and/or protein influence their attachment with sars-cov-2 spike protein? second, are these genetic variants of ace2 benign or could it be considered as an evolutionary trade-off where a variation in a trait may bring both advantage and disadvantage to the fitness of an organism? this study aims to explore both these possibilities by a battery of sequence and structure analysis tools. the findings provide interesting insights into the potential relationship between natural genetic variants in human ace2 and susceptibility and/or resistance against covid-19 infection. and human ace2 (q9byf1) were retrieved from ncbi and uniprot, respectively. structures of both the proteins were identified by pdb-blast and retrieved from rcsb protein data bank. 11 data for genetic variants and allele frequencies were obtained from ensembl genome browser 12 and gnomad. 13 appropriate filters were employed to limit the data to only the coding region variants of ace2 gene. coding variants of ace2 corresponding to the critical binding sites between ace2-sars-cov 14 and ace2-sars-cov-2 (pdbid: 6lzg), and those reported to show impaired binding with coronavirus spike protein in the in vitro mutation analysis 15 were selected for further investigations (table s1 ).the effect of amino acid substitution on protein (ace2) stability was predicted at 25°c and 37°c using i-mutant2.0. 16 the program predicts the change in the free energy (δδg) in the sequence variants compared with the wild type. an increase or decrease in protein stability is indicated by negative or positive δδg values, respectively. the functional impact of all selected allelic variants of ace2 was predicted using sorting intolerant from tolerant (sift), 17 polyphen-2, 18 combined annotation-dependent depletion (cadd) 19 and rare exome variant ensemble learner (revel). 20 a total of 17 ace2 coding region allelic variants were identified that correspond to the critical interaction points between ace2 and receptor-binding domain (rbd) of coronavirus spike protein.structural models of these variants were generated using atomic coordinates of pdbid: 2ajfa (wild-type ace2) as a template by sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein is a 1273 amino-acid-long structural protein located on the outer envelope of the virus. the protein has two main functional subunits: a long n-terminal s1 subunit and a relatively short c-terminal s2 subunit. a 200 amino-acid-long rbd is stationed within the s1 subunit of the spike protein that is mainly involved in its interaction with ace2 receptor. 6,7,10 human ace2 is an 805 amino-acid-long protein with two functional domains:n-terminal peptidase m2 domain and c-terminal collectrin domain.partial structure of the ace2 has been resolved (pdbid: 1r42) comprising peptidase m2 domain. structurally, the peptidase domain has two catalytic subdomains with an active site sandwiched in between the two subdomains. 24 cocrystal structures of sars-cov-2 spike protein complexed with human ace2 (pdbid: 6lzg), sars-cov with human ace2, 14 and in vitro mutation analysis of human ace2 15 have identified the critical residues that underpin the interaction between the rbd of viral spike protein and ace2 peptidase domain. in this study, among the 345 and 242 natural ace2 coding variants identified from ensembl genome browser and gnomad, respectively, 17 were found at positions that have shown to be important for the binding of ace2 with the viral spike protein (table s1 ). allele frequencies of these variants range from 5.45e−6 (rs1299103394) to 3.88e−3 (rs4646116). to predict the potential pathological consequences rendered by ace2 alleles, changes in the free energy of ace2 variants were estimated. the results showed that amino acid substitutions in only three alleles rs73635825 (s19p), rs1299103394(k26e), and rs766996587 (m82i) may adversely affect the stability of the encoded protein compared with the wild type (table 1) . however, to date, no pathogenic consequences have been reported in relation to these variants in humans. moreover, except for rs73635825 (s19p), which was predicted to be damaging by only polyphen-2, different prediction tools designed to assess the functional impact of the mutations and/or single-nucleotide polymorphisms did not reveal any ensuing pathogenicity rendered by these variants (table 1) .conversely, rs961360700 (d355n) and rs762890235 (p389h) were predicted to be detrimental by sift and polyphen-2, whereas rs1396769231 (m383t) was predicted to be damaging by sift, polyphen-2, and revel prediction tools. nevertheless, no report of any functional impact was found in the literature for these allelic variants of ace2 as well.to explore the structural changes in the protein encoded by figure 2c ). many of these interactions were also reported in a previously resolved structure of sars-cov spike protein-ace2 complex (pdbid: 2ajf). 14 a representation of the comparison of these interactions for different ace2 alleles is shown in figure 2d .briefly, the most conserved intermolecular interactions (hydrogen bonds) between different ace2 variants and sars-cov-2 spike protein were found between y41, h34, y83, and k353 of ace2 spike protein. 15 therefore it is likely that rs73635825 (s19p) and (s19p) and rs143936283 (e329g). therefore, the findings of this investigation provide clues to screen frequencies of the candidate alleles in different populations to predict the prognosis of covid-19.http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8862-179xrecently, world health organization (who, https://www.who.int/) declared that the outbreak spread of the novel coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) causes over 8 million reported cases and more than 4 hundred thousand deaths in 216 countries. most of the coronaviruses cause only mild 3 respiratory distress [1, 2] . however, three coronaviruses namely the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), sars-cov-2, and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) have been found so far highly pathogenic transmitted from animal to human [3] . the sars-cov in 2003 brings about a 10 % case fatality rate (cfr), and mers presented a cfr of about 34.4% [4] [5] [6] . the cfr for the novel coronavirus cannot be stated at the moment, as the pandemic is not over yet, although 3.4% is estimated and one thing is apparent the transmission rate of the infection is higher than the previous outbreaks [7] .the sars-cov-2 causes mainly severe acute respiratory distress by attacking lung cells and other complications in the heart, kidney, brain, and spleen and ultimately succumbed to a disastrous effect in coronavirus afflicted patients [8] . in this hour of crisis, there is no available effective standard-of-care present to treat the coronavirus affected patients. this makes an urgent need to find out agents to get control over the pandemic. scientists globally make an effort to do their best to come up with effective therapeutic agents. so, to design a drug for the virus first we have to see the indispensable processes of the virus, which help them to survive and replicates its copy number. the genome of the virus showed a sequence similarity of 96.3% batcov ratg13 and 79% with the sars-cov [9, 10] . sars-cov-2 is an enveloped single-stranded positive-sense rna genome containing viruses. the rna consists of 29,891 nucleotides, which transcribed for 6-12 orfs, can be translated into around 28 identified non-structural and structural proteins (ncbi reference sequence: nc_045512.2) [11] .sars-cov-2 enters into the host cells containing ace2, such as lung, oral, and nasal mucosa by glycosylated spike protein [12] . human ace2 interacts with sars-cov-2 spike proteins and facilitates sars-cov-2 entry into target cells [13] . the 4 viral glycosylated spike protein composed of s1 and s2 subunits in the coronaviruses which enables them access into the host cell. the rbd of s1 subunit in sars-cov-2 attaches to ace2, led to the shed of s1 subunit and subsequently triggers the cleavage of the s2 subunit by host protease protein, tmprss2, that can cleave s1/s2 protease cleavage site [13] . the cleavage changes the conformation and allowing hr1, hr2 to form 6-hb, which facilitates membrane fusion and virus releases its payload rna into the cytoplasm. the first translation product of the rna genome is polyprotein pp1a and pp1ab. subsequently, 3cl protease (3clpro) and papain-like protease (plpro) cleave pp1a and pp1ab to functional proteins required for genome amplification. the other structural proteins are produced and the host er-golgi system assembles and releases mature virus from infected cells [14, 15] . the current understanding strongly recommends targeting the surface protein of the viral particle, which possibly prevents them from entering the host cell.sars-cov-2 spike protein is a trimeric protein. the rbd of each subunit has two types of conformations. one conformation is "up" and the other is "down".when the conformation is "up", the viral spike protein could smoothly interact with human ace2 protein, otherwise, it is inaccessible [16] . comparing the structure of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov in spike protein, they have similar amino acid sequences and functions [17] . however, the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein in the down conformation n packs tightly against the n terminal domain (ntd) of the neighboring protomer, whereas the sars-cov-2 in the "down" conformation is angled closer to the central cavity of the trimer. additionally, the binding affinity between sars-cov-2 spike protein and ace2 protein is stronger than sars-cov, even 10-20 folds [18] . therefore, we deduce that the structure of sars-cov-2 is similar to sars-cov, but not the same. 5 drug discovery and development is a time taking, costly, and complex process.it usually takes years of effort to get clinically successful [19] . however, the virtual screening of authentic databases and the use of advanced bioinformatics and cheminformatics can reduce the time to come up with the best drug match to the selected target. this process of virtual screening has become a gold standard method for the preliminary phase of drug designing. to discover the potential hits against sars-cov-2, we have screened the essential entry pathway targeting virus penetration into cells. this study aims to find the potential hit compounds from taiwan database of extracts and compounds (tdec, https://tdec.kmu.edu.tw/) for and against sars-cov-2 spike protein. we focus on the screen of hit compounds that can interact with viral spike protein and spike-ace2 complex protein, leading to the prevention of viral payload into the host cytoplasm. we have selected our target mainly in the rbd of spike proteins for viral and host cell interactions. tdec is an academic and scientific platform for investigators in different fields to share their research information. it includes much information, such as compounds' structures, physicochemical properties, and biological activities, etc. on pure natural isolates, crude extracts, and synthesized extract from plants, microbes, marine organisms, and chinese herbal medicines. in the present study, an attempt has been made to virtually screen candidates from tdec for a selected target and did all the high throughput bioinformatics and cheminformatics analysis to get an insight into the interaction of spike protein and hits. 6 the protein superimposition was performed by pymol software (version 0.99rc6) to compare the conformation of spike proteins in two states [20] . one was spike protein in the prefusion ace2-free conformation, and the other was rbd of spike protein in the ace2-bound conformation. in this study, the simulated structure of the rbd of spike protein in the prefusion ace2-free conformation was constructed by homology modeling using the structure of the experimental structure of ace2-free spike protein resolved by cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-em) as the modeling template (s1a fig) and the simulated spike protein was able to be obtained from swiss model website (s1b fig) [18, 21] . the other was rbd of the spike protein bound with ace2 protein that was an experimental protein structure resolved by x-ray crystallography and it was able to be downloaded from protein data bank (pdb, https://www.rcsb.org/) (s1c fig) [22] . the protein superimposition calculations were analyzed and shown by pymol software.the virtual screenings with molecular docking calculations were performed by autodock vina (version 1.1.2) program within pyrx (version 0.8) software to discover the potential compounds binding into the viral spike protein from the compound database [23, 24] . the 2,321 structures of compounds were downloaded (may 9, 2020) from tdec, and then collected those compounds together and save it as an sdf format file by discovery studio 2019 visualizer software (ds 2019) [25] .subsequently, these structures of compounds were optimized by energy minimization with steepest descent algorithm using mmff94 force field, and then translated and 7 divided to 2,321 individual pdbqt format files by open babel program within pyrx software [26] . the experimental structure of spike-ace2 complex protein resolved by x-ray crystallography was obtained from protein data bank (pdb id: 6m0j) and the simulated structure of prefusional spike protein was downloaded from swiss model website [21, 22, 27] . after that, the substrates, including ligands, metal ions, and water molecules existed in both protein structures were all removed and the atoms of residues in both protein structures were modified by added the polar hydrogens and partial charges using ds 2019 software with charm force field.moreover, to discover the potential compounds binding into the rbd of spike protein in the prefusion conformation and the site of the connective interface of spike-ace2 complex protein from the database by virtual screening, dimensions of docking search spaces were respectively set big enough to contain the residues of ace2 binding site on the rbd of spike proteins. therefore, the size of the docking sites was respectively set as follows. in experimental spike-ace2 complex protein a previous report had been shown that once the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein bound to human ace2 protein, it can assist virus entry into the cells [17] .recently, the 3d protein structure of the viral spike protein has been resolved by cryo-em technique [18] . however, we found that the structure of the spike protein resolved by cryo-em was incomplete because it lacked parts of residues in the rbd of spike protein (s1a fig) . therefore, the structure of the spike protein with the complete amino acid sequences in the prefusion conformation was needed to be constructed by simulation. fortunately, a useful and trusted simulated structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein in the prefusion conformation that has been constructed by homology modeling and could be easily downloaded from swiss-model website (s1b fig). additionally, the viral rbd of spike protein bound with human ace2 protein, the spike-ace2 complex protein, was also recently resolved by x-ray crystallography (s1c fig). to investigate whether the conformation between the rbd of spike proteins in ace2-free state and ace2-bound state have differences or not, the protein superimposition was performed by pymol software using the structural aligning method. the data showed that the value of root mean square (rms) of the two conformations was 1.735 å (< 2å). it meant that the superimposition between both rbd of spike proteins was good (fig 1) . however, comparing the rbd regions of both spike proteins in the simulation models, it was significantly different in structural conformation (blue ring in fig 1) . the simulation showed that the position of receptor-binding motif (rbm) regional structure in prefusion conformation was close to the rbd core than in the fusion conformation. besides, the pose of rbm regional structure in the fusional conformation was more close to ace2 protein than in the prefusion conformation. generally, sar-cov-2 rbm contains many contacting residues binding to human ace2 protein [22] . we concluded that the conformation changing of the rbm regional structure in the spike protein might affect the spike protein binding behavior to human ace2 protein. the study reported that c-terminal domain (ctd) of sars-cov spike protein bound to ace2 protein with different kinds of angles and its conformations or poses would be changed to well fit the conformation of dynamic ace2 protein, such as ace2 unbound-up conformation, ace2-bound conformation, and ace2 unbounddown conformation [10] . additionally, we have observed that the conformation of the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein in the prefusional state is different from in the fusional state (fig 1) . in other words, we can speculate that the conformation of the dynamic rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein would change to well bind and fit dynamic ace2 protein. therefore, we could design a strategy that two potential hitting sites could be set as the compound docking sites to prevent the spike protein to bind to ace2 protein. one was that compounds docked on the rbd of the spike protein to prevent spike protein to bind to the human ace2 protein, and the other was that compounds docked to the site of the connective interface of the spike-ace2 complex protein to influence the affinity of binding between dynamic viral spike protein and dynamic human ace2 protein and to cause nonfunctional changing of structural conformation to prevent viral spike protein from cleaved by human proteases. in this study, our aim was going to discover the compounds that not only can bind to the rbd of spike protein in the prefusion conformation but also bind to the site of the connective interface of spike-ace2 complex protein. to discover the potential compounds, the virtual screening with molecular docking calculation was performed by autodock vina program within pyrx software. all molecular structures prepared for virtual screening were downloaded from tdec website. the results showed that the numbers of docked compounds (binding energy < -8 kcal/mol) in the prefusion rbd of spike protein and the spike-ace2 complex protein were respectively 53 and 222. among those compounds, the numbers of overlapped compounds and non-overlapped compounds were respectively 39 and 197. the binding energies and properties of 39 overlapped compounds were respectively shown in fig 2, s2 fig, and s1 table. subsequently, once the value of the screening threshold raised and limited to -9 kcal/mol, only compounds tdec2018cn001781 (thioflexibilolide a) and tdec2020cn000246 (candidine) reached the condition. with amino acid his34, and its interactive distance was 4.71å (fig 5d) . the data also showed that candidine could dock with the prefusional rbd of spike protein (cyan cartoon) and its value of binding energy was -9.0 kcal/mol ( fig   6a) . it also formed many interactions with amino acids in the prefusional rbd of the with amino acid leu452, and their interactive distances were respectively 3.83å, 3.95å, 3.77å, and 3.55å. moreover, it also formed a pi-pi t-shaped interaction (pinking purple dashed line) with amino acid phe486, and its interactive distance was 5.39å (fig 6b) . candidine docked with the site near the connective interface of the 14 rbd of spike-ace2 complex protein and its value of binding energy was -9.8 kcal/mol (fig 6c) . besides, it also formed many interactions with amino acids in the space near the connective interface of the rbd of spike-ace2 complex protein. the results showed that it formed an electrostatic hydrogen-bonding interaction (green dashed line) with amino acid glu37, and its interactive distance was 2.25å. besides, it also formed a hydrophobic pi-sigma interaction (dark purple dashed line) with amino acid asn33, and its interactive distance was 3.94å (fig 6d) . vaccines for coronaviruses [13, 30] . the predictions obtained from virtual screening such as binding energy, possible flexibility in conformation, are still very useful to lead the way of drug discovery or drug repurposing. as represented in fig 4, we have started with 2,321 compounds taken from tdec and applied the filters to get compound which can bind to the target structures with high affinity. notably, we got the two natural products, thioflexibilolide a and candidine, which passed all the filters applied with the strong binding energy respectively -9.2 kcal/mol and -9.0 kcal/mol on the prefusion spike protein and -9.8 kcal/mol and -8.9 kcal/mol on the spike-ace2 complex protein (fig 5 and fig 6) . the other compounds listed in the s1 in the further phenotypic assay. among them, hit compounds were able to influence the interaction between viral rbd of the spike protein and the human ace2 protein in two dynamic proteins. besides, we also found among these 39 compounds that dioscin, actinomycin d and saikosaponin c had been reported that they had antivirus activity against others virus (s2 table) . although, those compounds that we discovered from the database may have the potential ability to prevent the binding between viral spike protein and human ace2 protein, the efficacy of compounds were still needed to be further verified by bioassay.thioflexibilolide a and candidine were natural products respectively isolated from soft coral sinularia flexibilis and phaius mishmensis [31, 32] . in chemical structure, the structure of candidine is more solid than thioflexibilolide a. it it might be caused that the rbm of spike protein is major composed of chain type of structure rather than α-helix or β-sheet structure (s1 fig). besides, we also deduce that two compounds bind to side face respectively with the rbm of the ace2-free spike protein and the connective interface of spike-ace2 complex protein probably affect the affinity of binding between viral spike protein and human ace2 protein or influence its conformation changing to prevent spike protein to be cleaved by host protease like tmprss2 (fig 5 and fig 6) .to rapidly develop useful drugs against sars-cov-2, computer-aid drug screening was performed in many studies. sars-cov spike protein were homology proteins with greater than 70% similar sequences and have the same function for binding ace2. however, the previous report also showed that the binding affinity between sars-cov-2 spike protein and ace2 was higher than sars-cov spike protein approximately 10-20 folds [18, 39] .these reports suggested that it is highly similar but not the same in partial structure or conformation in the spike proteins between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. moreover, spike-ace2 complex protein was constructed by protein-protein docking may not good enough to directly exhibit the protein-protein binding situation in fact. recently, the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein in the prefusion conformation (pdb id:6vsb) and the complex protein that sars-cov-2 spike protein's rbd bound with ace2 protein had already been resolved (pdb id: 6m0j) respectively by cryo-em and x-ray crystallography with high resolution [18, 22] . therefore, the two new resolving protein structures were likely more close to the structural situations in fact.in other words, it could raise the accuracy in structure-based virtual screening with docking calculation because of those structures resolved with high resolution that is why we did that in this study.developing the viral spike antibody is one of the good strategies to fight against sars-cov-2. it could bind to the rbd of spike protein to neutralize sars-cov-2 had been reported [40, 41] . however, it is concerned about inducing antibodydependent enhancement (ade) [42] . herein, we reported that the 39 potential compounds against sars-cov-2 spike protein may have the advantage of avoiding to induce ade.ace2 was a type i transmembrane protein and it functioned as a carboxypeptidase to mediate homeostasis of renin-angiotensin system (ras), such as blood volume, lung and cardiovascular regulating functions, by cleaving angiotensin ii (ang ii) to ang(1-7) [43] . ace2 was higher expressed in the small intestine, kidneys, testicles, adipose tissue, and thyroid and moderate in the lungs, liver, adrenal glands, and rectum and lower in the blood, blood vessels, spleen, brain, muscle, and bone marrow [44, 45] . on the other hand, gender and age characters could affect ace2 expression under inflammatory conditions in the skin, lung, brain, and thyroid [44] . recent studies also showed that gender could affect sars-cov-2 infection susceptibility and virus clearance [17] . besides, another report also pointed out that covid-19 patients' symptoms including dysfunctions in diarrhea, taste, and smell; injuries in the liver, kidney, and heart may have a close relationship with ace2 expression [46] . herein, our results showed the 39 potential compounds could prevent the binding between viral spike protein and human ace2 protein in silico. it 20 is speculated that those potential compounds could fight against covid-19 and lower the expression in the above symptoms for humans.natural products proved to be beneficial due to the contribution from a long time to develop effective drugs for several diseases [47] . therefore, we have tried our endemic tdec which is very rich and diverse in natural product resources derived from traditional medicine, domestic microbes, and marine organisms.thioflexibilolide a is well-known for its neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory activities derived from soft corals, whereas about gravicycle is reported non-toxic after its in vitro toxicity assessment in the cell [48] . the results we are reporting here about the compounds which are screened by employing virtual screening with molecular docking approach from the database for disabling sars-cov-2 spike protein's rbd from its interaction with ace2 receptor of the host cell is very first of its kind as far as possibly know. the compounds perform well to get the filter into potential drug candidate during our screening process, and we strongly recommend our compound for further in vitro and in vivo investigation.the study carried out intending to come up with potential drugs for covid-19therapy. here in this piece of work, we virtually screened more than 2000 drugs against the target spike protein's rbd. after data mining and filtering out the unfitted compounds, we finally found two compounds named thioflexibilolide a and candidine. we have done the molecular docking to check whether it binds with the target with strong affinity or not. as per our result, we found these two compounds bind with strong affinity to the selected target of the viral protein. we believed that these two compounds could be potential drugs for sars-cov-2. the two 34 s1 sinularia flexibilis [31] tdec2020cn000246 -9.0 -9.8 phaius mishmensis [32, 51] tdec2019ca001707 -8.9 -8.3tripterygium wilfordii [52] tdec2019ca001572 -8.8 -8.9dioscorea nipponica [53] tdec2019cn000617 -8.8 -8.3solanum torvum [54] tdec2018cn001906 -8.7 -8.0 sinularia crassa [55] tdec2018cn000709 -8.6 -8.1 streptomyces sindenensis [56] tdec2019ca001664 -8.6 -9.1 bupleurum chinense [57] tdec2019ca001644 -8.5 -9.1 cunninghamia lanceolata [58] tdec2019cn000295 -8. [76, 77] tdec2018cn002008 -8.0 -8.8sinularia brassica [61] tdec2018cn002161 -8.0 -8.6sinularia brassica [61] tdec2019cn000527 -8.0 -8.7annona montana [63] tdec2019cn000665 -8.0 -8.5 paraminabea acronocephala [62] tdec2019cn000667 -8.0 -8.1 paraminabea acronocephala [62] tdec2019cn000203 -8.0 -8.6sapindus mukorossi [63] s2 [82, 83] the recent outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has affected all walks of life. genomic studies have established that sars-cov-2 belong to the betacoronavirus genus, which also includes sars-cov and mers-cov that were associated with previous outbreaks of relatively smaller scale [1] [2] [3] . these coronaviruses attach to the host cell with the aid of the spike glycoprotein present on its envelope. coronavirus spike glycoprotein is composed of two subunits -the s1 subunit is important for binding to the host cell receptor and the s2 subunit is responsible for the fusion of the virus and the host cell's membrane. angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), an enzyme located on the outer surface of a wide variety of cells, is the primary host cell target with which the spike protein of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 associates [4] [5] [6] . the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the s1 subunit of these viruses binds to outer surface of the claw like structure of ace2 7 .the sequence similarity of the rbd region of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike protein is between 73% to 76% 7 . fourteen residues of the sars-cov spike protein rbd have been reported to interact with human ace2. these are tyr436, tyr440, tyr442, leu443, leu472, asn473, tyr475, asn479, gly482, tyr484, thr486, thr487, gly488, and tyr491 8, 9 . only eight of these residues are conserved in sars-cov-2 9 the equivalent conserved residues in sars-cov-2 are tyr449, tyr453, asn487, tyr489, gly496, thr500, gly502, and tyr491, while leu455, phe456, phe486, gln493, gln498, and asn501 are substituted.the atomic level three-dimensional structure of several sars-cov-2 proteins have now been determined [10] [11] [12] [13] . these x-ray crystallography based structures provide remarkable insights into macromolecular structure and intermolecular interactions. however, molecular recognition and binding are dynamic processes. molecular dynamics (md) simulation often complement traditional structural studies for looking at the dynamics of these processes at the atomic level 14, 15 .such simulations can provide insights into the structural stability of macromolecular complexes, flexibility of interacting subunits and the interactions of residues in the interface.here, we report the stability and binding dynamics of sars-cov-2 spike rbd bound to ace2, and compare this with the dynamics of sars-cov spike rbd, by running multiple 500 ns allatom md simulations. high resolution x-ray crystal structures of sars-cov-2 spike rbd bound to ace2 illustrate fourteen positions that are associated with the interaction between sars-cov/sars-cov-2 and ace2. the primary objective of this study was to identify both similarities and dissimilarities in the dynamics of the interactions between sars-cov/sars-cov-2 and ace2 and to identify key residues that could be vital to the integrity of this interface. this would provide insights into residues that could be targeted for disrupting this interface.md simulations of sars-cov-2-ace2 and sars-cov-ace2 complexes 500 ns md simulations of sars-cov-ace2 complex (pdb id: 6m0j) and sars-cov-ace2 complex (pdb: 2ajf) were performed in triplicate. one of the 500 ns simulations of sars-cov-2-ace2 complex was further extended to 1 µs to ensure that the interactions are faithfully retained for a longer duration. additionally, triplicate 500 ns simulations of a second sars-cov-2-ace2 structure (pdb id: 6lzg) was also performed to ensure that results were not biased by a single structure. the overall structural integrity of all stimulations of sars-cov2-ace2 complex were retained with a cα root mean square deviation (rmsd) from the starting structure that was less than 4 å. in the case of the sars-cov-ace2 simulations, one of simulations had a cα rmsd that was under at 5 å. the oscillating rmsd of this simulation was characteristic of the closing/opening motion of the ace2 claw like structure 16 (figures 1a and figure 1b ). the other two sars-cov-ace2 simulations had a higher rmsd that was associated with the detachment of the spike protein from one end of interface ( figure 1b) . interestingly, the other end remained attached as evident from specific contacts that were retained throughout the simulations.protein secondary structure composition and compactness, as indicated by the radius of gyration, of ace2 and spike protein structures were also preserved throughout the simulations (supplementary figure 1) . this included salt bridges, hydrogen bonds, π-π and cation-π interactions (supplementary table   1 ). some of these interactions were more persistent than others. the residues of sars-cov-2/sars-cov spike rbd that interacted with ace2 consistently are shown in figures 3a and 3b .interfaces and the dynamics of the salient ones along the length of the simulation trajectories are shown in figure 4 and supplementary figures 4 and 5 . table 1 ). the likelihood of an interaction between gln493 of sars-cov-2 and lys31 residue of ace2 was reported recently 7 .next, the backbone of gly488 of sars-cov consistently interacted with lys353 of ace2 in all three simulations, while the gly502 at the equivalent location in sars-cov-2 formed sustained interactions with lys353 of ace2 in only one simulation (figures 4a and 4b) . additionally, the side chain of gln498 and backbone of gly496 of sars-cov-2 spike rbd formed sustained interactions in three and two simulations, respectively, with lys353 of ace2. such an interaction was absent in equivalent residues of sars-cov ( figures 4a and 4b ). this suggests that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov differs in how they target the basic lys31 and lys353 residues of ace2.tyr449 and tyr489, two conserved residues in sars-cov-2 spike rbd, consistently interacted with asp38 and gln24 of ace2 in multiple simulations. tyr453 and tyr505 were observed to interact with his34 and gln37, respectively, of ace2 for at least 80% of one simulation each ( figures 4a and 4b) . the corresponding residues in sars-cov did not appear to form such sustained interactions except tyr491 which consistently interacted with gln37 in two simulations.furthermore, gln493 and gln498 of sars-cov-2 showed sustained interactions with glu35 and asp38, respectively, while the corresponding asn479 and tyr484 in sars-cov exhibited extremely weak interactions ( figures 4a and 4b ). this is in agreement with recent work that shows the likely existence of tyr449-asp38, tyr453-his34, tyr489-gln24, and gln493-glu35 interactions between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and ace2 [16] [17] [18] .three residues which are mutated in sars-cov-2 (ala475, lys417 and gly446) interacted with ace2 residues (gln24, asp30 and gln42). such interactions were not observed in corresponding residues of sars-cov ( figures 4a and 4b, supplementary table 1 ). significantly, a very strong salt bridge was established and sustained between lys417 of sars-cov-2 spike rbd and asp30 of ace2 for nearly the full duration of all simulations. notably, this salt bridge is absent in sars-cov since the equivalent residue is val404, which is incapable of forming such an interaction ( figures 4a and 4b ). gly446 maintained an interaction with gln42 of ace2 for majority of only one simulation ( figure 4a ), while ala475 exhibited only weak interactions with gln24 in the simulations.to look at the dynamics of the interface, interactions that were maintained for at least 50% of the total simulation time in three simulations in the two complexes were evaluated. four interfacial residues in sars-cov-2 (lys417, gln493, tyr449 and gln498) and two in sars-cov (thr486 and gly488) maintained such interactions with four (asp30, glu35, asp38 and lys353) and two (lys353 and asp355) residues of ace2 respectively (figures 4a and 4b) . hence, there are noteworthy differences between how the two viral spike proteins interact with ace2 and the larger number of sustained interactions in sars-cov-2 spike protein could be associated with a higher binding affinity of sars-cov-2. additionally, similar dynamics of interacting residues were also observed in triplicate 500 ns simulations of another complex structure of sars-cov-2-ace2 (pdb: 6lzg) that was simulated to ensure that the results were not biased by one structure recent studies, based on models of the sars-cov-2 spike protein rbd, have indicated that leu455, phe486, ser494, and asn501 of sars-cov-2 are important for binding to ace2 via their interaction with met82, tyr83, lys31, and tyr41 residues 3,7,18 . however, from the simulations, only a weak π-π interaction was observed between phe486 and tyr83 (supplementary table 1 ). while, leu455, ser494, and asn501 were not observed to form any significant interactions with ace2.water molecules play an important role in many intermolecular interfaces. in this instance, six conserved water sites were found in the interface between ace2 and sars-cov-2 spike rbd.water-mediated indirect interactions were formed between ace2:lys31 and spike:phe490/leu492, ace2:asp38 and spike:gly496, ace2:asn33/his34/glu37/asp38 and spike:arg403 ( figure 5 ). these could also play a role in stabilizing the interface. this study provides insight into the stability of the interactions that define the sars-cov-ace2 and sars-cov-2-ace2 interfaces, using extended md simulations of x-ray crystal structures of these complexes. firstly, interactions that were shared by sars-cov-2-ace2 and sars-cov-ace2 complexes were assessed. sars-cov-2 spike protein rbd consistently interacted with ace2 in three clusters. at one end, gln493 and gln498 formed sustained hydrogen bonds with glu35 and lys353 of ace2. at the other end, tyr449 formed hydrogen bond with asp38 of ace2. in the middle, lys417 formed a strong and stable salt bridge with asp30 of ace2.additionally, several intermittent interactions of sars-cov-2 could permit it to bind more stably than sars-cov (figures 3b and 4a and supplementary table 1 ). these findings were also supported by the results from two different structures of the sars-cov-2-ace2 complex (supplementary figure 6 and supplementary table 1 ). loop regions (residues 484-505) of sars-cov-2 fluctuated less when bound to ace2, when compared to sars-cov. this is stabilized by the formation of sustained interactions between gln493 and gln498 of sars-cov-2 and glu35 and lys353 of ace2, respectively ( figures 4a and supplementary figure 4) .unlike sars-cov-2, in sars-cov, the region in the middle was devoid of any stable interactions with ace2. however, at the two ends, a different set of residues in sars-cov formed interactions with ace2 ( figure 3d ). therefore, it is apparent that there are several similarities and differences in the structure and dynamics of the interactions of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov with ace2. hence, antibodies or antiviral treatment modalities that target the spike protein of sars-cov is not expected to produce a similar effect with sars-cov-2. some of the recent studies that failed to inhibit the binding of sars-cov-2 rbd to ace2, support these findings 13, 19 .secondly, two charged virus binding hot spots on human ace2 (lys31 and lys353), which are essential for the binding of sars-cov, have been studied extensively 4, 8 . charge neutralization of these hot spot lysines has been shown to be important for the binding of coronavirus to ace2 7, 8 . sars-cov-2 and sars-cov utilizes unique strategies to achieve this. interestingly, sars-cov-2 residues only formed sustained interactions with lys353 of ace2 and these were absent in sars-cov indicating an adaptation to a stronger interface ( figure 4a figure   2b and 2d). the strength of this sustained salt bridge between lys417 and asp30 could contribute to the substantially different binding affinity of sars-cov-2 to ace2 receptor when compared to sars-cov 16, 18 . notably, some of the previously reported residues (leu455, phe456, tyr473, phe486, ser494, and asn501) that were suggested to enhance the binding affinity of sars-cov-2, were not observed in these simulations 3, 16, 18 .in conclusion, while sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike rbd bind to the same region of ace2 and share several similarities in how they interact with ace2, there are a number of differences in the dynamics of the interactions. one salient difference is the presence of a stable salt bridge between lys417 of sars-cov-2 spike protein and asp30 of ace2 as well as three stable hydrogen bonds between tyr449, gln493, and gln498 of sars-cov-2 and asp38, glu35, and lys353 of ace2, which were not observed in the sars-cov-ace2 interface. stable viral binding with the host receptor is crucial for virus entry. thus, special consideration should be given to these stable interactions while designing potential drugs and treatment modalities to target or disrupt this interface.coordinates of the three dimensional x-ray crystal structures of the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 rbd in complex with ace2 were obtained from the protein data bank (pdb). the pdb ids of the structure used are 6m0j and 6lzg for sars-cov-2 spike protein rbd bound to ace2 and 2ajf for the sars-cov spike protein rbd bound to ace2. schrödinger maestro 2019-4 (schrödinger, llc, new york, ny) was used to visualize and prepare the protein structures for simulations. the structures were first pre-processed using the protein preparation wizard (schrödinger, llc, new york, ny). the protein preparation stage included proper assignment of bond order, adjustment of ionization states, orientation of disorientated groups, creation of disulfide bonds, removal of unwanted water molecules, metal and co-factors, capping of the termini, assignment of partial charges, and addition of missing atoms and side chains. in the case of the sars-cov structure, a loop (residues 376-381) missing in the pdb structure was modeled using schrödinger prime 20 . hydrogen atoms were incorporated, and standard protonation state at ph 7 was used. structures of spike protein rbd bound to ace2 were placed in orthorhombic boxes of size 125 å × 125 å × 125 å and solvated with single point charge (spc) water molecules using the desmond system builder (schrödinger, llc, new york, ny). a box size of 85 å × 85 å × 85 å was used for simulations of spike rbd structures isolated from the pdb structures 6m0j and 2ajf. simulation systems were neutralized with counterions and a salt concentration of 0.15m nacl was maintained. md simulations were performed using desmond 21 . the opls forcefield was used for all calculations. all systems were subjected to desmond's default eight stage relaxation protocol before the start of the production run. 500 ns simulations were performed in triplicate with a different set of initial velocities for simulations involving 6m0j, 6lzg and 2ajf while one 500 ns simulation each were run for the isolated spike protein structures. one of the 500 ns simulations of the sars-cov-2-ace2 complex was extended to 1 µs to ensure that the interactions are retained for a longer period. for the simulations, the isotropic martyna-tobias-klein barostat and the nose-hoover thermostat were used to maintain the pressure at 1 atm and temperature at 300 k, respectively 22,23 . short-range cutoff was set as 9.0 å and long-range coulombic interactions were evaluated using the smooth particle mesh ewald method (pme) 24 . a time-reversible reference system propagator algorithm (respa) integrator was employed with an inner time step of 2.0 fs and an outer time step 6.0 fs 25 . simulation data was analyzed using packaged and in house scripts and plotted using r 3.6.0 (https://www.r-project.org).the emergence of sars-cov-2 marks the seventh coronavirus to be isolated from humans, and the third to cause a severe disease-named covid-19-after severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) . the rapid spread of sars-cov-2, and the grave risk it poses to global health, prompted the world health organization to declare, on 30 january 2020, the covid-19 outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern and on 11march 2020 to be a pandemic zhou et al., 2020) . as of 13 march 2020, there have been nearly 140000 sars-cov-2 infections and more than 5000 associated deaths reported across at least 100 countries. the rapidly evolving epidemiology of the pandemic and absence of licensed prophylactics or therapeutics for the disease have accelerated the need to elucidate the molecular biology of this novel coronavirus.although sars-cov-2 is a newly identified virus, it shares genetic and morphologic features with others in the coronaviridae family, particularly those from the betacoronavirus genus. the genome of the recently isolated sars-cov-2 shares 82% nucleotide identity with human sars-cov and 89% with bat sars-like-covzxc21 . the spike (s) glycoprotein, in particular, bears significant structural homology with sars-cov compared to other coronaviruses such as mers-cov. like sars-cov, the surface spike (s) glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 binds the same host receptor, ace-2, to mediate cell entry (letko et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020a) . s-a class i fusion protein-is also a critical determinant of viral host range and tissue tropism and the primary target of the host immune response (li, 2016) . as such, most coronavirus vaccine candidates are based on s or one of its sub-components. coronavirus s glycoproteins contain three segments: a large ectodomain, a single-pass transmembrane anchor and a short intracellular tail. the ectodomain consists of a receptor-binding subunit, s1, which contains two subdomains: one at the n-terminus and the other at the c-terminus. the latter comprises the receptor-binding domain (rbd), which serves the vital function of attaching the virus to the host receptor and triggering a conformational change in the protein that results in fusion with the host cell membrane through the s2 subunit.recently, the molecular structure of recombinant full-length sars-cov-2 spike protein was solved in a stabilized pre-fusion state, by single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em), at a resolution of 3.8 å (wrapp et al., 2020) . despite the comprehensive structural characterization of the spike protein as a whole, movement of the rbd between "up" and "down" conformational states prevented complete modeling of the rbd domains. subsequent cryo-em investigations of sars-cov-2 provided more detail of rbd, particularly at sites that contact the human ace-2 receptor (yan et al., 2020a) . here, we report the first high resolution-less than 2 å-sars-cov-2 rbd. additionally, we present the antigenicity of this recombinant rbd, particularly of interest, given the equipoise in the literature regarding the binding affinities of sars-cov antibodies for sars-cov-2 rbd. early reports, have described that the human sars-cov antibody, cr3022, is able to bind to the sars-cov-2 rbd. in the present study, we verify binding, and subsequently solved the structure of sars-cov-2 rbd in complex with cr3022 with a novel "cryptic" epitope.the sars-cov-2 rbd (residues 313-532), with a c-terminal his-tag, was expressed in 293f cells, and purified by ninta affinity, and size-exclusion chromatography. crystallization condition screening identified 20% jeffamine d2000, 10% jeffamine m2005, 0.2 m nacl, 0.1m mes ph 5.5 for diffraction quality crystal growth. crystals diffracted to <1.8 å in group p 41 21 2 and to a complete dataset to 1.95 å that could be scaled and processed ( table 1) . the structure was refined to an rfree of 20% and rwork of 22% with no ramachandran outliers. s residues 313-532 were clearly interpretable from the electron density map, with a dual conformation of a loop containing residues 484 to 487 clearly visible in the electron density map (figure 1) . structure comparison of the unliganded rbd structure presented here, with the stabilized prefusion sars-cov-2 spike (s-2p) molecule structure determined by cryo-em (pdb id: 6vsb) (wrapp et al., 2020) shows high structural similarity, with an rmsd of 0.68, 0.68, and 0.71 for each of the spike protomers. in the structure of the s-2p molecule (s-2p) (wrapp et al., 2020) 25, 29 or 49 amino acids (aa) within each protomer rbd are not modeled, including 40% of the ace-2 receptor binding site as measured by buried surface area (bsa) (yan et al., 2020b) . the sars-cov rbd-2 compared to liganded (pdb id: 2ajf) and unliganded (pdb id: 2ghv) sars-cov rbd structures shows high structural similarity, except for residues 473-488 (figure 1) . a chimeric sars-cov-2 rbd structure (pdb id: 6vw1) with 23 aa differences compared to sars-cov-2, in complex with human ace-2 was recently released in the pdb. comparisons with previously published structures with the sars-cov-2 rbd highlight residues 473-488 as an area with significant structural plasticity. in the rbd structure from this study, we observe electron density for two conformations of the 482-486 loop. one of these conformations is highly similar to the ligand bound form of the rbd, while the second conformation would clash with the ace2 receptor. both this structural detail of the unliganded rbd and comparison to previously described rbd structures indicates that this area of the rbd is structurally malleable with implications for antibody or small molecule therapeutics design.in an effort to identify antibodies that could bind to sars-cov-2, we screened a set of sars-cov, (tripp et al., 2005) and mers cov (wang et al., 2018; wang et al., 2015) rbd-reactive antibodies for binding to the sars-cov-2 rbd. we demonstrated that the sars-cov mouse antibody 240cd (tripp et al., 2005) had nanomolar (nm) affinity for the sars-cov-2 rbd and did not significantly block ace-2 receptor binding (figure 2 ). cr3022-a sars-cov neutralizing antibody (tian et al., 2020) identified from a human phage-display library (ter meulen et al., 2006) -also bound to sars-cov-2 rbd with nm affinity ( figure 2b) . we assessed competition binding between 240cd and cr3022, and show that these antibodies cross-compete with each other for binding to the sars-cov-2 rbd (figure 2c, 2d) .sars-cov-2 has a likely zoonotic origin and horseshoe bats have been implicated as natural reservoirs of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (menachery et al., 2015; zhou et al., 2020) . as such, we next explored antibody cross-reactivity with the s glycoproteins of two bat sars-related covs: sarsr-cov rs4874 (ge et al., 2013; yang et al., 2015) and rs4231 (hu et al., 2017) , which are closely related to the progenitor of sars-cov and retain the ability to utilize human ace-2. cr3022 was able to recognize a recombinant spike glycoproteins generated from bat sarsr-cov rs4874, while 240cd, and other mouse generated monoclonal antibodies have a mixed recognition phenotype ( figure 2f ).the antigenic cross-reactivity of this set of antibodies precipitated an investigation into their molecular recognition determinants. the potential relevance of a human antibody motivated the investigation to prioritize studies of cr3022, for which a sequence was available (ter meulen et al., 2006) .the cr3022 heavy chain is encoded by ighv5-51*03, contains a 12-aa cdr h3 with 8 v gene-encoded residues altered by somatic hypermutation. cr3022 light chain is encoded by igkv4-1*01 with 1 v geneencoded residue, altered by somatic hypermutation, and a 9-aa cdr l3 (extended data figure 2a ). to provide an atomic-level understanding of the structure of the cr3022 antibody, we crystallized the antigenbinding fragment (fab) of cr3022. crystals diffracted to 3.2 å resolution in space group p 21 (table 1) .overall the structure of the cr3022 fab revealed a relatively flat antigen-combining site, with the exception of an extended protruding 12-aa cdr l1 loop ( figure s2a ).to determine the structure of cr3022 in complex with the sars-cov-2 rbd, we carried out crystallization conditions screening, with crystals of the cr3022-rbd complex forming in 1m succinic acid, 0.1m hepes ph 7, 2% peg mme2000 and determined the crystal structure by x-ray diffraction to 4.25 å ( table 1 ). the complex structure was solved by molecular replacement using the refined cr3022 and sars-cov-2 rbd structures as search models and was refined to an rwork/rfree of 0.242/0.292 (table   1) . cr3022 bound to the rbd at an epitope centered on s glycoprotein residues 377-386 with a total buried surface area of 871 å (figure 3, figure s2 , and table s1 ). this region is highly conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 ( figure s3) . comparison of the cr3022 epitope site with previously described antibody-complex structures for sars-cov, and mers-cov indicates that cr3022 describes a novel recognition site (figure 3 and figs. s3, s4). further sequence analysis of the epitope indicates that this epitope is conserved in betacoronavirus clade 2b, with also some similarity in clade 2d (fig. s3) . to confirm that this site was also shared with 240cd, we produced an rbd knockout mutant by introducing a glycan sequon at position 384, and by biolayer interferometry show that both cr3022 and 240cd binding to the rbd can be eliminated by the introduction of a glycan at this site (fig. s2d ).the epitope conservation within the clade explains the antigenic cross-reactivity with both human sars-cov and bat sars related cov. to date, there has been extensive structural characterization of the sars-cov, and mers-cov spike molecule and domains, which provides a framework for understanding the novel sars-cov-2 spike molecule (table s2 ). in the context of the coronavirus trimeric s glycoproteins, the rbd displays two prototypical conformations either in an "up" or "down" position, with implications for receptor binding and cell entry ( table s1 ). to further analyze these conformations, we modeled the cr3022 binding to the trimeric structures of sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov. the cr3022 epitope is occluded by adjacent spike protomers when the rbd is in the "down" conformation, but becomes more accessible when the spike is in a more open conformation here multiple rbd molecules are in the "up" conformation ( figure 4) . there is still a clash of the antibody fc1 region with the ntd from the same protomer, or an rbd from an adjacent protomer when modeled using the static structure.to understand whether cr3022 could bind to sars-cov s glycoproteins, we measured binding to stabilized s-2p or non-stabilized versions of s (figure 4) . we observed robust binding to the nonstabilized s glycoprotein, while binding to sars s-2p trimer was low. we then treated the sars s-2p trimer with trypsin and/or incubation with the ace2 receptor to assess whether minimal proteolytic action or receptor binding could increase the availability of the "cryptic" cr3022 epitope. incubation of the stabilized s-2p trimer with human ace2 did not dramatically affect cr3022 binding, while in contrast, the trypsin treatment of the s-2p protein resulted in increased binding akin to the unstabilized s glycoprotein binding, and the level of binding was titratable, with increasing amounts of s-2p resulting in higher cr3022 binding. given the prior neutralization and protection studies utilizing cr3022, and its ability to complement potent neutralizing antibodies, it is likely that the cr3022 epitope represents a "cryptic" epitope that becomes exposed during the processes of viral cell entry.in summary, our data represents the most detailed structural information for the sars-cov-2 rbd to date and the first structure of the sars-cov-2 in complex with a human antibody. the presence of "cryptic" but protective epitopes for influenza (bangaru et al., 2019) , and ebola viruses (west et al., 2018) , have been previously described. the identification of a novel "cryptic" epitope for betacoronaviruses including sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 highlight a novel viral vulnerability that can be harnessed in combination with ace2 receptor site targeting monoclonal antibodies for vaccine and therapeutic countermeasure development.this work was supported by funding from the defense health agency, as well as a cooperative agreement cr3022 to sars-cov-2 rbd measured by biolayer interferometry. kinetic constants were determined were calculated using a minimum of four dilutions of the rbd and fitted using a 1:1 binding model. c,d, competition binding of antibodies cr3022 and 240cd to sars-cov-2 rbd. cr3022 or control antibody was allowed to bind to sars-cov-2 prior to binding to 240cd or vice-versa. e sars-cov-2 rbd was sequentially bound by antibodies cr3022 or 240cd followed by soluble human ace2 receptor. f sars-cov reactive antibodies were assessed for binding to bat sars-related cov rs4784 and rs4231 s glycoproteins. cov-2 rbd-cr3022 complex with the sars-cov s-2p structure. a the rbd-cr3022 structure is aligned to the sars-cov trimer structure (surface representation; pdb id: 6cs1), where two rbd molecules are located in the "up" conformation. in this static structure, the fc1 region of cr3022 (ribbon representation) clashes with the ntd of the same protomer. however, the epitope is fully accessible when more than one rbd is in the "up" representation. b biolayer interferometry measurement of cr3022 binding to sars s proteins with trypsin treatment or ace2 receptor binding. c cr3022 binding to a serial dilution of sars s-2p protein following trypsin treatment.the shanghai public health clinical center & school of public health, in collaboration with the central hospital of wuhan, huazhong university of science and technology, the wuhan center for disease control and prevention, the national institute for communicable disease control and prevention, chinesecenter for disease control, and the university of sydney, sydney, australia released the sequence of a coronavirus genome from a case of a respiratory disease from wuhan on january 10 th available at recombinomics.co/topic/4351-wuhan-coronavirus-2019-ncov-sequences/. the sequence was also deposited in genbank (accession mn908947) and gisaid (>epi_isl_402125). dna encoding the sars-cov-2 rbd (residues 331-527) was synthesized (genscript) with a c-terminal his6 purification tag and cloned into a cmvr plasmid, and protein was expressed by transient transfection in 293f cells for six days. the sars-cov-2 rbd-his protein was purified from cell culture supernatant using a ni-nta (qiagen) affinity column. dna encoding the s protein ectodomains (residues 1-1194) from bat sarsrelated cov isolates rs4231 and rs4874 (ref. (hu et al., 2017) ) were synthesized (genscript) with a cterminal t4-foldon domain or c-terminal gcn domain, respectively, followed by factor xa cleavage sites and strep-tactin purification tags. bat sarsr-cov s genes were cloned into a modified pcdna3.1 expression plasmid (chan et al., 2009) . protein was initially expressed by transient transfection in 293f cells for six days, then serial cloned to select stably expressing cell lines (yan l., in submission) . the rs4231-t4 and rs4874-gcn s proteins were purified from cell culture supernatant using a strep-tactin affinity column. the oligomeric structure of these s proteins was selected by size exclusion chromatography (ge/akta) and trimeric s proteins were confirmed by native-page. sars s-2p was produced as previously described, with strep-tactin affinity chromatography followed by gel filtration using a 16/60 superdex-200 purification column. purification purity for all s glycoproteins was assessed by sds-page.the sequences of the cr3022 variable regions of the heavy and light chains are available in genbank under accession numbers dq168569 and dq168570, respectively (ter meulen et al., 2006) . these sequences were synthesized (genscript) and cloned into cmvr expression vectors (nih aids reagent program) between a murine ig leader (genbank dq407610) and the constant regions of human igg1 (genbank aaa02914), igκ (genbank akl91145). plasmids encoding heavy and light chains were cotransfected into expi293f cells (thermofisher) according to the manufacturer's instructions. after 5 days, antibodies were purified from cleared culture supernatants with protein a agarose (thermofisher) using standard procedures, buffer exchanged into phosphate-buffered saline (pbs), and quantified using calculated e and a280 measurements.the fab fragment of antibody cr3022 was prepared by digestion of the full-length igg using enzyme lys-c (roche). the digestion reaction was allowed to proceed for 2.5 hours at 37°c. digestion was assessed by sds-page and upon completion, the reaction mixture was passed through protein-g beads (0.5-1 ml beads), 3 times and the final flow through was assessed by sds-page for purity. the fab fragment was mixed with purified sars-cov-2 rbd, and the complex was allowed to form for 1 hour at room temperature. expi293f (thermofisher scientific #a14527), and 293f cell lines were utilized in this study.crystallization sars-cov-2 rbd at 10 mg/ml and 5 mg/ml in pbs buffer was screened for crystallization conditions using an art robbins gryphon crystallization robot, 0.2 ul drops, and a set of 1200 crystallization conditions. crystal drops were observed using a jan scientific uvex-ps with automated uv and brightfield drop imaging robot. crystals of the sars-cov-2 rbd grew after 24 hours in multiple conditions from the molecular dimensions midas crystal screen, with diffraction-quality crystals seen in conditions b1, g1, f6, and h10. cr3022 fab was screened for crystallization at 10.0 mg/ml and 5.0 mg/ml concentrations in pbs. diffraction quality crystals grew after 48 hours in 0.1m imidazole ph 6.5, 40% 2propanol and 15% peg 8,000. for the complex, cr3022 fab and sars-cov-2 rbd were mixed in 1:1 molar ratio and crystallization drops were set-up at 8.0 and 4.0 mg/ml concentrations in pbs buffer as described above. crystals grew in a crystallization condition containing 1m succinic acid, 0.1m hepes ph 7.0 and 2% peg mme2000. both, rbd alone and cr3022 fab-rbd complex, crystals were harvested and cryo-cooled in their respective crystallization conditions plus 25% glycerol.single crystals were transferred to mother liquor containing 22% glycerol, and cryo-cooled in liquid nitrogen prior to data collection. diffraction data for sars-cov-2 rbd were collected at advanced photon source (aps), argonne national laboratory, ne-cat id24-c beamline, and measured using a dectris eiger 16m pixel detector. crystals grown in midas condition b1 (20% jeffamine d2000, 10% jeffamine m2005, 0.2 m nacl, 0.1m mes ph 5.5) provided the highest resolution diffraction with spots visible to 1.8 å. a complete dataset could be processed to 1.95 å in space group p41212. cr3022 fab crystals diffracted to 3.3 å on ne-cat id24-c beamline. diffraction data could be scaled in p21 space group with 99.9% completeness. diffraction data for cr3022 and sars-cov-2 rbd complex were collected on ne-cat id24-c beamline at advanced photon source (aps), and measured using a dectris eiger 16m pixel detector. diffraction data from multiple crystals were merged and scaled together to achieve a final resolution of 4.2 å with overall completeness of 82.2%. data collection statistics are reported in table 1 .phenix xtriage was used to analyze the scaled diffraction data produced from hkl2000 and xds. data was analyzed for completeness, matthew's coefficient, twinning or pseudo-translational pathology. the structure of the sars-cov-2 rbd was determined by molecular replacement using phaser and a search model of the sars rbd (pdb id: 2ajf, molecule c). cr3022 fab crystal structure was determined by molecular replacement using coxsackievirus a6 neutralizing antibody 1d5 (pdb id: 5xs7) as a search model. the cr3022-rbd complex structure was determined by molecular replacement using the refined cr3022 and sars-cov-2 rbd structures as search models. refinement was carried out using phenix refine with positional, global isotropic b factor refinement, and defined tls groups, with iterative cycles of manual model building using coot. structure quality was assessed with molprobity. the final refinement statistics for all the structures are reported in table 1 . all structure figures were generated usingepitope sites correspond to antigen sites that are in contact with the antibody in the antigen-antibody complex (i.e. all sites that have non-hydrogen atoms within 4 å of the antibody). for a given epitope site, the weight, which characterizes the interaction between the epitope site and the antibody (improved based on (bai et al., 2019) ), was defined as:in which, nc is the number of contacts with the antibody (i.e. the number of non-hydrogen antibody atoms within 4 å of the site) ; nnb is the number of neighboring antibody residues; 〈 〉 is the mean number of contacts nc and 〈 〉 is the mean number of neighboring antibody residues nnb across all epitope sites. a weight of 1.0 is attributed to the average interaction across all epitope sites. neighboring residue pairs were identified by delaunay tetrahedralization of side-chain centers of residues (c is counted as a side chain atom, pairs further than 8.5 å were excluded). quickhull (barber, 1996) was used for the tetrahedralization and biopython pdb (hamelryck and manderick, 2003) to handle the protein structure.in the sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 rbd comparison, residues were considered similar for the following residues pairs: rk, rq, kq, qe, qn, ed, dn, ts, sa, vi, il, lm and fy.octet red96 instrument (fortébio). after reference subtraction, binding kinetic constants were determined, from at least 4 concentrations of fab, by fitting the curves to a 1:1 langmuir binding model using the data analysis software 9.0 (fortébio). antibodies were loaded at 30 ug/ml onto a ahc probe for 120 s followed by baseline incubation for 30-60 s.to assess antibody competition, either 240cd or cr3022 or a non-specific control antibody cr1-07 was incubated with the sars-cov-2 rbd prior to assessment of binding to cr3022 or 240cd.antibody concentration was 30 ug/ml. to assess binding of human ace-2 receptor in the presence or absence of antibodies cr3022, or 240cd, rbd was loaded onto a his probe. the rbd was then sequentially incubated with either cr3022, 240cd or control antibody cr1-07 prior to incubation with human ace-2 receptor.cr3022 was loaded onto an ahc probe for 120s prior to incubation with sars-cov s glycoproteins (15 ug/ml) alone or pre-incubated with ace2 protein. sars s-2p protein was treated with 0.1% bovine pancreas trypsin for 10 minutes prior to binding to binding measurements. sars spike protein was provided by bei resources, lot 768p152. binding of cr3022 was also carried out against a series of concentrations of sars s-2p which had been treated with 0.1% w/w bovine pancreatic trypsin.the associated accession numbers for the coordinates and structure factors reported in this paper are being deposited to the pdb.no potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors. to sars-cov-2 rbd measured by biolayer interferometry. kinetic constants were determined were calculated using a minimum of four dilutions of the rbd and fitted using a 1:1 binding model. c,d, competition binding of antibodies cr3022 and 240cd to sars-cov-2 rbd. cr3022 or control antibody was allowed to bind to sars-cov-2 prior to binding to 240cd or vice-versa. e sars-cov-2 rbd was sequentially bound by antibodies cr3022 or 240cd followed by soluble human ace2 receptor. f sars-cov reactive antibodies were assessed for binding to bat sars-related cov rs4784 and rs4231 s glycoproteins. . identification of cr3022 epitope as a "cryptic" epitope. structural alignment of the sars-cov-2 rbd-cr3022 complex with the sars-cov s-2p structure. a the rbd-cr3022 structure is aligned to the sars-cov trimer structure (surface representation; pdb id: 6cs1), where two rbd molecules are located in the "up" conformation. in this static structure, the fc1 region of cr3022 (ribbon representation) clashes with the ntd of the same protomer. however, the epitope is fully accessible when more than one rbd is in the "up" representation. b biolayer interferometry measurement of cr3022 binding to sars s proteins with trypsin treatment or ace2 receptor binding. c cr3022 binding to a serial dilution of sars s-2p protein following trypsin treatment. sars-cov-2-spike setkctlksftvekgiyqtsnfrvqptesivrfpnitnlcpfgevfnatrfasvyawnrk 356 batrs4231-spike aelkcsvksfeidkgiyqtsnfrvapskevvrfpnitnlcpfgevfnattfpsvyawerk 343 batwiv16-spike aelkcsvksfeidkgiyqtsnfrvapskevvrfpnitnlcpfgevfnattfpsvyawerk 343 sars-cov-spike aelkcsvksfeidkgiyqtsnfrvvpsgdvvrfpnitnlcpfgevfnatkfpsvyawerk 343 ********** * *****:** sars-cov-2-spike risncvadysvlynsasfstfkcygvsptklndlcftnvyadsfvirgdevrqiapgqtg 416 batrs4231-spike risncvadysvlynstsfstfkcygvsatklndlcfsnvyadsfvvkgddvrqiapgqtg 403 batwiv16-spike risncvadysvlynstsfstfkcygvsatklndlcfsnvyadsfvvkgddvrqiapgqtg 403 sars-spike kisncvadysvlynstffstfkcygvsatklndlcfsnvyadsfvvkgddvrqiapgqtg 403 :**************: ********** ********:********::**:********** sars-cov-2-spike kiadynyklpddftgcviawnsnnldskvggnynylyrlfrksnlkpferdisteiyqag 476 batrs4231-spike viadynyklpddflgcvlawntnskdsstsgnynylyrwvrrsklnpyerdlsndiyspg 463 batwiv16-spike viadynyklpddftgcvlawntrnidatqtgnynykyrslrhgklrpferdisnvpfspd 463 sars-spike viadynyklpddfmgcvlawntrnidatstgnynykyrylrhgklrpferdisnvpfspd 463 ************ ***:***:.. *:. ***** ** .*:.:*.*:***:*. :. . analysis of the cr3022 footprint across betacoronaviruses. the cr3022 epitope on sars-cov-2 (china.wuhan.30dec19.402132) rbd is compared across betacoronaviruses. the epitope is numbered according to the wuhan reference; the strength of the interaction between the ab and the spike protein is indicated by the height and color of the histogram bars above the sequence alignment. sequences are ordered based on their phylogenetic relationships based on a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree derived from amino acid rbd sequences. the rbd structure is shown in surface representation and depicts mutations between sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 in red; the cr3022 epitope is outlined in white, with contact residues shown in stick representation. coronaviruses (covs) are a group of enveloped positive-stranded rna viruses that can cause respiratory, intestinal, and central nervous system infections in humans and animals [1] . until 2019, six strains of coronaviruses that are able to infect humans had been identified [1, 2] . among them, four human coronaviruses, including hcov-oc43, hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, and hcovhku1, are not highly pathogenic and only cause mild respiratory diseases [1] . however, two other coronaviruses, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) [3] [4] [5] [6] and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [7, 8] , have caused two large-scale pandemics and resulted in more than 8000 cases, including nearly 800 related deaths and about 2500 cases, including about 860 related deaths, respectively. the outbreaks of sars-cov and mers-cov indicated that some coronaviruses can be highly pathogenic when they transmit from animals to humans [9] [10] [11] . therefore, it is urgent to develop antiviral treatments or vaccines targeting such high-risk coronaviruses like sars-cov and mers-cov.before efficient antiviral drugs or vaccines are developed for sars-cov or mers-cov, another outbreak of pneumonia caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) has emerged in wuhan since december 2019 [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . as of 30 march 2020, sars-cov-2 has caused 693,224 confirmed cases, including 33,106 related deaths globally [20] . the full-length genome sequence of sars-cov-2 was soon determined by the zhang group [21] . it was revealed that sars-cov-2 has a probable batin this study, we have investigated the rbd-ace2 complex, spike protein, and free rbd systems of sars-cov (genbank id: np_828851.1) and sars-cov-2 (genbank id: mn908947.3). for sars-cov, the rbd-ace2 complex structure was directly downloaded from the protein data bank (pdb entry: 3sci) [36] . then, all the water molecules were removed from the complex structure. the free rbd structure was obtained by removing the ace2 protein from the rbd-ace2 complex. the structure of the trimeric spike protein of sars-cov was also downloaded from the pdb (pdb entry: 6acd) [26] . for sars-cov-2, the three dimensional (3d) rbd structure was modeled based on the rbd structure of sars-cov using the modeller program [37] , where the sequence alignment was performed using the clustalw program [38, 39] . the complex structure between the sars-cov-2 rbd protein and human ace2 was then predicted by our protein-protein docking approach [40] [41] [42] . the 3d structure of the trimeric spike protein for sars-cov-2 was constructed based on the spike protein structure of sars-cov (pdb entry: 6acd) using modeller.the complex structure between the sars-cov-2 rbd protein and the human ace2 molecule was predicted using our hybrid protein-protein docking algorithm, hdock [40] [41] [42] [43] . specifically, given the individual structures of the sars-cov-2 rbd protein and the human ace2 molecule, hdock globally samples all possible binding modes between the two proteins through a fast fourier transform (fft)-based search strategy [42] . then, all the sampled binding modes were evaluated by our iterative knowledge-based scoring function itscorepp [44] . last, the binding modes were ranked according to their binding energy scores, and the top ten binding modes were provided to users. during the docking calculation, all the default parameters were used. namely, the grid spacing was set to 1.2 å for 3d translational search, the angle interval was set to 15 • for rotational sampling in 3d euler space, and the binding interface information in the pdb was automatically applied during the template-based modeling of individual structures. a web server version of our hdock algorithm can be freely accessed from our web site at http://hdock.phys.hust.edu.cn/ [41] .the amber suite was used for the md simulations [45] . before the simulations, the missing residues in the middle of a chain were added using the modeller program [37] . during the simulations, the ff14sb force field was selected [46] , an explicit solvent model was used, the time step was set to 2 fs, langevin dynamics were used for temperature control, and the program "pmemd.cuda" was used as the simulation engine, where all the simulations were performed on a gpu compute node [47] . specifically, for each system, the following four stages of md simulations were performed before the production simulation: (1) a 1000-step simulation was first run to minimize the solvated protein system with weakly restraints on the backbone atoms; (2) the system was then heated to 300 k by a 25,000-step (i.e., 50 ps) simulation with weakly restraints on the backbone atoms; (3) next, another 25,000-step (i.e., 50 ps) constant pressure simulation was conducted to equilibrating the density of the system at 300 k; (4) the system was then equilibrated by a 250,000-step (i.e., 500 ps) of constant pressure simulation at 300 k. finally, two 2,500,000-step production simulations were run to record the trajectories of the system at 300 k, where the coordinates were written out every 5000 steps (i.e., 10 ps), resulting in a total of 10 ns simulation with 1000 recorded trajectories. after the simulations, the "mmpbsa.py" was used to calculate the free energies of the systems through the mm-gbsa model [48] , and the "cpptraj" was used to analyze the coordinate trajectories [49] . to check the statistical significance of the difference between two means, a t-test was performed to obtain the p value using two average free energies and their standard deviations.the rbd proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov exhibit a high sequence similarity (89.2%) with a sequence identity of 73.7%. the high homology resulted in an accurate 3d rbd model of sars-cov-2 with a small rmsd of 0.55 å from the experimental sars-cov rbd structure. with the sars-cov-2 rbd model and experimental human ace2 structure, we then performed protein-protein docking to predict their binding mode using our hdock approach [40] [41] [42] . figure 1a shows the predicted complex structure between the human ace2 molecule and the sars-cov-2 rbd protein.it can be seen from the figure that the predicted sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex structure is very close to the experimentally determined sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex structure. the interface root mean square deviation (rmsd) between the two complexes is only 0.473 å, demonstrating that the rbds of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov bind to the same site of the human ace2 receptor ( figure 1a ). these results can also be understood by comparing the residues at the rbd-ace2 binding interface for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. the binding sites on the rbd proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are very conserved. the corresponding residues show a high sequence similarity of 83.3% ( figure 1b ,c). among them, the hydrophobic residues, which are important for protein-protein interactions, are especially conserved. for the rbd of sars-cov-2, there are 13 hydrophobic residues at the binding site, which are comparable to 13 hydrophobic residues for that of sars-cov ( figure 1b) .recently, the cryoem structure of the sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex was determined by the zhou group [31] . comparing the experimental structure and our predicted model showed that the two complexes are close to each other and have a small interface rmsd of 1.108 å (figure 2a ). the interface difference is mainly due to the conformational changes in the rbd, especially around the loop of residues 475-488 ( figure 2b ), while the backbone rmsd for the two ace2 monomers is only 0.965 å. if the flexible loop of residues 475-488 in the rbd was excluded, the interface rmsd between the predicted and experimental complexes would be as small as 0.774 å. these results suggested the accuracy of our predicted sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex structure. . sars-cov-2 rbd is colored magenta and its interacting ace2 is colored blue. sars-cov rbd is colored green and its interacting ace2 is colored red, respectively. (b) the binding site residues on the rbd that are within 5.0 å form the ace2, where the hydrophobic residues on the sars-cov-2 rbd are highlighted in red. (c) part of the sequence alignment between the spike proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, where the rbd residues are highlighted in yellow and the residues at the binding site are highlighted in magenta, respectively.we have run a long-time md simulation to generate the trajectories of the rbd-ace2 complex system for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. the binding free energies were calculated using the mm-gbsa model by the "mmpbsa.py" script in the amber package. table 1 shows a comparison of the rbd-ace2 binding free energies for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. it can be seen from the table that the binding free energy of the sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 interaction is −50.43 kcal/mol, which is significantly lower than the binding free energy of the sars-cov rbd-ace2 interaction (−36.75 kcal/mol). in other words, sars-cov-2 binds human ace2 with a significantly higher affinity than sars-cov. very recently, an experiment study also suggested that sars-cov-2 could bind human ace2 with a higher affinity than sars-cov [30] . this may provide one of the possible reasons why sars-cov-2 is much more infectious than sars-cov, though other factors like human activities and pathogen persistence can also have a critical impact on the spread of sars-cov-2. further examination of the binding free energy contributions reveals that the higher binding affinity of sars-cov-2 than sars-cov is mostly attributed to the solvation energy contribution ∆g solv (674.97 vs. 696.56 kcal/mol), whereas sars-cov-2 has a higher binding free energy in vacuum ∆g gas than sars-cov (−725.41 vs. −733.31). in other words, sars-cov-2 tends to bind human ace2 better than sars-cov in the water, while sars-cov would bind to human ace2 better than sars-cov-2 in the gas. further investigation will be needed to reveal the impact of such binding preferences on human infection. table 1 . the binding free energies calculated from molecular dynamics (md) simulations for the rbd-ace2 interactions of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, where ∆g gas is the interaction energy change in the gas and ∆g solv is the solvation energy change upon binding in the solvent, respectively. all units are reported in kcal/mol. the t-test was conducted to check the statistical significance of the difference between two sets of free energies. a p-value of <0.05 indicates that the difference is statistically significant (95% confidence interval). the spike protein on the coronavirus envelope is a trimeric protein. this protein is critical for the vitality of coronaviruses because it is not only an important component for the virus particle but also plays a crucial role in attaching host cells and fusing the membranes [26] . in addition, the spike protein also determines the solubility of coronavirus particles and thus the viral infectivity because the spike protein is the largest protein located on the coronavirus envelope surface. therefore, the spike protein is directly related to the stability and functionality of coronaviruses. here, we have run a lengthy md simulation to study the trimeric spike proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. table 2 gives a comparison between the free energies of the spike proteins for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. it can be seen from the table that the spike protein of sars-cov-2 has a significantly lower total free energy (g total = −67,303.28 kcal/mol) than the spike protein of sars-cov (g total = −63,139.96 kcal/mol) ( table 2 ). these results suggest that sars-cov-2 is more stable and able to survive a significantly higher temperature than sars-cov. this may partly explain the higher infection ability of sars-cov-2 than sars-cov because sars-cov-2 would have a higher persistence than sars-cov at the same temperature. table 2 . the free energies calculated from md simulations for the spike proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, where g gas is the interaction energy in the gas and g solv is the solvation energy in the solvent, respectively. all units are reported in kcal/mol. the t-test was conducted to check the statistical significance of the difference between two sets of free energies. a p-value of <0.05 indicates that the difference is statistically significant (95% confidence interval). the lower free energy of the sars-cov-2 spike protein may result from the virus evolution or adaption to hosts because sars-like coronaviruses normally originate from bats that are known to have a higher body temperature than humans [50] [51] [52] . in other words, sars-cov-2 and other sars-like coronaviruses would have evolved to achieve a lower free energy for their spike proteins by recombination or mutations so that they can survive in high-temperature animals like bats [1] . in addition, the free energy decomposition also shows that the lower free energy of sars-cov-2 spike protein than sars-cov spike protein is mainly attributed to the free energy in a vacuum g gas (−36,405.44 vs. −32,053.43 kcal/mol), whereas their solvation energies g solv are more comparable (−30,897.84 vs. −31,086.53 kcal/mol) ( table 2 ). this may reflect an evolution trend of sars-like coronaviruses, i.e., favoring the internal interactions between residues instead of the solvation energy. this kind of evolution would also be beneficial for the persistence of coronaviruses because such kinds of coronaviruses with lower internal energy would be more robust and able to survive in both the air and solvent.3.4. the free rbd: sars-cov-2 is more temperature-sensitive than sars-cov coronaviruses use the spike protein to attach host cells by binding the host cell receptor. therefore, the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the spike protein is critical for coronaviruses to infect host cells. here, we have run lengthy md simulations to investigate the dynamic properties of the rbd proteins for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. table 3 shows a comparison between the free energies of the free rbd proteins for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. similar to the findings in the spike protein as detailed in the last section (table 2) , the rbd protein of sars-cov-2 also shows a significantly lower free energy than that of sars-cov (−4090.04 vs. −3617.73 kcal/mol) ( table 3) , which may also be understood by the evolution pressure on coronaviruses due to their high-temperature host environment. however, unlike in the spike protein where the free energy difference between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is mostly attributed the inter-residue interactions in a vacuum (g gas ), here in the rbd protein, the free energy difference between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov comes from both the free energies in vacuum g gas (−2104.37 vs. −1703.66 kcal/mol) and solvation energy g solv (−1985.68 vs. −1914.07 kcal/mol) ( table 3 ). the lower solvation energy of sars-cov-2 rbd than sars-cov rbd may be understood because the rbd must move up away from the spike protein and into the water in order to bind human ace2 [27] . in other words, sars-cov-2 would have evolved to be more soluble so that it can move up and bind the ace2 more easily. the better solubility of sars-cov-2 rbd than sars-cov rbd may also contribute to part of the higher infection ability of sars-cov-2 than sars-cov. table 3 . the free energies calculated from md simulations for the rbd proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, where g gas is the interaction energy in the gas and g solv is the solvation energy in the solvent, respectively. all units are reported in kcal/mol. the t-test was conducted to check the statistical significance of the difference between two sets of free energies. a p-value of <0.05 indicates that the difference is statistically significant (95% confidence interval). protein flexibility is a critical factor in binding as it may not only change the binding interface between two proteins but also be an important contribution to the entropy penalty upon binding. therefore, we have investigated the protein flexibility of the rbd domains for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov by analyzing their coordinate trajectories. figure 3 shows two ensembles of selected trajectories over a period of 10 ns simulations for the rbd proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. the figure also gives a comparison of the root mean square fluctuations (rmsf), a rough measurement of protein flexibility, for the rbds of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. it can be seen from the figure that the rbd of sars-cov-2 shows a significantly higher rmsf than that of sars-cov. in other words, the sars-cov-2 rbd is much more flexible than the sars-cov rbd. the flexibility is especially higher in the loop of residues 470-490 near the binding site than in other regions ( figure 3a ). that means that sars-cov-2 must overcome much more entropy penalty than sars-cov when binding to human ace2. as we know, the binding free energy between two proteins can be expressed as, ∆g = ∆e − t∆s, where ∆e is the interaction energy, ∆s is the entropy loss upon binding, and t is the temperature of the system. as ∆s is negative here, the binding free energy will become higher and the binding will become weaker with the increasing temperature. therefore, the rbd-ace2 binding affinity for sars-cov-2 is expected to decrease much faster than that for sars-cov when the temperature increases. in other words, sars-cov-2 is much more temperature-sensitive than sars-cov in terms of rbd-ace2 binding. namely, sars-cov-2 will decrease its infection ability much faster than sars-cov when the temperature rises. therefore, it is expected that sars-cov-2 would become less infectious compared to sars-cov, and the disease prevention and control for sars-cov-2 may get easier when the weather gets warmer/hotter, although the drug and vaccine development targeting the rbd protein may be more challenging because of the high protein flexibility near the binding site. previous studies showed that sars-cov-2 is highly homologous to human sars-cov and attaches host cells through the binding of the spike protein to the angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2). however, the molecular mechanisms of sars-cov-2 binding to human ace2 and evolution of sars-cov-2 remain unclear. in this study, we have extensively studied the rbd-ace2 complex, spike protein, and free rbd protein systems of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov through protein-protein docking and md simulations. it was found that sars-cov-2 can bind human ace2 with a higher binding affinity than sars-cov, which may partly explain that sars-cov-2 is much more infectious than sars-cov. the spike protein of sars-cov-2 shows a lower free energy than that of sars-cov, suggesting that sars-cov-2 may be more stable and able to survive a higher temperature than sars-cov. this may also provide insights into the bat origin of sars-cov-2, as bats have a higher body-temperature than humans. in addition, the sars-cov-2 rbd exhibits a significantly higher flexibility than sars-cov rbd, especially near the binding site. that means that sars-cov-2 must overcome a higher entropy penalty in order to bind ace2 and is thus more temperature-sensitive than sars-cov in human infection. therefore, with the rising temperature, sars-cov-2 is expected to decrease its infection ability much faster and become much less infectious than sars-cov, which would make the disease prevention and control of sars-cov-2 easier. from the above results together, one may infer that unlike sars-cov, which was gone after 2003, sars-cov-2 might survive a high-temperature environment like summer in which the virus is not active/infectious due to the high flexibility in the rbd, and then become infectious again when the temperature is low in the winter. these results may have a far-reaching implication for the disease prevention and control as well as drug and vaccine development for sars-cov-2. the devastating impact of covid-19 infections caused by sars-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has stimulated unprecedented international activity to discover effective vaccines and drugs for this and other pathogenic coronaviruses. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] it has also raised important questions on the mechanisms of zoonotic transfer of viruses from animals to humans, questions as to whether companion animals or those used for commercial purposes can act as reservoirs for infection, and the reasons for the large variations in sars-cov-2 susceptibility across animal species. [17] [18] [19] understanding how viruses move between species may help us prevent or minimize these pathways in the future. elucidating the molecular basis for the different susceptibilities of species may also shed light on the differences in susceptibilities in different sub-groups of humans.very recently, shi et al. published the results of experiments to determine the susceptibility to sars-cov-2 of ferrets, cats, dogs, and other domesticated animals. 20 they showed that sars-cov-2 virus replicates poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens, and ducks, but ferrets and cats are permissive to infection. other studies have reported the susceptibility of other animal species to sars-cov-2. 17, 20, 21 susceptible species such as macaques, hamsters and ferrets are used as animal models of sars-cov-2 infection. [22] [23] [24] in the absence of purified, isolated ace2 from all the relevant animal species that could be used to measure the molecular affinities to spike protein experimentally, computational methods offer considerable promise for determining the rank order of affinities across species, as a method to impute which species may be permissive to sars-cov-2.here we show how computational chemistry methods from structure-based drug design can be used to determine the relative binding affinities of the sars-cov-2 spike protein for its receptor, angiotensin converting enzyme (ace)-2, a critical initiating event for sars-cov-2 infection, across multiple common and exotic animal species. [25] [26] [27] the aim of these studies was to better understand the species-specific nature of this interaction and see if this could help elucidate the origin of sars-cov-2 and the mechanisms for its zoonotic transmission.to construct the three-dimensional structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein, the sequence was retrieved from ncbi genbank database (accession number yp_009724390.1). a psi-blast search against the pdb database for template selection was performed and the x-ray structure of sars coronavirus spike template (refcode 6acc) was selected with 76.4% sequence similarity to sars-cov-2 spike protein. the protein sequences of the ace2 proteins for different species is summarized in table 11 and full sequence alignment in supplementary figure 1 . the phylogenetic tree for ace2 proteins from selected animal species is illustrated in supplementary   figure 2 . the 3d-structures were built using modeller 9.21 (https://salilab.org/modeller/). 28 the quality of the generated models was evaluated using the ga341 score and dope scores, and the models assessed using swiss-model structure assessment server (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/assess). 29the x-ray crystal structures of human ace2 (recode 3sci) and human sars spike protein (refcode 5xlr) were retrieved from protein data bank. protein preparation and removal of nonessential and non-bridging water molecules for docking studies were performed using the ucsf chimera package (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/). 30these modelled structures were docked against sars-cov-2 spike protein structure using the hdock server (http://hdock.phys.hust.edu.cn/). 31, 32 molecular docking was performed on the homology modelled sars-cov-2 spike protein with human and animal ace2 proteins. the sars-cov spike protein was also docked with human ace2 protein to obtain the docking pose for binding energy calculations. the docking poses were ranked using an energy-based scoring function. the docked structures were analyzed using ucsf chimera software.the final models were optimized using the amber99sb-ildn force field in gromacs2020(http://www.gromacs.org/). 33 docked complexes (sars-cov-2 spike with human ace2, human sars-cov spike with human ace2, sars-cov-2 spike with bat ace2 etc) were used as starting geometries for md simulations. simulations were carried out using the gpu accelerated version of the program with the amber99sb-ildn force field i periodic boundary conditions on an oracle cloud server. docked complexes were immersed in a truncated octahedron box of tip3p water molecules. the solvated box was further neutralized with na+ or cl− counter ions using the tleap program. particle mesh ewald (pme) was employed to calculate the long-range electrostatic interactions. the cutoff distance for the long-range van der waals (vdw) energy term was 12.0 å. the whole system was minimized without any restraint. the above steps applied 2500 cycles of steepest descent minimization followed by 5000 cycles of conjugate gradient minimization. after system optimization, the md simulations was initiated by gradually heating each system in the nvt ensemble from 0 to 300 k for 50 ps using a langevin thermostat with a coupling coefficient of 1.0/ps and with a force constant of 2.0 kcal/mol·å2 on the complex. finally, a production run of 100 ns of md simulation was performed under a constant temperature of 300 k in the npt ensemble with periodic boundary conditions for each system.during the md procedure, the shake algorithm was applied for the constraint of all covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms. the time step was set to 2 fs. the structural stability of the complex was monitored by the rmsd and rmsf values of the backbone atoms of the entire protein. finally, the free energies of binding were calculated for all the simulated docked structures. calculations were also performed for up to 500 ns on human ace2 to ensure that 100ns is sufficiently long for convergence. duplicate production runs starting with different random seeds were also run to allow estimates of binding energy uncertainties to be determined for the strongest binding ace2 structures.the binding free energies of the protein-protein complexes were evaluated in two ways. the traditional method is to calculate the energies of solvated sars-cov-2 spike and ace2 proteins and that of the bound complex proteins and derive the binding energy by subtraction.δg (binding, aq) = δg (complex, aq) -(δg (spike, aq) + δg (ace2, aq)we also calculated binding energies using the molecular mechanics poisson boltzmann surface area (mm-pbsa) tool in gromacs that is derived from the nonbonded interaction energies of the complex. 34, 35 the method is also widely used method for binding free energy calculations.the binding free energies of the protein complexes were analyzed during equilibrium phase from the output files of 100 ns md simulations. the g_mmpbsa tool in gromacs was used after molecular dynamics simulations, the output files obtained were used to post-process binding free free energy decomposition analyses were also performed by mm-pbsa decomposition to get a detailed insight into the interactions between the ligand and each residue in the binding site. the binding interaction of each ligand-residue pair includes three terms: the van der waals contribution, the electrostatic contribution, and the solvation contribution.another estimate of the strength of the interaction between protein-protein complex can be obtained from the non-bonded interaction energy between the complex. gromacs has the ability to decompose the short-range nonbonded energies between any number of defined groups. to compute the interaction energies as a part of our analysis, we reran the trajectory files obtained during simulation to recompute energies using -rerun command. the interaction energy is the combination of short range coulombic interaction energy (coul-sr:protein-protein) and the short-range lennard-jones energy (lj-sr:protein-protein (see table 3 ).while this paper was being prepared, a paper by guterres and im described a substantial improvement in protein-ligand docking results using high-throughput md simulations. 36 they employed docking using autodock vina, followed by md simulation using charmm. the parameters they advocated were very similar to those used in our study. proteins were solvated in a box of tip3p water molecules extending 10 å beyond the proteins and the particle-meshewald method was used for electrostatic interactions. nonbonded interactions over 10 and 12 å were truncated. their systems were minimized for 5000 steps using the steepest descent method followed by 1 ns equilibration with an nvt setting. for each protein-ligand complex, they ran 3 × 100 ns production runs from the same initial structure using different initial velocity random seeds and an integration step size of 2 fs.the ancestry of sars-cov-2 traces back to the human, civet and bat sars-cov strains, which all use the same ace2 proteins for cellular entry. [37] [38] [39] the similarities and variations in sequences for both the sars-cov-2 spike protein and the sars spike protein were determined from sequences retrieved from ncbi genbank databank and aligned using clustalw. the spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd) region showed a 72% identity between the two viruses ( figure 1 ).conserved regions in black and non-conserved residues in red and blue.the three-dimensional structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein ( figure the ramachandran scores of the modeled ace2 structures for selected species are summarized in table 1 with the actual predicted ace2 structures and ramachandran plots for each selected species shown in supplementary figure 3 . figure 3) . the modelled structures were further assessed for quality control using ramachandran plot and molprobity scores in swissmodel structure assessment. the ramachandran plot checks the stereochemical quality of a protein by analyzing residue-by-residue geometry and overall structure geometry, is also a way to visualize energetically allowed regions for backbone dihedral angles ψ against φ of amino acid residues in protein structure. the ramachandran score of sars-cov-2 spike protein was 90% in the binding region and molprobity scores that provide an evaluation of model quality at both the global and local level was 3.17. further, the ace2 modelled structures from selected species were also assessed using swiss model structure assessment. ramachandran score or the percentage of amino acid residues falling into the energetically favored region for all species ranged from 96-99% (table 1) . these ramachandran and molprobity scores show that all the built structures were of good quality and were suitable for use in further studies. the ramachandran graphs are presented in supplementary figure 3 .the receptor binding domain (rbd) of sars-cov-2 spike protein was docked against ace2 receptor of various species using hdock server. the interacting residues of ace2 and sars-cov-2 spike protein are depicted in table 3 . we found certain key amino acids in the receptor binding motif (rbm) that were in accordance with previous studies 40 . certain amino acids including phe28, asn330, asp355 and arg357 were conserved in ace2 of most of the selected species and were observed to take part in the interaction with spike protein. tyr41, lys353, ala386 and arg393 also interacted with spike protein residues and were highly conserved across all species except bat, mouse, ferret and pangolin, respectively. spike protein interacting residues with ophiophagus hannah (king cobra) were least common amongst all the ace2 species included in the study, consistent with its low sequence similarity to human ace2. homo sapiens (human)the molecular dynamics simulation of complexes of sars-cov-2 spike protein and ace2 receptors of various species were performed for 100ns. all complexes became stable during simulation with rmsd fluctuations converging to a range of 0.5 to 0.8 nm from the original position. the calculated binding energies for the interactions of sars-cov-2 with ace2 from the species studied are presented in table 4 . the table 4 also includes observational in vivo data on sars-cov-2 infectivity and disease symptoms in the species where this has been reported. although bats carry many coronaviruses including sars-cov, a relative of sars-cov-2, direct evidence for existence of sars-cov-2 in bats has not been found. as highlighted by our data, the binding strength of sars-cov-2 for bat ace2 is considerably lower than for human ace2, suggesting that even if sars-cov-2 did originally arise from a bat precursor it must later have adapted its spike protein to optimise its binding to human ace2. there is no current explanation for how, when or where this might have happened. instances of direct human infection by coronaviruses or other bat viruses is rare with transmission typically involving an intermediate host.for example, lyssaviruses such as hendra are periodically transmitted from bats to horses and then to humans who contact the infected horse. similarly, sars-cov was shown to be transmitted from bats to civet cats and from them to humans. to date, a virus identical to sars-cov-2 has not been identified in bats or any other non-human species, making its origins unclear. to date, the most closely related coronavirus to sars-cov-2, is the bat coronavirus, batcov ratg1, which has 96% whole-genome identity to sars-cov-2. 50 hence other genetic factors could underlie the apparent lack of susceptibility of dogs to covid-19 clinical infection.it is known that gain of function (gof) mutations occur in viruses that can lead to pandemics. gof means viruses gain a new property e.g. in influenza virus gof has been associated with the acquisition of a new function, such as mammalian transmissibility, increased virulence for humans, or evasion of existing host immunity. 49 the conditioning of viruses to humans as pandemics progress is well recognized. however, the sars-cov-2 structures and sequences that we employed were from viruses collected very early in the pandemic. it is therefore not clear how sars-cov-2could have developed such a high affinity for human ace2, notably higher than for those of putative zoonotic sources for sars-cov-2, unless it has been previously selected on human ace2or an ace2 of another species bearing a closely homologous spike protein binding domain.interestingly, pangolin ace2 bears some similarities in its sbd to human ace2. this marries with the fact that pangolin-cov shares a highly similar rbd to sars-cov-2, although their remaining sequence has only 90% similarity. this could be consistent with a process of convergent evolution whereby human and pangolin coronaviruses infecting via ace2, have come to the same solution in respect of evolving an optimal spike rbd for binding of either human or pangolin ace2, respectively. our data does indicate that humans might be permissive to pangolin covs that use ace2 for cell entry, a fact that needs to be borne in mind in respect of future potential coronavirus pandemic sources. however, this does not mean that pangolin ace2 was the receptor on which the sars-cov-2 spike protein rbd was initially selected, with the strength of binding to pangolin ace2 lower than binding to human ace2. this makes it unlikely that pangolins are the missing intermediate host. if sars-cov-2 spike was selected on pangolin ace2, then given the higher affinity of sars-cov-2 for human ace2 than for bat ace2, sars-cov-2 would have to have circulated in pangolins for a long period of time for this evolution and selection to occur and to date there is no evidence of a sars-cov-2 like virus circulating in pangolins.another possibility would be a short term evolutionary step where a pangolin was recently coinfected with a bat ancestor to sars-cov-2 at the same time as it was infected by a pangolin cov allowing a recombination event to occur whereby the spike rbd of the pangolin virus was inserted into the bat cov, thereby conferring the bat cov with high binding for both pangolin and human ace2. such recombination events are known to occur with other rna viruses and can explain creation of some pandemic influenza strains 49 . nevertheless, such events are by necessity rare as they require coinfection of the one host at exactly the same time. most importantly, if such a recombination event had occurred in pangolins it might have been expected to have similarly triggered an epidemic spread of the new highly permissive sars-cov-2 like virus among pangolin populations, such as we now see occurring across the human population. currently there is no evidence of such a pangolin sars-cov-2 like outbreak, making this whole scenario less likely.indeed, pangolins might be protected from sars-cov-2 infection due to the existence of crossprotective spike rbd neutralising antibodies induced by exposure to pangolin cov, given the rbd similarity of these two viruses. another possibility which still cannot be excluded is that sars-cov-2 was created by a recombination event that occurred inadvertently or consciously in a laboratory handling coronaviruses, with the new virus then accidentally released into the local human population.given the seriousness of the ongoing sars-cov-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the sars-cov-2 virus. in particular, it will be important to establish whether covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether covid-19 has alternative origins. this information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future.on when a rapid viral replication ensues cell-to-cell spread, and acute inflammation begins to mount. uncontrolled viral replication and dysregulated host immune responses may be the leading cause of fatality by sars-cov-2. despite many studies, the underpinnings of high virus infectivity remain poorly understood. therefore, it is essential to dissect the genomic control of sars-cov-2 infectivity and virulence for the rational designing of therapeutic agents.the genome. the genomic constitution of sars-cov-2 does not appear to be unique in the background of the disease pathology. the mers-cov share ~51% genome sequence identity to sars-cov and sars-cov-2. two other β human coronaviruses (hcovs), hcov-hku1, and hcov-oc43 also share ~51% genome identity to sars-cov and sars-cov-2. yet they cause a common cold instead of acute respiratory distress. human α-coronavirus nl63 and 229e strains which are even further diverged from the β-hcov genomes also cause a common cold. even essential genes like the rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) have diverged, for example, rdrp from sars-cov-2/sars-cov is only 71-72% identical to mers-cov (table s1) . therefore, what gene or genomic feature(s) distinguishes each virus is an important consideration in understanding its infectivity and spread across hosts.the spike. among all coronaviruses, spike is a key gene that determines infectivity due to its established role in initiating virus-host attachment, fusion, entry, and cell-to-cell fusion post replication 3 . the expressed protein executes its function through a trimeric quaternary structure, with each monomer segmented into the s1 and s2 domains, where s1 consists of the n-terminal domain (ntd) and the c-terminal domain (ctd), while the s2 (also known as the fusion domain) consists of the fusion peptides (fps), central helix (ch), heptad repeat regions hr1 and hr2, and a transmembrane domain (tm) followed by the cytoplasmic tail (cp) (fig. 1a) . the ntd or ctd embeds the receptor-binding domain (rbd) depending on the individual virus. in sars-cov-2 the ctd embeds the rbd. the rbd recognizes the host-cell and mediates the virus-host attachment, while the s2 domain drives the viral entry into the host cell and cell-to-cell fusion by catalyzing the virus-host membrane fusion process. the tm anchors the protein in the viral membrane, while the fps contribute to the trigger that drives the virus-host membrane fusion process. a transition pathway has been proposed to proceed through a pre-hairpin intermediate structure followed by pre-bundle hemifusion membrane-associated structure, bundle structure, and the eventual post-fusion structure 8 . it is remarkable that despite their similarity in function, βcoronavirus spike proteins have widely diverged, with the rbd diverging further (21%-61% pairwise sequence identity), explained in part by the diversity of its host receptor targets like the human ace2 for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, dpp4 for mers-cov, and 9-o-ac-sia for hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1. the s2 domain has also diverged, but comparatively less with >33% overall pairwise sequence identitythe heptad repeat regions being the most conserved (fig. 1b) . it is pertinent to ask what features of spike sequence and structure determine the virus fusogenicity and infectivity.spike glycosylation. densely glycosylated spike protein has been suggested as the prime reason for the high sars-cov-2 infectivity 3 . this extensive glycosylation of the s2 domain is driven by an intracellular n-terminal signaling peptide for transport and retention in the endoplasmic reticulum (see fig. 1b multiple sequence alignment 9 bottom panel). however, this signal sequence is absent in a fellow murine β-coronavirus mhv-a59 spike protein 10 , indicating limited glycosylation. yet, mhv-a59 aggressively infects the mouse liver and brain. upon intracranial inoculation in mice, it can cause acute stage meningoencephalitis and myelitis, chronic stage demyelination, and axonal loss [11] [12] [13] . it infects the neurons profusely and can spread from neuron to neuron. its propagation from grey matter neuron to white matter and release at the nerve ends to infect the oligodendrocytes by cell-to-cell fusion 12 are robust mechanisms to evade immune responses and induce chronic stage progressive neuroinflammatory demyelination concurrent with axonal loss in the absence of functional virions 12, 14 . therefore, high infectivity of the mhv-a59 spike does not appear to be contingent on glycosylation and one can argue the same for sars-cov-2 spike, where its glycosylation may only marginally raise the basal fusion efficiency. surface glycosylation thus may not be a contributing factor to host cell binding, although the successive virus-to-cell and cell-to-cell fusion may all-together play an important role in higher virus infectivity.it has been suggested that enhanced virus-to-cell infection can be propelled by the increased number of hydrogen-bonded contacts between sars-cov-2 rbd and ace2 receptor leading to higher affinity and improved host targeting compared to the sars-cov 3, 4 . however, such a proposition is weak because the rbds in all hcovs are diverse, including sars-cov, where the minimal rbd (318 to 510 residues) shares only 74% sequence identity with sars-cov-2 (fig. s1 ). besides, a significantly higher affinity between ace2 and sars-cov-2 has not been experimentally corroborated 15 . also, the sars-cov-2 spike may interact with other receptors such as dc-sign and dc-signr as in sars-cov to increase tropism 16 and viral spread. therefore, there is no direct consequence of ace2 recognition with infectivity unless a virus entry can be realized; however, when rbds interact with ace2 in large numbers during the acute stage of the infection, they may modulate the host immune response by downregulating hydrolysis of the pro-inflammatory angiotensin ii to anti-inflammatory angiotensin 1-7 in the renin-angiotensin signaling pathway 17 . this can alter the immune response and increase infectivity. but such effects can manifest only beyond the early stage of the infection, and for that to happen the efficiency of viral entry is the rate-limiting step.spike cleavage. the cleavage of the spike protein is said to prime it for the virus-host membrane fusion process. how essential is this for virus fusogenicity and infectivity is an important consideration. the spike cleavage potentially removes any in situ covalent and noncovalent constraints that the s1 domain may impose on the s2 domain impeding its conformational transition that facilitates the virus entry. the comparison of the s1/s2 cleavage signal sequence shows that sars-cov-2 has an "rrars" furin recognition site, similar to mhv-a59 spike's "rrahr" required for activity 5 (fig. 1b) . in contrast, the canonical cleavage recognition sequence is missing in sars-cov with only a single arginine present there. a regular cleavage at this site has not been reported, and cleavage by trypsin has been shown to activate the virus independent of the ph. the cleavage site signal at s2' is highly conserved across all hcovs in contrast to the s1/s2 cleavage signal (fig. 1b) . the importance of this region has been aptly corroborated by s2' site cleavage studies in sars-cov 18 . besides, it is also possible for spike to be activated by the low ph environment through protonation of residues if it internalizes in the endosome post interaction with the host receptor. on the contrary, fusion processes are known to happen in mhv-a59 spike without cleavage as well 19 . therefore, the sars-cov-2 spike appears competent to access multiple pathways for priming that enhances its infection capability, including the possibility that it can infect without a cleavage as well.among all the components of the fusion apparatus in the spike s2 domain, the fps are the least studied although they have been suggested to contribute to the trigger that drives the virus-host fusion process by initiating the protein-host membrane contacts. limited experimental information available shows mutation in fp of sars-cov spike can significantly perturb the fusion efficiency 20 as much as >70% 21 . most studies of the fp regions have used synthetic peptides in a fusion assay system to understand their membrane perturbing capabilities [22] [23] [24] [25] , and how ca +2 ions may interact with these peptides to modulate fusion 8 . interestingly, the fps also contains a central proline 26 in several viruses such as the avian sarcoma/leucosis virus 27 , ebola virus 28 , vesicular stomatitis virus 29 , and hepatitis c virus 30 , where its important role has been investigated through mutation studies. the location of coronavirus fps proximal to the nterminal of the s2 domain is reminiscent of fps from hiv-1, influenza virus, and paramyxoviruses. they have been suggested to be at the head a pre-hairpin intermediate structure 31 predicted for the current model of class i viral fusion proteins.given that fps are believed to the early initiators of protein and host membrane contact there is still no consensus on their location. for example, the fusion peptide for sars-cov-2 spike has been cited at 788-806 position by xia et al. 32 compared to 816-833 by wrap et al. 3 . when inferred from alignment to sars-cov spike, two additional fp segments at 875-902 position and 1203-1220 can be proposed based on experimental studies by ou et al. 33 and guillén et al. 23 , respectively. in reality, all four spike fusion domain segments (fp-i to fp-iv; fig. 1b ) mentioned can be identified by a simple window-based analysis using interfacial hydrophobicity scales such as from wimley and white 34 . given that fp-1 to fp-iii are contiguous to each other in the sequence, the whole segment spanning the beginning of fp-1 to the end of fp-iii can be termed together as the "fusion loop" (fig. 1a) . but how these fps in the loop can act synergistically to trigger the membrane fusion process has not been understood yet.spike receptor binding and fusion peptide: a structural perspective. to understand the synergy of the fps in the trigger process, it is important to understand the structure of the spike protein in the proper context. the fp-i to fp-iii are surface exposed and are contiguous to each other in space as seen from the three-dimensional structures of the spike fusion domain (fig. 2 , cartoon diagrams). while fp-i to fp-iii are always surface exposed in the full-length, the fp-iv is deeply buried and interface the virus membrane. therefore, while fp-i to fp-iii are always available for early contacts with the host membrane, fp-iv can participate in the process post the conformational transition which may expose it for interaction with the host membrane. to understand what guarantees the fp surfaces to make the initial protein-host membrane contact, one must look at the possible modes of virus-host attachment through the spike. for example, if three rbds in the trimeric structure finds a host receptor, it can attain a tripod binding mode (fig. 3a) . a recent structure of the trimeric spike complexed with a host receptor reveals the precise geometry of ceacam1 binding the rbd of spike from mhv-a59 35 . however, a tripod binding requires receptor molecules on the host membrane to be pre-available in a specific arrangement. high expression of receptor molecules on the host cell surface is expected to increase the probability of tripod binding, but there is no existing information whether such a precise arrangement is present on the host surface suitable for interaction with the trimeric rbd. moreover, the membrane bilayer structure does not contain any feature that can direct such regular host receptor arrangement. it may be noted that only in a tripod arrangement, the pre-hairpin/prebundle helices of the fusion domain are expected to interact head-on with the host membrane and the n-terminal segment of the s2 domain will interact early during the protein-membrane contact. in such a situation, the existing model of structural transition will follow 8 . fp-i and fp-ii are located middle of the cylinder-like spike s2 structure (fig. 3a) and a conformational transition is needed to place them near the head of the cylinder. here, fp1 is expected to make the early hostmembrane contact if the cleavage is at the s1/s2 site and fp-ii if the cleavage is at the s2' site (see fig. 1a ). the fp-iii region has limited scope to make any early contact due to its farthest position from the host membrane surface. in tripod binding mode the virus membrane is still ~150å away, and the three hr2 regions need to fold back and bind to the hydrophobic grooves of the hr1 trimer in an antiparallel manner to bridge this gap and form a hemifusion structure with the host membrane 8 .spike fusion peptide trigger. alternately, if only one or two rbds bind the receptor, the vertical anchoring of the spike fusion domain relative to the host surface is not feasible based on simple structural considerations. also, a recent trimeric structure of sars-cov-2 spike has shown a single rbd to be in open conformation 3 . in such a state, the interaction of the open rbd with the host (fig. 3b) is not expected to stabilize the spike anchoring in any specific orientation relative to the host due to the weak interaction with the fusion domain. here a post-cleaved s2 domain is expected to interact side-on to the membrane surface through a "belly" landing to trigger the fusion process (fig. 3c) . it is to be noted that the shape of the trimeric s2 domain is not a proper cylinder, but with a bulge in the mid-segment which we call a "belly". the fp-ii and fp-i surfaces are located at the crest of this bulge, such that it is able the make the initial contact with the host membrane. the structural constraints that guarantee the "belly" landing can be understood from the overall geometry of the spike (fig. 3d) . the relative location of the ntd in spike form three vertices of a triangle, while the fp-i to f-iii are located midpoint of the sides, forming the vertices of an inner triangle. if the receptor attachment is in two rbd locations, the s2 landing will be close to the midpoint of the two vertices of the outer triangle coincident to the fp surfaces. even for one-legged attachment, the contact must always be directed towards the midpoint of the two ntds because that allows maximum contact surface to be formed where the spike can stably rest on the host surface. during the contact, the membranotropic segment of the fusion loop spanning the fps is expected to engage the host membrane during the fusogenic conformational change. in this case, the fp sites are proximal to the virus membrane surface such that hemifusion membrane structures can be initiated early in comparison to the tripod-binding mode which requires an intermediate pre-hairpin structure to be formed. it is also to be noted that weak rbd binding to s2 domain or disintegration of the spike trimer post tripod binding can mimic the one-or two-legged binding mode.the physicochemical property of the fusion loop and the synergy of the fps therein is critical to the rapid initiation and transition to the hemifusion stage of the membrane fusion process. the reorganization of the fusion loop and formation of the eventual six-helix bundle would have its side-face making maximum possible interface while contacting the host surface. since the exerted force during the conformation transition is tangential to the host surface, the orthogonal frictional forces may allow an efficient scything action based on the physiochemical nature of the contact engaged by the fusion loop. the nature of the initial surfaces of the fusion loop can be obtained from the electrostatic potential of the fp-i to fp-iii surface patches 36 (fig. 2, surface diagrams) . among the six spike proteins considered in this study, sars-cov-2 has the most hydrophobic/neutral electrostatic fp patches (white colored) most suitable for membrane disruption. it also has the least amount of highly negative electrostatic surface (red colored patches) which repel the attachment of the s2 domain to the host membrane due to the repelling hydrophilic surface of the outer membrane composed of negatively charged fatty acid groups. on the other hand, a positive electrostatic surface (blue colored patches) may allow protein surface to tightly attach to the membrane exterior through charge attraction. the presence of an interfacial ion like the ca +2 can cap the negative charge at the fp surface to assist fusion trigger -consistent with the membrane charge compatibility requirements. the disruption efficiency of surface patches is, therefore, likely to be highest for the hydrophobic/neutral, followed by the positive and negative electrostatic potential, unless modulated by an interfacial cation like the ca 2+ . one may argue that large patches of negative electrostatic surface potential (red color) in the hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43 spike fusion domain may explain the mild nature of those viruses.aside from the electrostatics, the physical rigidity of the fusion loop in spike is of prime importance for the virus fusogenicity. this is because the spike fusion domain being metastable, any local alteration of rigidity has global implications for the molecule. this has been alluded to by the mutation studies on the fusion peptide central prolines [27] [28] [29] [30] , but its criticality was recently revealed from our comprehensive studies on centrally located consecutive prolines in mhv-a59 spike fusion peptide 6 . proline being an imino-acid with unique structure, has restricted torsional freedom, which in turn restricts the torsional freedom of the protein backbone where it is located 37 . when two consecutive prolines are located, the rigidity of the protein backbone is further enhanced. among the six spike proteins in our study, three has a single central proline in fp-i, and two centrally located consecutive prolines occur in sars-cov-2 spike fp-1. there are no central prolines in fp-ii and a single conserved central proline in fp-iv, while consecutive prolines exist at a central location in hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, and mhv-a59 fp-iii spikes. to understand the intrinsic flexibility/rigidity of the surface exposed fps, we set up a 500 ns molecular dynamics simulations 38 using charmm forcefield 39 (fig. 4) . the starting structures of all the fp-i fragments are devoid of stable secondary structures such as helices or sheets and is dominated by turns, and irregular structures indicating that the region prefers to be in a loop conformation. this is true even for the mhv-a59 spike, which is flexible as experimentally evidenced by the lack of coordinate from the electron density map for complete fp-i in the pdb file: 3jcl. in comparison, fp-iis in all cases are dominated by helical conformation, with the nterminal fp segments always in a helical state. this is true for fp-iii region fragments as well. given an irregular structure, the effect of proline is more dramatic on the fp-i region in contrast to fps from fp-ii and fp-iii which are already stabilized by hydrogen bonds in helices. for all fps in the fp-i region, although local secondary structures are induced during simulation, the lowest root-mean-square fluctuation (rmsf) for a residue is achieved only by the sars-cov-2 consecutive proline containing fp. this can also be confirmed from the energy landscape plot created from the molecular dynamics simulation trajectory (fig. s2) where it has the most compact single conformational well among all the fp-is. if we look at the fp-iii regions where other consecutive proline containing fps exist, hcov-oc43 has the lowest rmsf; sars-cov-2 fp-iii segment does not have any central proline, but it contains a unique "thr-ile-thr" segment constituted of three consecutive β-branched side-chain residues that can impart substantial rigidity based on steric considerations 37 if not as much as the consecutive prolines. this can be again confirmed from the energy landscape plot which shows a single compact conformational well in contrast to the other fp-iiis (fig. s2) . the observations are consistent with our previous comparative molecular dynamics studies 6 on mhv-a59 fp-iii and single central proline containing fp-iii from another parental non-neurotropic strain of murine hepatitis virus (mhv), mhv-2, where we found the fp-iii from the former became more rigid than the latter in methanolic conditions compared to water. additionally, nmr studies on the mhv-a59 fp-iii fragment revealed its unique ability to form cis-peptide at the central p-p peptide bond 6 . a cistrans isomerization during the membrane fusion process has the potential to expose the hydrophobic residues efficiently around the isomerized-peptide neighborhood, enhancing the fusion trigger potential. while the structural role of proline cannot be discounted, other stabilizing interactions also dominate the fps, among which the formation of the aromatic/hydrophobic clusters is of relevance to the fusion process (see fig. s2 for examples). as observed from the packing of the loops, a combination of aromatic and val/ile/leu side chains pack tightly to exclude water. but when these regions become exposed during the conformational transition, they would enhance the hydrophobic interaction of the protein surface with the membrane. in all s2 domains, however, fp-iii regions are in part masked by the fp-i segment, as evident from the relative solvent accessible surface area (sasa) values indicated in fig. 4 . the fp-iii region can get fully exposed post cleavage at the s2' site which dislodges the sheathing fp-i segment, or when the site gets progressively exposed during the conformational transition amidst the fusion process.experimental corroboration. additional evidence of "rigidity" imparted by proline being critical for virus fusogenicity, infectivity and pathogenicity can be obtained from our previous in vitro and in vivo studies 6 . we generated the spike containing two consecutive prolines at 938-939 (s-mhv-a59(pp)) in the fp-iii and its proline deletion (δ938) mutant s-mhv-a59(p) from isogenic recombinant strain of mhv-a59, rsa59 6 spike protein. the proline deleted mutant only spike gene construct s-mhv-a59(p) show slower trafficking to the cell surface, and significantly less fusogenicity. established on differential properties of proline deletion in spike construct, we generated proline deleted targeted recombinant mutant strain rsa59(p-) which contains s-mhv-a59(p) and compared it with two consecutive proline-containing parental isogenic strain rsa59 containing s-mhv-a59(pp). proline deleted mutant rsa59(p-) infection in neuronal cell line demonstrated less aggressive and fewer syncytia formation, and one order lower viral titers postinfection in vitro. based on these in vitro differential properties of proline deletion in spike construct we generated proline deleted targeted recombinant mutant strain of rsa59(p-) which contains s-mhv-a59(p) and compared it with two consecutive proline containing parental isogenic strain rsa59 containing s-mhv-a59(pp). the in vivo studies in mice parallels the in vitro studies demonstrating significantly reduced viral replication and consecutive disease pathologies, like less severity in meningitis, encephalitis, and demyelination, and inability to infect the retina nor induce loss of retinal ganglion cells 40 . the non-neurotropic strain mhv-2 sharing 91% genome identity with mhv-a59, and 83% pairwise spike sequence identity, with a single central proline in fp-iii, causes only meningitis and is unable to invade the brain parenchyma.computational studies of s2 fusion domains of s-mhv-a59(pp) and mhv-2 spike involving molecular dynamics confirmed the former to be more rigid and containing more residues in the regular secondary structure 6 .target for therapy. our study brings out the importance of the fusion loop region which could be a legitimate target for the design of vaccine or synthetic agents for therapy against covid-19. the s2 domain serves as a better therapeutic target than s1 due to higher evolutionary conservation, but the few attempts made have mainly focussed attention on the heptad repeat regions 8 . two important features that also make the fusion loop an attractive therapeutic target are its accessibility due to its surface exposure in the full-length spike, and the relatively high conservation of residues in the fusion loop, especially around the fp-ii region which increases its scope as a pan-coronavirus target that can cater to future pandemic threats as well. mimetic peptides can be designed to bind to the fusion loop to inhibit the fusogenic conformational transition of the s2 domain. impairment of the fusion trigger would have a direct bearing on the fusogenicity of the virus and contribute to the reduction of lung invasion and damage that clinically results in acute pneumonia. systematic studies can identify the minimal motif in the fusion loop serving as the fusogenic determinant to improve our selection of a potential therapeutic target to prevent cell-to-cell fusion and subsequent pathogenesis.the interplay of the outlined physicochemical features determines the virus-entry process to become more efficient. the local and global stability of the s2 domain is important. since the s2 domain undergoes a conformational transition, local stability means reasonably rigid moving parts, and global stability means a well-defined conformational transition pathway from the metastable to the stable state. this local and global stability requirement could be attributed to the physicochemical efficiency needed in disturbing the host membrane. secondly, the electrostatic potential of the fusion peptide derived surface patches must be neutral or positive to be able to engage the host membrane. the presence of glycosylation sites adds to the hydrophobicity of the s2 domain surface, but it is a small fraction of the available surface for interaction with the host membrane. the fusogenic conformational transition requires optimal synergy between the physical and chemical properties of the fusion loop to allow a concurrent scything action to rapidly facilitate transition to the host-virus hemifusion membrane state. the free-energy available from the conformational transition of s2 to a more relaxed helical bundle is available to disrupt the host membrane and overcome the kinetic barrier to bring the host and virus membrane lipid bilayers together. the pre-hairpin s2 intermediate as suggested to exist by many researchers may be one of the many conformational states interacting with the host membrane. priming by spike cleavage is important for facilitating the fusion process and therefore a part of the synergy at play. however, the open conformation of rbd seen in pdb id: 6vsb for sars-cov-2 suggests that flexible linker segments loosely connect the rbd back to the fusion domain leaving it relatively free for unfettered conformational transition. therefore, multifarious options to prime and trigger appear to be available to sars-cov-2 for viral entry, which contributes to its increased infectivity. preventing the trigger by inhibiting the fusion loop is therefore a suitable target for therapy. given the importance, a more extensive study of sars-cov-2 spike protein and the mechanistic hypothesis described here is therefore warranted.the sequences used in this study were downloaded from the ncbi database (url:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). the multiple sequence alignments were performed using the t-coffee webserver (http://tcoffee.crg.cat/). the default parameter values for alignment available in the server were used. the server combines several methods to come up with an optimal multiple sequence alignment 9 .all protein three-dimensional structures were downloaded from the protein data bank (http:/www.rcsb.org). the pdb ids for the downloaded structures are hcov-hku1: 5i08, mhv-a59: 3jcl, 6vsj, hcov-oc43: 6nzk, mers-cov: 6q04, sars-cov-2: 6vxx, 6vsb, and sars-cov: 5xlr. structures with the highest resolution was preferred when more than one model was available. coordinates from these files were extracted for obtaining starting models of the fps used in our molecular dynamics simulations. whenever there were missing coordinates, they were modeled as an extended structure in the fp. the sasa was calculated by the program nacess (http://wolf.bms.umist.ac.uk/naccess/); residues for which no atom coordinates are present in the pdb file was considered as fully exposed to solvent while calculating the relative sasa values. the secondary structure was calculated by the secstr program from the procheck suite (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/procheck/). the electrostatic surface potential was calculated using the apbs plugin 36 inside the pymol software (http://pymol.org). the default parameters were used for the calculations. all cartoon diagrams and surfaces were rendered by the pymol software.the molecular dynamics simulations were performed with gromacs software 38 (http://www.gromacs.org). the simulations were performed using the charmm 27 forcefield with cmap 39 . each fp was placed in a cubic box solvated with water (spc model). solvent molecules were randomly replaced with na + and cl − to neutralize the system and bring the final concentration of nacl to 0.1 m. periodic boundary conditions were enforced in all three directions. the system was minimized until the maximum force in the system reached below 1000 kj mol −1 nm −1 . the systems were equilibrated for 2 ns under the nvt ensemble. this was followed by equilibration for 2 ns in the npt ensemble at 1 atm and 300 k. the production run was executed for 500 ns saving the output every 100 ps yielding 5,000 frames for analysis. the analysis of the trajectory was performed using gromacs utilities. the diagrams were created using our in-house software. the electrostatic surface of the fusion domain is shown adjacent to each structure and the corresponding fusion peptide regions are marked by an arrow. the orientation of the cartoon structure and the electrostatic surface are aligned among themselves. note that one face of the electrostatic surface that is visible is repeated on the other side due to the symmetry arising out of the trimeric quaternary structure. the fusion domain structures are shown in cyan for helices, strands in red, and loops in magenta. please refer to fig. 1 for the sequence alignment and its legend for the pdb id of files used to draw the structures. note that a part of the fp-i surface is absent for mhv-a59 and hcov-hku1 due to unavailable atom coordinates in the pdb file. the same is true for a small section of fp-ii from sars-cov-2. for residue details, please refer to fig. 4 . all fp-i regions have at least one asn-linked site, only sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and hcov-hku1 has a site in fp-ii, and hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1 in fp-iii. contiguous to the fp-iii are the heptad repeat regions where the glycosylation and sequence conservation among spike is the highest. spike from mhv-a59 shares a 64-66% overall sequence identity with hcov-hku1 and oc43, 71-76% identity with the corresponding s2 domains. similar match with sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 are at <30% pairwise sequence identity. fig. 3 . schematic diagrams explaining the mode of binding of spike protein to the host receptor and its putative orientation relative to the host membrane surface during the virushost attachment. (a). a cartoon diagram created using pdb id: 6vsj where the spike protein from mhv-a59 is in complex with ceacam1 receptor from mouse. since all three subunits from the spike rbd attach to the receptor, it allows the virus to anchor in a tripod mode. the approximate length of the spike in the longer dimension is indicated along with the fp locations. (b). a cartoon diagram created using pdb id: 6vsb, where one of the rbds are shown in an open conformation. a receptor molecule ace2 has been drawn to show the putative attachment in one-legged mode. two-legged mode may also be possible similarly. (c). the s2 domain of sars-cov-2 spike protein is shown in a belly-landing orientation. the approximate length of the spike in the longer dimension is indicated along with the marked fp locations. (d) a ribbon diagram of the trimeric spike proteins from the six coronaviruses used in this study. two triangles are marked on each structure, where the relative locations of the protruding ntds appear near the outer triangle vertices, and the fp-i, fp-ii, and fp-iii colored surfaces are located near the inner triangle vertices. the triangles are marked to bring out the relative positions of the ntds and the fp surfaces. the spike structure is oriented such that the rbd appears closest to the eye, followed by the ntd and then the fps. the y-axis scales provide values for sasa and rmsf side-by-side. the standard deviation of the sasa in the simulation is indicated by a shaded background around the sasa curve. the x-axis indicates the residues for each fp fragment. the central proline residues are marked in bold and those residues for which the atom coordinates are absent in the pdb file are marked in red. below the residues, the corresponding secondary structures as indicated as present in the full-length protein. the symbols mean as follows, h:α-helix, h: α-helix termini, g: 310-helix, g: 310-helix termini, b: β-bridge, e: β-strand, e: β-strand termini, t: hydrogen-bonded turn, t: hydrogen-bonded turn termini, s: bend, and <space>: irregular secondary structure. the first, second, and third columns are indicated by labels i, ii, and iii corresponding to fp-i, fp-ii, and fp-iii in each spike protein from a given virus, respectively. the relative sasa value of the whole fp fragment in the s2 domain expressed as a percentage is indicated in bold on the top part of each plot. sars-corona virus (cov-2) is the newest member of a large group of viruses coming under the order nidovirales and family coronaviridae and genera beta coronavirus (group 2b).[1] sars-cov-2 consists of four basic structural proteins, which are club shape trimeric “spike protein (s)”, “membrane (m) protein”, “envelop (e) protein,” and helically symmetrical “nucleocapsid protein (n).”[2]the molecular basis of transmission of coronavirus (cov) is already explained in our previous systematic review.[3] the infection process starts with the binding of the spike protein s1-domain to the human host cell receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (aces), which leads to conformational change in the s1 and s2 domain of spike protein. these changes expose the “fusion peptide” of s2-domain, which mediates the fusion of the viral and host cell membranes. the rna genome of the virus is then subsequently released into the host cell. the virus uses host-cell machinery to start the translation process to synthesize necessary polyproteins such as a pp1a, pp1ab which are further processed by proteases to release the nonstructural viral proteins (nsps). the structural proteins (spike, e, n, and m protein) are translated from their respective location in the viral genome. the synthesized structural proteins, nonstructural proteins, and rna genome assembles, which is then transported outside the cell by exocytosis.[4]coming to the presently available pharmacotherapeutic options for the treatment of covid-19, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine,[5] interferon-α, ribavirin, corticosteroids,[3] plasma therapy,[6] intravenous immune-globulins,[7] lopinavir/ritonavir, etc., are the mainstream treatment options; however, most of the agents are being used without major clinical evidence of efficacy and safety. although many therapeutic options are under evaluation in different settings, for example, in silico, in vitro, preclinical, and clinical studies, however, definite evidence of efficacy of any of the agents in clinical settings is still not clear.[2358]sars-cov-2 is 70%–80% similar to sars-cov at the genomic level.[9] recent studies highlighted many important genomic variations in sars-cov-2, for example, the absence of 8a protein, changes in number of amino acid in 3c and 8b protein.[4] the spike protein is also modified by the homologous recombination process.[10] as compared to sars-cov, a mutation (n501t) in the spike protein of sars-cov-2 confers higher-binding affinity of sars-cov2 to the ace2 receptor.[11]better understanding the viral life cycle in terms of structural biology perspectives can help us in identifying druggable targets, which can be approached from drug design perspective. here, we systematically reviewed the available target protein structures of sars-cov2 in relation to the viral life cycle and drug-design perspective.we included peer-reviewed published studies evaluating target protein three-dimensional (3d) structure (nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy structure) with or without bound ligand, with structures deposited and published in rcsb.org. among unpublished studies with structure published in rcsb.org, we included only inhibitor bound structures.after reviewing the full text of the articles, we could find published papers with 3d structures of only four targets, which are spike protein, main protease (also known as main protease [mpro] and 3clpro), rna-dependent rna-polymerase (rdrp), and nsp15 of sars cov-2.the spike proteins are trimeric fusion proteins, with two main domains, the s1 and the s2 domain. the structure the spike protein of sars-cov2 is around 77% conserved when compared to sars-cov.[12] root mean square deviation (rmsd) between sars-cov receptor-binding domain (rbd) and sars-cov-2 rbd is around 1.2 angstrom and rmsd between receptor-binding motif (rbm) of sars-cov and rbm of sars-cov-2 is around 1.3 angstrom, implicating high similarity between these two structures.[13] the affinity of interaction between ectodomain of sars-cov-2 and ace-2 is very high (10–20 fold) as compared to sars-cov, and thus, it contributes to the high infectivity sars-cov-2.[14]the spike proteins are considered as a class-1 viral fusion-protein, and it requires two-step protease cleavages for activation. the site between s1 and s2 is the location of priming cleavage; however, the activation cleavage occurs solely on s2. different protease, for example, trans-membrane protease serine protease-2 (tmprss-2), tmprss-4, human airway trypsin (hat) like protease, cathepsins, etc., are involved in these proteolytic activation process. in cell-based experiments (293/hace2 cells), the expression of different tmprss iso-forms enhanced sars-cov-2 spike protein-mediated cell-cell fusion.[15]the s1-rbd-mediated recognition and attachment to the host receptor (ace2) is a prime-initiating event, which leads to viral and host-cell fusion and other subsequent events. this highlights the importance of detailed understanding of the interactions between the s1 domain of spike protein and ace2.the rbd of the s1-spike protein of sars-cov-2 consists of a core region and the receptor-binding motif (rbm).[16] the core region consists of 5 beta-pleated sheets (1, 2 3, 4, and 7), which are organized in the antiparallel mode. the rbm consists of two short beta-pleated sheets (β5 and β6), loops and alpha helices (alpha 4 and 5). a total of three cysteine residue pairs provide stability to the core and another cysteine residue pair helps in connecting the distal end of rbm.[13] however, the interacting surface between the s1 rbd and ace2 is quite huge (total buried surface area of 1687 angstraon[2] with around 800 å each on the s1 rbd side and ace2 side).[13] compared to sars-cov, many variations were seen in the sars-cov rbd region, for example, in the n terminal, the variations arg426 to asn 439, tyr484 to gln498, and thr487 to asn50 were observed between sars-cov and novel sars-cov2.[17]ace2 also serves as a chaperone to the amino acid transporter boat1 (slc6a19). a full length structure of ace2-boat1 complex is already reported. the complex represent a homodimer (2× [ace2-boat1]) of two heterodimers (ace2-boat1), exhibit closed or open conformation due to shift of the peptidase domain (pd) of ace2. however, the homo-dimerization is mediated by the collectrin like domain (cld).[18] interestingly, the open close conformation of the complex is governed by the state of the peptidase domain of the ace2. the peptidase domain also binds to the s1 domain of spike protein. a dimeric ace2 complex can accommodate two s proteins together. these interactions may play an important role in membrane invagination during endocytosis. however, ace2 may stay as homodimer even in the absence of bo at1.[18] pdb i. d. 6m17 represents a cryo-em structure ace-2 (amino acids 814) in the presence of the transporter b0at1 with and without rbd of “sars-cov-2-spike protein” (resolution of 2.9 angstroms).[18] the structure of “spike-protein rbd” in complex with “ace2-boat complex” is shown in figure 2.the pd of ace2 is the main region responsible for its interaction with the spike protein (dissociation constant [kd] of ~15 nm).[17] the major interactions being h bond between rbd (gln498, thr500, and asn501) with n terminal of ace-2 (tyr41, gln42, lys353, and arg357), tyr453 and lys417 of rbd region bind with middle of the bridge region of ace2 (asp30 and his34), hydrogen bond forms in between gln474 residues of rbd and gln24 residues of c terminal of ace2. phe486 of the rbd shows van-der waal force interaction with met 82 of ace-2.[17]the s2 subunit has a key role in the membrane fusion.[19] the homology between s2 segments of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 is around 89%.[20] the fusion process is initiated by the initial interactions between the rbd of spike s1 domain of sars-cov-2 and the pd of ace2.[20] this process is followed by the interaction between heptad repeat1 (hr1) and heptad repeat2 (hr2) domain of s2 to form a six helix bundle fusion core, which fuses with the host cell membrane.[21] compared to sars-cov-2, an eight residue sequence in the fusion region of s2 of sars-cov-2 imparts more stability to the six helix bundle core.[22] an already established pan cov inhibitor ek1 was also found to be useful against sars-cov-2. by conjugating cholesterol with the ek1, a new molecule was designed (ek1c4), which showed more potent inhibitory action against sars-cov-2.[23]compared to sars-cov, the host membrane fusion ability is higher in the case of sars-cov-2. few mutated amino acids in the hr1 results in enhanced interaction with the hr2 domain.[22] details of interaction between hr1 and hr2 of s2 can be visualized in the pdb: 6 lxt.[22]the s2 domain contains two heptad repeats (hr1 and hr2) and one fusion peptide. in case of sars-cov, critical cleavage at r797 may expose the viral fusion peptide.[24] this fusion peptide-associated fusion platform (bipartite) alters the membrane integrity in the presence of calcium.[25] a proteolytic cleavage in the s2 exposes the fusion peptide. in virology, fusion peptides are used as the mediators for the fusion process as they help lipid membranes to fuse and permeabilize. in case of sars-cov-2, two fusion peptides are recognized that is sarsww-i and sarsww-ii at the n terminal region of spike protein of ncov. however, among these, only sarsww-i peptide robustly divided into the membranes of large unilamellar vesicles and induced the fusion of lipid vesicles causing vesicular aggregation and induced the leakage of lipid vesicles (an indicator of the propensity to perturb membrane integrity).[26]in another experiment, treatment with bafilomycin or ammonium chloride decreased the sars-cov-entry to 293/hace2 cells indicating endocytosis as the possible route of establishment of cellular infection. some phosphoinositides may play an important role in this endocytosis process, for example, phosphatydleinositol 3-phosphate 5 kinase (pipkin) which plays a major role in the synthesis of phosphotydilinositol 3,5 bis phosphate in early endosome. inhibiting pipkin with apilimod resulted in the decreased entry of sars-cov-2 spike pseudo-virion into 293/hace2 cells. however, in the downstream, tcp2 was found to be another major determinant in the sars-cov-2 endocytosis process.[15]after searching the rcsb database, we could find eight structures of spike protein s1 and s2 domain, of which respective study was also published in a peer reviewed journal. however, we could find few structures, of which details were not available in the peer reviewed domain. however, among these structures, we could find one structure (pdb i. d. 6w41) in which rbd of s1 of sars-cov-2 was co-crystallized with a neutralizing antibody (isolated from convalescent sars-cov patients).[12] the pdb i. d. 6vw1 represents sars-cov-2 chimeric rbd crystallization structure complex.[16] the structures 6vxx and 6vyb represent the sars-cov-2 s ectodomain trimer both in both closed and open states. the pdb i. d. 6vsb represents a high-resolution structure (cryo em) of the spike protein (3.46 å) with sequence length of 1288 amino acids.[14] the pdb i. d. 6m0j represents a crystal structure of rbd region of spike protein (s) bound to the ace2 receptor at the resolution of 2.45 å.[13] again, some of the polyclonal antibodies against spike protein of sars-cov also neutralized satrs-cov-2, indicating that the conserved regions of the s epitopes can be targeted for developing a vaccine.[27] however, three sars-cov specific antibodies failed to bind against the spike protein of sars-cov-2.[14]the replicase gene of sars-cov-2 encodes two polyproteins (pp1a and pp1ab), which are necessary for replication/transcription process of the virus.[202829] the main protease and the papain-like protease are the two major proteases, which processes these two polyproteins to release 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps) of polyproteins which results from translation of viral rna.[28]the structure typically contains two protomers (protomer i and ii), each of which consisting of 3 domains (domain i, ii and iii), with around 100 amino acids in each domain. the substrate-binding site residues in the gap between i and ii domain. one interesting feature is that the substrate binding site is highly conserved among all sars-cov main protease and the most variable domain being helical domain iii.[30] in domain iii, five helices cluster is located which implicated in dimerization of mpro through a salt bridge interaction (arg-4 of one protomer and glu-290 of the other protomer). for the catalytic activity, the dimerization is necessary because the n-finger of each protomer interacts with the other protomer through its interaction with residues glu166 and thus helps to form the shape of the substrate binding site.[28] the structure of the main protease is represented in figure 3.m pro has ability to cleave the larger pp1ab at particular 11 sites; the recognition site being leu-gln*-*ser-ala-gly in most of the cases.[28]the mpro crystal structure with an inhibitor (n3) is already reported (pdb i. d. 6 lu7).[30] structure of sars-cov-2 mpro is reported with α-ketoamide inhibitor (pdb: 6y2e,6y2g,6y2f).[28]the genomic organization of covid-19 contains 5' utr, orf-1ab, s, e, m, n gene and utr 3'. among them, orf1ab cover the largest part of viral genome and is responsible for coding of 16 nsp nonstructural-proteins (1-16).[31] nsp3 and nsp 5 encodes the “papain like protease (pl pro)” and “chymotrypsin-like protease (cl pro or m pro)” respectively, while nsp15 shows endo-ribonulease activity.[32]orf1b encoded nsps (12–16) are involved in rna replication/transcription process. these nsps e.g., rdrp and helicase complex comprises the replication transcription complex (rtc).[3233] these rtc are typically anchored in endoplasmic reticulum (er) originated double membrane containing vesicles which are further integrated into convoluted membranes (network of modified er membrane).[33]among the all sars-cov-2 nsp, the only available crystal-structure of is of nsp15 (pdb i. d. 6vww, 371 amino acid, 2.20 å).[34] however, none of the structures of nsp 15 were inhibitor bound. nsp15 belongs to the endoribonuclease (endou) family,[35] which play role in rna processing. nsp15 is an essential element in the coronavirus life cycle.[36] nsp15 is an endoribonuclease nidoviral rna uridylate-specific (nendou), belonging to the endou family. the c-terminal-nendou domain is responsible for the catalytic-function of nsp15. the active site present in between 2 b sheet, which comprises of six conserved residues his235, ly290, his250, thr341, ser294, tyr343.[36] nendou activity of the nsp15 can induce protein-interference in the innate-immune response, however, this effect may be independent of the endonuclease activity also. nsp-15 is a necessary element in the life cycle of for coronavirus.[36]nsp12 also known as a rdrp is a key component in viral life cycle, which plays an essential role in synthesis of viral rna and transcription/replication. nsp7 and nsp8 act are required cofactors for this machinery.[37]the nsp12 structures comprises of the niran domain towards the n terminal end and the rdrp domain toward the c terminal end.[38] niran domain and polymerase domain are linked by an interface domain.[39] the complex structure of rdrp is depicted in figure 4.nsp12 is thought to be a primary target of nucleotide analogues such as remdesvir (antiviral inhibitor), which has the ability to treat sars-cov-2 viral infection.[40] a cryo em structure of nsp12 with remdesvir is reported in complex with triphosphate form of remdesvir, nsp-7 and nsp-8 (pdb i. d. 7bv2, 2.9-å resolution),[41] in presence and absence of dtt.[39]nil.there are no conflicts of interest.spike proteins are located on the surface of coronaviruses and serve as entry proteins for infection (xu et al. 2004 ). the spike molecules form trimers, which must be cleaved by cellular proteases so that the fusion peptide can facilitate the fusion of virus membrane with the infected cells. the proteases generate s1 and s2 subunits from spike molecules, and the s1 subunit contains the critical receptor-binding domain to bind the ace2 receptor on host cells. the receptor-binding motif of the receptor-binding domain, rich in tyrosine, forms direct contacts with ace2. fusion of the virus with host cells involves several other critical structures of the spike protein, including central helix and heptad repeat 1 and 2 domains.spike glycoproteins are major targets for vaccine design and antibody-based therapies for coronaviruses, including middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus; severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 1 (sars-cov-1), which caused a multi-country outbreak in 2002-2003; and sars-cov-2, which is responsible for a pandemic beginning in 2019. several antibodies targeting spike proteins of sars-cov-1 have shown promising efficacy in preclinical trials (berry et al. 2010 , bian et al. 2009 , greenough et al. 2005 , he et al. 2006 , he et al. 2005 , hwang et al. 2006 , ishii et al. 2009 , miyoshi-akiyama et al. 2011 , pak et al. 2009 , prabakaran et al. 2006 , rockx et al. 2008 , sui et al. 2014 , sui et al. 2005 , ter meulen et al. 2006 , traggiai et al. 2004 , van den brink et al. 2005 , zhu et al. 2007 . furthermore, structural studies suggest that domains other than the crucial receptor-binding domain are also potential targets for antibody binding; these include the fusion peptide, heptad repeat 1, and central helix domains (yuan et al. 2017 ) (table si) . in all coronaviruses, spike glycoproteins are densely glycosylated, with more than 20 predicted sites for n-glycosylation. the function of these glycans in immune evasion by the virus remains unknown.in this study, we analyzed a recombinant sars-cov-2 spike protein expressed by insect cells.we acquired tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms) spectrums for all glycopeptides generated by sequential digestion using trypsin and chymotrypsin. we further analyzed the cryogenic electron microscopy structures of the spike proteins to identify surface-exposed epitopes for antibody recognition and vaccine design.a total of 22 n-glycosylation sites were found in the recombinant spike protein of sars-cov-2secreted from bti-tn-5b1-4 insect cells ( figure 1 ). all 22 n-glycosites were confirmed by fragment ions of glycan moieties and characteristic b/y ions derived from peptide backbones (supplemental figure 1 and 2). among them, eight are located in the n-terminal domain, two(n331 and n343) are located in the receptor-binding domain but are outside of the receptorbinding motif (limited to amino acids 438-506), and three are located in the rest of the s1 subunit. nine are located in the s2 subunit. the glycosylation pattern of the spike protein is highly conserved in sars-cov-1, sars-cov-2, and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. the n-terminal and heptad repeat 2 domains are densely glycosylated. the fusion peptide domain is neighbored by n-glycosite n657. in contrast, the receptor-binding motif, central helix domain, and heptad repeat 1 domain are free of glycosylation. the majority of nglycan moieties are a high-mannose type (table sii) , which is consistent with the glycosylation pathway of the bti-tn-5b1-4 insect cell line used to produce the recombinant spike protein. to evaluate the efficiency of glycosylation at every n-glycosite, we calculated the relative ionabundance of glycopeptide and non-glycosylated sequences generated by trypsin and chymotrypsin digestion. all 22 n-glycosylation sites were occupied by n-glycans (table siii) .for 18 of the 22 n-glycosites, more than 90% of ions were glycosylated peptides. for nglycosites 331, 1074, 1158, and 1173, more than 80% of ions were glycosylated peptides. we also searched for the o-glycosylated glycopeptides (table siv) . preliminary analysis indicated that the ion abundance of o-glycopeptide sequences was less than 3% as compared with nonglycosylated sequences for all predicted o-glycosites (t323, t325, s678, s673, and s686).by cryogenic electron microscopy structure modeling (protein data bank [pdb]: 5x58) of the sars-cov-1 spike protein, 14 sites of n-glycosylation were observed. the asn-glcnac groups were identified at the reducing end of the glycans at atomic resolution (pdb: 5x58, 3.2 å), and the density maps of extending glycan chains were still visible although the density was relatively weak (figure 2a , b, and c). the receptor-binding domain region of the sars-cov-1spike protein is densely covered by glycans except fspdgkpctppalncywplndygfytttgigyq, which overlaps with a previously identified "achilles heel" (i.e., vulnerable spot) for antibody binding (berry, et al. 2010) .the spike protein of sars-cov-2 contains 22 n-glycosylation sites (in yellow in figure 2d ).when trimer structures of the s protein of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 are aligned (rootmean-square deviation~1.32 for single chain), the structures are very similar except for a few loops, such as those at the n-terminal of the n-terminal domain (supplemental figure 3 ).sequence alignment and structure comparison revealed that the predicted glycosylation sites are highly conserved. fourteen of 22 sites were observed by cryogenic electron microscopy for thesars-cov-1 s protein, and most predicted sites of sars-cov-2 are located similarly to sars-cov-1 ( figure 2e ). the receptor-binding domains were overall highly conserved with sequence identity (74.5%), structure (root-mean-square deviation~1.14å), and two identical glycosylation sites near the n-terminal ( figure 2f ), while the sequence specificity of epitopes remained unique in some regions (tables i and ii) . a similar surfaced-exposed region, or achilles heel, yqagstpcngvegfncyfplqsygfqptngvgyq, was identified in the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov-2. interestingly, the achilles heel regions for both sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 were also free of glycosylation, whereas its neighboring fragments were covered or interacting with glycosylation. this region free of glycosylation is favorable for ace2 and other protein binding ( figure 2g ).accessible surface area profiling was used for predicting epitopes for monoclonal antibodies (mabs) (supplemental figure 4) . candidate epitopes are listed in table i and figure 3 . in addition to receptor-binding domains, multiple potential candidate epitopes were found from amino acid sequences at fusion peptide, heptad repeat 1, and central helix domains. similar sites were found in receptor-binding domains and central helix domains of both viruses ( figure 3 ).however, unique sites were also found for each virus. for example, a unique epitope existing in sars-cov-2, but not in sars-cov-1, is the rarr (682-685) site for furin recognition (supplemental figure 5 ).to evaluate the conservation of spike epitopes on a structural level, we further aligned the epitopes of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 based on cryogenic electron microscopy structures.eleven predicted epitope pairs were found in receptor-binding domain, heptad repeat 1, and central helix (table ii, figure 4 , and supplemental figure 6 ). two structurally conserved epitope pairs (ah1/ah1 and ah2/ah2) were predicted at the achilles heel region which interacts with ace2 (table ii) . we also identified two conserved epitope pairs located on the surface of the receptor-binding domain but outside the ace2-binding region (i/i and ii/ii). epitope pair ii/ii has been proven to be a target for recognition by mab s309 (pinto et al. 2020 ), a potent neutralization antibody with half-maximal inhibitory concentration (ic50) at 69 ng/ml.neutralizing antibodies toward spike proteins are critical for protective immunity. traggiai et al.reported spike-specific mabs isolated from a patient who recovered from sars-cov-1 infection, with in vitro neutralizing activity ranging from 10 -8 to 10 -11 m (traggiai, et al. 2004) .several other groups have reported mabs targeting spike (berry, et al. 2010 , bian, et al. 2009 , greenough, et al. 2005 , he, et al. 2006 , he, et al. 2005 , ishii, et al. 2009 , miyoshi-akiyama, et al. 2011 , rockx, et al. 2008 , sui, et al. 2014 , sui, et al. 2005 , ter meulen, et al. 2006 , van den brink, et al. 2005 , zhu, et al. 2007 . spike protein has also been the focus for vaccine development. for example, mice vaccinated with dna or subunit vaccines composed of spike proteins (or receptor-binding domain of spike proteins) and adjuvants had high titers of immunoglobulin g antibodies and were protected from sars-cov-1 or middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection (du et al. 2010 , du et al. 2007 , honda-okubo et al. 2015 , iwata-yoshikawa et al. 2014 , li et al. 2013 , lu et al. 2010 , sekimukai et al. 2020 , yang et al. 2004 , zhao et al. 2014 ). toll-like receptor ligands, delta inulin, and monophosphoryl lipid a were reported as effective adjuvants to be combined with subunit vaccines. however, to avoid the useof adjuvant, inactivated sars-cov-1 or recombinant adeno-associated virus encoding the receptor-binding domain of the sars-cov-1 spike protein has also been studied; these induced potent protective antibody responses against infection (du et al. 2008 , okada et al. 2005 , see et al. 2006 , spruth et al. 2006 . the safety and efficacy of antibody therapeutics and vaccines in human clinical trials remain to be studied, as well as the mechanisms for specific vaccine components and formulations. for example, pulmonary pathology was reported when alum was used as an adjuvant for a spike protein subunit vaccine (tseng et al. 2012 ). antibody-induced lung injury was also reported in a macaque model of sars-cov-1 infection (liu et al. 2019) , which highlights the importance of avoiding antibody-mediated inflammation.the receptor-binding domain has been a major focus for antibody and vaccine studies. three antibodies,80r, m396, and f26g19, complexed with the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov-1 have been co-crystalized (hwang, et al. 2006 , pak, et al. 2009 , prabakaran, et al. 2006 ).all three antibodies recognize non-continuous, conformational epitopes (table si) . several mab clones that recognize linear continuous peptide sequences have also been reported (4d5, 17h9, f26g18, and 201), although co-crystal structures are not available yet.in this study, we identified the accessible surface area profiling of the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov-2 and found a vulnerable region, yqagstpcngvegfncyfplqsygfqptngvgyq. previously, the structural counterpart of this region was termed the achilles heel of sars-cov-1 (berry, et al. 2010) . it mostly overlaps with the interface between ace2 and s protein ( figure 2g ). for sars-cov-1, multiple mabs targeting its achilles heel have been generated, including f26g18,4d5,cr3006,m396,fm39,cr3014,f26g19,and 80r (table si) . for antibody and vaccine development, ongoing studies are focusing on epitopes at the achilles heel of sars-cov-2, especially ah1 and ah2 sites (listed in table ii and figure 4) , which directly interact with ace2.however, neutralizing antibodies which do not directly compete with ace2 binding also exist in recovered sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 patients; for example, the cr3022 mab neutralizes sars-cov-1 but not sars-cov-2 (yuan et al. 2020). the s309 mab isolated from a sars-cov-1 patient neutralizes both sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2, and structural analysis revealed its epitope to be a glycopeptide sequence located on the n343 glycosite. notably, this is exactly in structurally conserved regions as we predicted for the ii/ii epitope pair (table ii) . clearly, other epitope pairs predicted in our study are candidate targets to isolate neutralizing antibodies as well.it is well known that predicted epitopes of protein antigens may be masked by glycosylation.complex datasets and algorithms, such as spatial epitope prediction for protein antigens (seppa)3.0, have been developed which are based on training parameters related to interactions of glycans and surrounding amino acids (kong et al. 2015) . however, no experimental data are available on the effect of glycosylation sites on epitope surfaces. with the recent breakthrough by high-resolution cryogenic electron microscopy, many glycoproteins can be solved and modeled with glycosylation sites. here we directly exploit experimental data of the sars-cov-1 spike protein from high-resolution cryogenic electron microscopy and screened epitopes for the sars-cov-2 spike protein by accessible surface area profiling based on homology-modeled structures. by this approach, we have identified an achilles heel of sars-cov-2, as well as11 multiple other surface-exposed epitopes within and outside the receptor-binding domain. for example, in the n-terminal domain (ntd) domain of the sars-cov-1spike protein, mabs specific for linear epitopes have been reported (table si) (greenough, et al. 2005) . mabs specific to other regions of the s1 and s2 subunits of sars-cov spike proteins were also reported (miyoshi-akiyama, et al. 2011). as summarized in table i , promising antibody binding sites within and outside the receptor-binding domain have been identified for sars-cov-2; our future investigations will focus on vaccination studies to validate their function as neutralizing epitopes with preventive and therapeutic effects in virus challenge experiments.dense glycosylation of glycoproteins is a well-known strategy used by viruses to conceal surface peptide epitopes that would otherwise elicit antibody responses, as exemplified by the env protein of human immunodeficiency virus 1. however, after decades of effort, mabs which bind to conformational epitopes on the surface of the env protein have been identified (garces et al. 2015 , kong, et al. 2015 , kong et al. 2013 . most of these antibodies bind to the n-glycan portion neighboring the peptide epitopes, whereas some antibodies such as mab 8anc195 have evolved to recognize peptide epitopes with no dependence on glycan binding (kong, et al. 2015) .for antibodies specific to spike glycoproteins, there are no data available whether their recognition is hindered by the glycosylation of spike. however, antibodies that bind to both peptide and sugar portions of spike glycopeptides exist, such as mab s309 which binds to a glycopeptide epitope on the n343 glycosylation site (pinto, et al. 2020) . we propose a "snake catching" model: a snake-like epitope is elusive and difficult for an antibody to "catch" because of the highly mobile, "wiggly" sugar chains that hide the peptide portion. therefore, to overcome the sugar barrier, a minimum length of peptide portion, either conformational or linearcontinuous, must first be clamped by a paratope. this clamping effect may either be strengthened by sugars close to the peptide epitope or not hindered by sugar modification. clearly, surfaceexposed glycopeptide motifs are critical for vaccine design.in summary, our study clearly identified, by ms, all of the 22 n-glycosites of the sars-cov-2 spike protein. we have identified a list of linear surface-exposed candidate epitopes in the spike proteins of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 and demonstrated the advantages of studying the effects of glycosylation with real cryogenic electron microscopy data. these candidate epitopes are critical for screening for mab therapeutics to treat sars-cov-2, as well as mechanistic studies on vaccine development.spike proteins for sars-cov-2(genbank accession number: mn908947),sars-cov-1 (ab263618),and middle east respiratory syndrome virus (km027290) were predicted by netnglyc.the sequence identity of the spike proteins between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 is as high as 84%, which is sufficient to build an accurate homolog model. the sequence of mn908947 was submitted to swiss-model, and the structural model was built against all available homolog structures as templates. one stable conformation of trimer structure models for sars-cov-2 is very close to the spike protein structure from sars-cov-1(pdb: 5x58), and their root-mean-square deviation of a single protein chain is approximately 1.32å after the two structures were superimposed and compared in pymol( figure 2d and e). s protein was precipitated with trichloroacetic acid solution (6.1n). the protein pellet was subsequently dissolved in 8 m urea in 100mm tris-hcl, ph 8.5. tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (5 mm) was added and incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature to reduce the protein, and iodoacetamide (10mm) was subsequently added and incubated for 15 minutes to alkylate the protein. the protein mixture was digested with chymotrypsin (wako, richmond, va) at a 1:100 ratio at 25°c, followed by trypsin (promega) at 1:50 ratio (w/w) at 37°c. the reaction was terminated by adding formic acid, and the peptide mixture was desalted with a mono-spin c18 column (gl sciences).the desalted peptide mixture was loaded onto a homemade 30-cm analytical column (reprosil-pur c18-aq 1.9-μm resin, dr. maisch gmbh, 360μm od× 75μm id) connected to an easy-nlc all acquired ms/ms and ms data were interpreted and analyzed as described (liu et al. 2017) by using pglyco 2.0 (version 2019.01.01, http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pglyco/index.html) glycopeptide identification and by using byologic v3.5 for quantification. parameters for our database search of intact glycopeptides were as follows: mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions were set as ± 7 and ±20 ppm, respectively. the enzymes were trypsin and chymotrypsin. maximal missed cleavage was 2. fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on all cys residues (c +57.022 da). variable modifications contained oxidation on met (m +15.995 da). the n-glycosylation sequon (n-x-s/t, x ≠ p) was modified by changing "n" to "j"(the two shared the same mass). the glycan database was extracted from glycome db(www.glycome-db.org). all identified spectra could be automatically annotated and displayed by the software tool glabel embedded in pglyco2.0, which facilitates manual verification.parameter settings in byonic were the same as that in pglyco2.0 except that the built-in nglycan database (n-glycan 38 insect glycan) was used for database searching. the o-glycan database was homemade according to previously reported glycan structures by gaunitz et al. (lindberg et al. 2013) . the identified n-glycopeptides were further examined manually to verify the accuracy of identification. the glycopeptides were quantified by byologic based on the extracted ion chromatogram area under the curve.glycosylation sites were solved and determined from high-resolution cryogenic electron microscopy density maps, and only n-acetyl-d-glucosamine (asn-glcnac) was determined to represent a whole glycan due to the glycan flexibility and disorder. thesars-cov-1spike protein structure (pdb:5x58), together with the asn-glcnac sites, were applied for molecular interface calculation with pisa (http://www.ccp4.ac.uk/pisa/). all the amino acids linking or interacting with asn-glcnac were selected and excluded in epitope prediction. besides the interaction between asn-glcnac and amino acids, the effects of the larger structure of glycans extending from every asn-glcnac may also need to be considered, as shown as in figure 2c , although their electron densities are weak.the aforementioned molecular interface calculation procedure was applied to calculate the accessible surface area and screen the corresponding antigen epitopes, except that theglycosylation effect could not be measured because the structure is not yet available. because most glycosylation sites are conserved due to the high similarity between these two spike proteins, we could predict the glycosylation site effects in the sars-cov-2 spike structure as well. when predicted epitopes coincided with the amino acid residues interacting with asn-glcnac, they were removed from the candidates by cross-reference of the sars-cov-1 data. the authors declare no conflict of interest.dapeng zhou, chao peng, and wen zhang designed this study. dapeng zhou, xiaoxu tian, ruibing qi, chao peng, and wen zhang contributed to the collection, analysis, andinterpretation of data. dapeng zhou and wen zhang wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript. (greenough, et al. 2005 , hwang, et al. 2006 , pak, et al. 2009 , prabakaran, et al. 2006 page 2 of 14 banerjee et al. j transl med (2020) 18:281 lives from more than 60,57,853 infected persons globally [1] . the outbreak started from the wuhan province of china and spread at about 216 countries with most adverse effects in china, italy, iran, spain, the united states, france, germany, britain and several other countries. any type of therapeutic strategies starting from the blocking of viral entry, inhibition of spike proteins association with host ace-2 (angiotensin converting enzyme type 2), modulations of interfering kinase activity, inactivation of viral genome expression-packaging and vaccination against this virus is the demand of the present situation. regarding the vaccination strategies, it is assumed that frequent mutation results in anomalies in its surface/spike proteins [2, 3] .mostly resembling the features of sars cov global outbreak (2003, https ://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/), this virus unlikely manifested it's extremely high grade of virulence, spreading capability and stability across the geographical barrier (or specifically colder place, aged persons or specific genders; yet to be clarified) [4] . the positive selective pressure could account for the stability and some clinical features of this virus compared with sars and bat sars-like cov [5] . stabilizing mutation falling in the endosome-associated-protein-like domain of the nsp2 protein could account for covid-2019 high ability of contagious, while the destabilizing mutation in nsp3 proteins could suggest a potential mechanism differentiating covid-2019 from sars cov [5] . nevertheless, nutritional and immunological statuses are also important factors for the screening of the therapeutic strategies for the affected and sensitive persons. possible medications or immunizations from the existing drugs or infusion of convalescent plasma should be conducted with utmost care to the covid 19 patients [6] . advanced precautionary steps and therapeutic interventions should be formulated taking into account of several personal and community factors [7] . development of a successful and reproducible vaccination protocol and its human trial may take longer time for the issues of mutation and large number glycan shield and epitope masking on the sars cov 2 proteins [8] .in a series of medication regimen, 1 (at1r) blockers is used for reducing the severity and mortality from sars-cov-2 virus infections [9] . chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are now being prescribed somewhere to fight covid-19 for the time being [10, 11] . human coronaviruses and other influenza viruses resulted in epidemic in last 2 decade in different parts of the world. the anomalies between severity and spreading between the origin site, china and the other parts of the world (european and north america countries) might have some indication. common human covs may have annual peaks of circulation in winter months in the us, and individual human covs may show variable circulation from year to year. [12] .colder climate and prior exposure to other human coronaviruses, or influenza or flu viruses or possible vaccination against those might develop antibody dependent enhancement (ade) of immunological responses during recent sars cov-2 exposure. ade might have modulated immune response and could elicit sustained inflammation, lymphopenia, and/or cytokine storm [13, 14] . possibly, that could be one of the reasons (more history of exposure with covs beside weaker immune system) for older people being more affected by the present sars cov-2. moreover, both helper t cells and suppressor t cells in patients with covid-19 were below normal levels. the novel coronavirus might mainly act on lymphocytes, especially t lymphocytes [15] . strong inflammatory events could be the initiator of the collapsing environment during covid-19 infection. in most of the death cases in covid-19 infections, acute respiratory failure is followed by other organs like kidney anomalies. in these cases inflammatory outburst might have worsened the infection and post viral-incubation situations [16, 17] . recent studies in experimentally infected animal strongly suggest a crucial role for virus-induced immune-pathological events in causing fatal pneumonia after human cov infections [18] . so, combined anti-viral and anti-inflammatory treatment might be beneficial in these cases [19] . sars-based available immune-therapeutic and prophylactic modalities revealed poor efficacy to neutralize and protect from infection by targeting the novel spike protein. [20] .in this background, critical screening of the spike sequence and structure from sars cov-2 by energetic and ic50 based immune-informatics analysis may help to develop a suitable vaccine. so, in the current study we were intended to analyze the spike proteins of sars cov, mers cov and sars cov 2 and four other earlier out-breaking human corona virus strains. we critically compared sars cov and sars cov 2 spike-proteins, domains, motifs and screened several epitopes based on their energetics, ic50 and antigenicity employing several bio/immuuno-informatics software with regard to their possible glycosylation and mhc/paratope binding effects. the present work might be helpful for the urgent development of a suitable vaccination regimen.the spike glycoprotein sequences of four human coronavirus (hku1, nl63, 229e and oc43), mars coronavirus (nc_038294.1:21455-25516), sers coronavirus (nc_004718.3:21492-25259) were retrieved from virusite: integrated database for viral genomics [21] , tertiary structures of selected coronavirus (cov) spike proteins were predicted/validated using phyre2, protein homology/analogy recognition engine v 2.0 [22] and swiss-model [23] . in phyre2 structures were predicted against 100,000 experimentally designed protein folds. predicted structures were subjected to analysis in swiss-model for qmean z-score calculation which includes cumulative z-score of cβ, all atoms, solvation and torsion values prediction. rampage: ramachandran plot analysis server [24] was used for protein 3d structures quality assessment. the summation of number of residues in favored regions and in additionally allowed regions was considered for percent (%) quality assessment.predicted tertiary structures were visualized and aligned using pymol molecular visualization system. pymol assigns the secondary structure using a secondary structure alignment algorithm called "dss", where the sequences of two structures were aligned first then the structures were aligned. for the visualization of molecules a high-speed ray-tracer molecular graphics system was used.secondary structural analysis and their 3d folding patterns were analyzed in the form of topology using pro-func; a protein function predicting server using protein 3d structures [25] . in protein classification, topology analysis plays an independent and effective alternative to traditional structural prediction. topological differences between two structures indicated differences in protein folding and flexibility.sequence comparisons among selected cov spike glycoproteins were conducted through multiple sequence alignment using clustal x2 [26] . conserved motifs were identified using meme suite (http://meme.sdsc.edu/ meme/cgi-bin/mast.cgi) server. meme suite represents the ungapped conserved sequences which are frequently present in a group of related sequences. the 7 motif number has been defined in the current study for motif finding. whereas, glam2scan tools was used for the identification of gapped motifs within the related sequences. conserved motifs were represented through logo using glam2scan tools of meme suite server. identified motifs were subjected to annotation using protein blast (https ://blast .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast .cgi?progr am=blast p&page_type=blast searc h&link_loc=blast home) and finally functional gene ontology based conserved domain identification was conducted using interpro: classification of protein families interactive database [27] .conserved epitopes of sars cov-2 spike glycoprotein were identified using svmtrip: a tool which predicts linear antigenic epitopes [28] . svmtrip predicts the linier antigenic epitopes by feeding support vector machine with the tri-peptide similarity and propensity scores of different pre-analyzed epitope data. annotation of predicted epitopes was performed through protein blast. svmtrip have gained 80.1% sensitivity and 55.2% precision value with five fold cross-validation. for epitope prediction 20 amino acid lengths was selected.the major histocompatibility complex (mhc) binding efficiency of predicted epitopes was performed using immune epitope database (iedb) and analysis resource [29] . a total of 5 dpa, 6 dqa and 662 drb alleles from mhc class ii were screened for the detection of best interactive alleles on the basis of highest consensus percentile rank and lowest ic50 value. all the analyses were performed on human class ii allele, using frequently occurring alleles (frequency > 1%), peptide length of 9mers was selected; consensus percentile rank ≤ 1 was used for the selection of peptides.antigenecity of predicted epitopes were determined using vaxigen v2.0 protective antigen, tumour antigens and subunit vaccines prediction server [30] . vaxigen v2.0 uses auto cross covariance (acc) transformation of selected protein sequences based on unique amino acid properties. each sequence was used to find out 100 known antigen and 100 non-antigens. the identified sequences were tested for antigenecity by leave-one-out cross-validation and overall external validation. the prediction accuracy was up to 89%.the structure of mhc class ii hla-dra, drb molecule (pdb id: 2q6w, 5jlz) and fully glycosylated covid 19 spike protein structure (pdb id: 6svb) was retrieved from protein data bank (pdb) and docking was performed using hawkdock [31] and zdock [32] server generating 100 docking solutions. among them best 10 were analyzed based on docking scores and binding free energy value calculation.initially the seven preselected spike glycoprotein sequences including the recent outbreaking strain sars cov-2 (covid 19) were subjected to tertiary structure prediction ( table 1 ). the ramachandran plot data and structural alignment data suggests that sars cov and sars cov-2 (covid-2) has higher degree of alignment ( (figs. 1, 2) . position specific multiple sequence alignment also showed the highest similarity of covid 19 with the sars cov (fig. 1) . although having sequential diversity, all the selected spike glycoproteins showed some stretches of conserved sequences (fig. 1 ). the position of n-terminal and c-terminal were found similar between sars cov and covid-19 during topology analysis. on the other hand, a drastic difference was observed in mers cov in arrangement of secondary structures in the tertiary region (fig. 2) .based on the alignment pattern, selected sequences were subjected to analysis different conserved motifs in the protein sequences. a total of 7 conserved motifs were analyzed (fig. 3) . most remarkably all the selected spike glycoprotein sequences were shown to have each 7 motif sequences in similar pattern and some of those conserved motif position were represented in fig. 3 . all the identified conserved motifs were individually subjected to protein blast for functional annotation. where motif 1, 5, 6 and 7 showed similarity with spike protein of human and bat coronavirus origin, motif 2 shared similarities with spike structural protein of mouse coronavirus origin, motif 3 showed similarity with spike glycoprotein s from sars cov and motif 4 with spike glycoprotein from mers cov ( table 2 ). highest percent identity of 91.84% was observed for motif 2. functional gene ontology based conserved domain identification within 7 identified motifs were predicted against interpro database. ipr002552 (corona_s2), pf01601 (corona_s2) domains were found within motif 1, 5 and 6. similar domains were also observed in motif 2, 3 and 4 with an extra domain of ssf111474 (coronavirus _s2 glycoprotein). no such domains were observed in motif 7. identified domains were predicted with membrane fusion function (go:0061025) and receptor-mediated virion attachment to host cell (go:0046813). whereas, those were detected as viral envelope (go:0019031) and integral component of membrane (go:0016021).the epitope probing was conducted only with the covid 19 spike glycoprotein sequence and structure. from the sequence analysis, 10 different locations were found which also showed similarity with sars cov and sars covid 2 spike glycoprotein in protein blast (fig. 4) . also the motif positions within the spike glycoprotein monomer were represented in fig. 4 . epitopes 1, 4 and 5 were not represented in covid 19 spike glycoproteins, as they were found to be embedded within the virus envelop. among the others, epitopes 2, 3, 6 and 7 were found at the interior location of spike glycoprotein monomer but epitopes 8, 9 and 10 were found at the surface of the structure.the proper type of major histocompatibility complex (mhc) selection for identified covid 19 epitope was performed and enlisted in table 3 . all the epitopes were individually screened against 5 dpa, 6 dqa and 662 drb alleles from mhc class ii for best fit analysis. as, we have analyzed the spike glycoprotein of covid 19 which is an infectious particle, transmit from one infected individual to another, alleles of mhc class ii were selected for viral epitope specificity analysis. where hla-drb1*01:13 was observed to bind with 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7b and 8b epitope sequences identified on the basis of ic50 value. among them sequence iiaytmslgaensva (epitope 8b) was shown with lowest ic50 value of 7.11. on the other hand, hla-drb1*04:04 was found for both the sequence of timlccmtsccsclk (epitope 5a) and siiaytmslgaensv (epitope 8a) on highest consensus percentile rank basis. highest value of 9.5 was found for motif 5. similarly hla-drb1*04:08 was observed for the sequences vrdpqtleilditpc (epitope 9a) with highest 9.50 and vsvitpgtntsnqva (epitope 10a) with 7.90 consensus percentile rank value. individual mhc class ii molecules were found for others ( table 3 ). the threshold value of highest consensus percentile rank was selected as 10 for all. as a whole, highest consensus percentile rank value of 10 was observed for sequence qqliraaeirasanl (epitope 3a) and lowest ic50 value of 7.11 was observed for sequence iiayt-mslgaensva (epitope 8b). the antigenic property of identified target sequences from epitopes was also predicted on the basis of threshold value of 0.4. below the threshold value, the sequence has been considered as non-antigenic and sequences with above value were antigenic in nature. a total of 9 antigenic sequences were detected (table 3) , among them two sequences aaeirasanlaatkm (epitope 3b) and itpgtntsnqvavly (epitope 10b) were found with higher threshold value of 0.7125 and 0.7193 respectively.coronavirus spike protein has a masking of n-acetyl glucosamine (nag) at different locations. comparative analysis between glycosylated and non-glycosylated protein revealed some structural modification at the epitope locations. among the identified epitopes 10b with sequence itpgtntsnqvavly (598-612) was found with n linked glycosylation at 603 position. the structural modification of this epitope was analyzed using non-glycosylated protein structure of covid 19 (acc. no.: nc_045512.2:21563-25384) and glycosylated covid 19 protein (pdb id: 6vsb). effect of glycosylation on protein structures revealed that glycosylated conformation was more organized (fig. 5a ) than non-glycosylated one (fig. 5b) . secondary structural comparison between two epitopes showed more organized structure with attached nag residue (fig. 5d) whereas a shorter β-sheet structure was observed when nag is removed from the structure (fig. 5c) . the peptide interactive site of 10b epitope was blocked due to nag attachment. as a result of which antibody binding to the antigen may hamper. the nag residue directly binds with n or asn amino acid residue (fig. 5e) . so the removal of nag from the spike glycoprotein structure is difficult. structural distortion between glycosylated and non-glycosylated epitope 10b at tertiary level indicated that removal of nag may distort the structure of epitope (fig. 5f ). again that may hamper the proper antigen-antibody binding.in this section energetics of epitope attachment with mhc class ii hla-dra, drb was determined in presence and absence of nag at the 10b epitope structure through molecular docking (fig. 6) fig. 6 where amino acid attachment differences were clearly indicated in fig. 6b (fig. 6c) where structural stabilization by hydrogen bond networking was noticed. but, the bindings were less when nag residue was attached . 6f ) . this result indicated that the attachment of nag with epitope also made it difficult for mhc class ii molecules to proper representation of epitope. though, epitope 8 a & b were also present at the surface of the spike glycoprotein but was found to wrapped with a short segment igaehvnnsyecd (651-663) carrying a glycosylation at n residue position 657 (fig. 7a) . as a result of which antibody accessibility to this epitope may also be difficult. whereas, surface epitope 9 with sequence vrdpqtleilditpc (576-590) showed highest antigenecity of 1.1285 (table 3) and highest consensus percentile rank of 9.50 and found free of any direct or indirect nag attachment pattern (fig. 7b) . on that basis, it was further analyzed for mhc ii hla-drb1 (pdb id: 5jlz) binding through molecular docking. among the best 10 docking posture, 8 th was found at the desired position of mhc molecule (fig. 7c) . the best position 1 was represented in table 2 an effort was made for epitope based peptide vaccine development by searching mhc-i and ii classes compatible sites and the results yet to come [33] . in the current study, energetic and inhibition concentration50 based selection of sars cov-2 spike epitope and its possible glycosylation effect/structural-hindrance have been evaluated. this may help in urgent vaccination strategies in the current disastrous situation. predicted structures were analyzed for quality assessment and according to qmean values of two sars strains − 2.82 and − 3.63) for respective models (table 1 ), good quality was observed. qmean values of this indicated the degree of native nature of the predicted structures in an universal scale [23] . very good quality structures were indicated with qmean z-score closest to zero. qmean indicated the overall z-score of cβ, all atoms, solvation and torsion values.but according to the ramachandran plot (table 1) , the quality of all the predicted structures was above 98% indicating good structural prediction.the structural alignment between each sets revealed that sars cov-2 was highly similar to sars cov rather than mers. from both the sequential and structural point of view, higher degree of similarity between sars cov and sars cov-2 might indicate and help in the therapeutic and vaccination strategies with reference to the current global situation. however, an absolute higher degree of virulence and spreading nature of sars cov-2 is of great concern in the present scenario. predicted conserved motifs showed functional similarity with different coronavirus sequences. above analysis indicated that identified motifs were specific for coronavirus and they could be used as the markers for common coronavirus infection detection irrespective of covid 19.among all the selected epitopes, motifs 8, 9 and 10 were found at the surface of the structure, which could be used as the immunological targets for the proper diagnosis and treatment of covid 19. the important issue of epitope finalization could be confronted by the factor of possible transition between pre-fusion and post-fusion spike structural distortion. specific mutant structure has been designed and tested to be resistant to conformational change after ace2 binding and protease cleavage at the s1/s2 site [34] . this may be indicative to searching suitable epitope which may remain unhindered from preto post-fusion state transition.during covid-19 specific epitope designing, 10 different sequences were found at different structural location. among them the location of 3b was more interior but 10b could be used as potent antigen. according to epitope locations (fig. 4) and antigenic nature, other sequences like 8a&b, 9a&b could be the target also. coronavirus spike proteins are glycosylated in nature where n-acetyl glucosamine (nag) is the main component. glycan shielding and possible epitope masking of an hcov-nl63 has been observed which may be the barrier for proper immunogenic responses [8] .on the other hand, glycosylation showed a direct effect on proper structural packaging of viral spike glycoprotein (fig. 5a) . whereas, non glycosylation or removal of glycosylation may distort the structure as proper mhc class ii binding and representation may hamper. among the selected epitopes, epitope 9 with sequence vrdpqtleilditpc (576-590) showed highest antigenecity of 1.1285 and consensus percentile rank of 9.50 (table 3 ) and found any direct or indirect glycosylation pattern (fig. 7b) . and epitope 9 was also formed rigid bonds with mhc ii hla-drb1 (pdb id: 5jlz). so, this could be a target for covid-19 vaccine development. modifications in spike proteins structure during receptor mediated host cell entry and further prediction on post-fusion events may result in success in vaccination strategies or blocking entry. host protease processing during viral entry and how different lineage b viruses can recombine to gain entry into human cells are the points also to be noted [35] . sars cov-2 induced severe and often lethal lung failure is caused due to its inhibition of ace-2 expression [36] . so, keeping the ace-2 normal functioning but blocking viral entry is the most challenging issue right now. possible suitable epitope as screened in the current study may be helpful in this global pandemic situation. the history of last movement that generates the 'up' and 'down' conformations (7, 8, 10) . other betacoronaviruses, like sars-cov, mers-cov and distantly related alphacoronavirus porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (pedv) also have this apparently stochastic rbd movement (11, 12) . the combination of rbd up-down rearrangement may lead each s1-head of the trimeric prefusion spike protein of coronavirus to adopt different possible conformations: (i) 3down, (ii) 1up-2down, (iii) 2up-1down, and (iv) 3up (fig. 1c) . among them 3down, 3up are symmetric conformers and 1up-2down, 2up-1down are asymmetric conformers. single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) determined few such symmetric and asymmetric structures referred to as the receptorbinding inactive state and receptor-binding active state, respectively (8) . the asymmetric structure where one of the rbds rotates up was thought to be less stable for sars-cov s (10) . in comparison, the recent cryo-em study found three rbds in 1up-2down conformation as a predominant arrangement in the prefusion state of 2019-ncov s trimer (7) . this arrangement apparently appears legitimate for sars-cov-2 s in order to explain the higher affinity of 1up-2down for ace2 receptor than that of sars-cov s. however, we cannot rule out the possibility of 2up-1down conformation as a functional state, which may provide even stronger binding with ace2 considering the fact that ace2 is a dimeric receptor (9, 13) . this hypothesis is consistent with a recent crystallographic study demonstrating that cr3022, a neutralizing antibody isolated from convalescent sars patients targets the rbd when at least two rbd on the trimeric spike protein are in the up conformation (14) . assembling all these experimental results it is high time to understand the molecular mechanism of s1-head coordination of trimeric sar-cov-2 s and to identify important interaction in regulating spike up-down conformations. a schematic of receptor-bound spike protein including the receptor-binding subunit s1, the membrane-fusion subunit s2 of a coronavirus is shown. b. side and top views of the homo-trimeric structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein with one rbd of the s1 subunit head rotated in the up conformation. c. rbd up-down movement expected to lead s1 heads of the trimeric spike protein to attain the following possible conformers: (i) 3 down (ii) 1up-2down (iii) 2up-1down, and (iv) 3up. these are an analogue demonstration of the spike protein top-view where ntds are represented by colored ovals, rbds are represented by flexible sticks and s2 domains are represented by filled circles.a major challenge was simulating the gigantic structure of the full-length trimeric spike, as it is associated with the largescale conformational transition. it is indeed a daunting task to explore the full conformational landscape at an atomic length-scale. to overcome this, a structure-based coarse-grained molecular dynamic simulation approach has been adopted (15) . the simulation started with a full-length homo-trimeric spike protein structure generated from homology modeling which involves the alignment of a target sequence and a template structure (pdb: 6vsb) (7, 16) . this also helped to build the missing loops. the domain-specific residuerange for the full-length, trimeric sars-cov-2 s is given in fig. 2a . the s1 head coordination of the trimeric spike is programmed by developing a super-symmetric topology-based modeling framework ( fig. 2b ) (described in the method pipeline in the supplementary material). with this, the molecular machine is ready to swing each of its s1 head between its 'up' and 'down' conformations (movie s1, s2). a number of cryo-em structures captured the 'up' and 'down' conformations of the rbd domain of spike proteins of other coronaviruses including sars-cov-2 where the s1 subunit undergoes a hinge-like conformational movement prerequisite for receptor binding (fig. 2c) (7, 8, 10, 17) . apart from the hinge-responsive rbd-cleft interaction, in this study, a few inter-chain interactions are found to assist the 'rbd-up' and the 'rbd-down' conformations (shown in fig. 2d and 2e, movie s3). these few interactions are identified to impact the breathing of rbd of sars-cov-2 s. this makes the early referred 'rbd-up/down' conformations slightly different from the 's1-head-up/down' conformation for trimeric sars-cov-2 s as the former is regulated only by intra-chain interactions while the latter is regulated by both intra and inter-chain interactions (fig. s1 ). after identifying all these unique intra and inter-chain contacts (18, 19) extracted from the corresponding 's1-head-up' and 's1-head-down' conformations, a super-symmetric contact map is generated. this follows the development of a structure-based model hamiltonian (materials and methods in supplementary) which is based on the energy landscape theory of protein folding (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) . this approach not only potentiates the trimeric spike to adopt c3 symmetric '3up' and '3down' states but also to break the symmetry in a thermodynamically governed way ( fig. s1-s4 ) (25, 26) . residue-residue native contact map identifying unique intra and inter-chain contact-pairs formed by any single monomer in its s1-head up and s1-head down states. c. within intra-chain contacts, the unique contacts that drive hinge motion leading to rbd-up and rbd-down states are highlighted in the structure, as well as in the contact map. d. inter-chain unique contacts between rbd and ntd domains upholding the s1-head-up state. e. inter-chain unique contacts are responsible for connecting the rbd of chaina with the s2-stalk of chainb and the s2 stalk of chainc.to monitor the transition between the 's1-head-up' and the 's1-head-down' states for each monomer with the trimeric interactions, a large pool of unbiased longtime trajectories generated where multiple occurrences of up and down states for each monomer have been sampled. we employ a reaction coordinate, q, the fraction of the native contact (19, 27) corresponding to the inter-chain contacts associated with the 's1-head-up' and the 's1-head-down' states. a typical trajectory plot of q extracted from the equilibrium simulation of the trimeric prefusion spike clearly shows the hopping between different conformational states as hypothesized earlier (fig.  3a) . furthermore, the dynamic transitions between the two major asymmetric states (1up-2down: q s1-head-down ≈0.45 and 2up-down: q s1-head-down ≈0.15) are evident in the q-trajectory. analysis of all the simulations yields the 2-d free energy landscape of the trimeric spike protein of sars-cov-2 ( fig 3b) with its all possible conformations. the conformations corresponding to the minima of the free energy landscape are shown in fig.3c . the temperature dependence of conformational transition indicates that the configurational entropy and enthalpy compensation results in the enhanced population of the asymmetric 1up-2down to 2up-1down conformations ( fig s4) . while the predominant population of the 1up-2down state is consistent with the recent cryo-em data, (7) (movie s1, s2) the other asymmetric structure (2up-1down) emerges as a best binding epitope for cr3022 (an antibody collected from convalescent sars patients) according to a recent antibody recognition study of sars-cov-2 s (14). .conformational transition of sars-cov-2 spike protein in its prefused state. a. the fraction of native contact (q) dynamics counting inter-chains contact-pairs formed in the s1head-up state and the s1-head-down state. b. a two-dimensional free energy landscape of conformational transition as a function of inter-chain contacts supporting s1-head-down (x-axis) and s1-head-up state (y-axis) explores all possible conformations. c. the representative structure corresponding to each minimum of the free energy landscape is designated as follows: (i) 3up, (ii) 2up-1down, (iii) 1up-2down, and (iv) 3down state (as shown in the one-dimension population distribution plot). a. unique inter-chain interactions formed by rbd of one chain with ntd of the adjacent chain stabilizing the s1-head-up conformation in sars-cov-2 s (pdb:6vsb). interchain domain closure is analyzed by inter-chain proline-proline distance measurement. the same distance measured for the following spikes: b. sars-cov spike (pdb:5x5b) and c. mers-cov spike (pdb: 5x5f). d. rbd up-down hinge dynamics triggered by inter-chain rbd-ntd domain interaction. e. in the absence of rbd-ntd inter-chain interaction, the hinge motion of rbd is hindered by populating more 'rbd-down' conformations and allows to sample 'rbd-up' conformation only rarely in a stochastic manner.in this study, sequence and interaction level (fig. s5, fig. s1 ) comparison has been made over the cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 s (pdb: 6vsb), sars-cov s (pdb:5x5b) and mers-cov s (pdb: 5x5f) (7, 12) . this comparison results that sars-cov-2 s has ntd-rbd domain association where a proline residue of chaina forms ch-п type interaction with the tyrosine residue (28) and hydrophobic interaction with another proline of chainb (fig. 4a, fig.  s1 ). inter-chain proline-proline distance measurement shows that the corresponding rbd-ntd domains are far away in the case of sars-cov s (fig. 4b ) and further away in the case of mers-covs (fig. 4c ). this measurement involves their respective cryo-em structures. despite the relatively high degree of sequence similarity between the sars-cov-2 s and the sars-cov s and also with the spike protein from the bat coronavirus ratg13, a single histidine residue at the relevant rbd-ntd domain interface is found unique in the vase of sars-cov-2 s (fig. s5) (29) . the imidazole ring of histidine is pointing towards the hydrophobic assembly of aforesaid proline-tyrosine in the juxtaposition of the rbd-s1 hinge region. such inter-chain rbd-ntd connection is thus found to impact the rbd hinge interaction by upregulating more rbd-up conformation (fig. 4d ). in the absence of such interchain interaction, the rbd mostly stays in the down conformation allowing rbd to break the symmetry rarely in a stochastic manner (fig. 4e) . the absence of inter-chain rbd-ntd connection also appears to impact the sars-cov rbd hinge interaction. here, the opening of rbd-s1 cleft is significantly less than that of sars-cov-2 s in their respective s1-head-up state (fig. s6 ). the assistance from the inter-chain rbd-s2-stalk related interfacial contacts are also found to modulate the population dynamics of rbd-down conformation (fig. s7 ). the influence of this inter-chain rbd-s2-stalk interaction has also been observed in an early cryo-em analyses where two proline mutations at the top of s2 stalk (inferring rbd-s2 inter-chain connection) helped to stabilize the 'up' conformers of sars-cov s (30) .the synergy between internal rbd-hinge interactions and inter-chain interactions allows trimeric sars-cov-2 s to adopt a unique dynamical feature than other corona-virus spikes. it appears that the inter-chain interactions driven rapid symmetry breaking strategy potentiates this spike machine to turn on its high-infectivity. the energy landscape framework used in this study indeed helps to unify and compare different spike protein interactions present in other coronaviruses. while in the current situation to develop diagnostics and antiviral therapies are of utmost priority, the present structure-based model derived information at the microscopic interaction level might provide deep insight to design effective decoys or antibodies to fight against 2019-ncov infection. movies s1 to s3method pipeline of building a super-symmetric contact map of sars-cov-2 prefusion spike protein.coarse-grained structure-based simulations have been performed for full-length trimetric sars-cov-2 spike protein. the structure-based hamiltonians for different simulations were derived after processing the recent cryo-em structure (pdb:6vsb) thorough the swiss model to complete missing loops present in the structure (7, 16) . this generates a homo-trimeric sars-cov-2 spike where this initial structure has important components in terms of intra and inter-chain contacts (interaction) leading to an 's1-head-up' and an 's1-head-down' conformation for each protomer. in this prevalent trimeric variant, only one monomer adopts 's1-head-up' and the same of the other two adopts the 's1-head-down' conformation. few characteristic intra-chain contacts cause the receptor-binding domain to perform a hinge-motion resulting 'rbd-up' and 'rbd- conformations driven by intra c as defined in the pipeline method. contact calculation is performed using the shadow criterion (19) .interesting components are inter-chain contacts residing at the interface of the dimer. now, two categories of interactive dimeric interfaces are there: asymmetric-dimer interface and symmetricdimer interface. chaina (s1-head-up) and the adjacent chainb (s1-head-down) represent an asymmetric dimer unit. similarly, chainb (s1-head-down) and the adjacent chainc (s1-headdown) represent a symmetric dimer unit. at the asymmetric-dimer interface, the rbd-domain ofchaina forms a few unique contacts with the ntd domain of the adjacent chainb as shown in has been cycled over all the interfaces making each of interfaces dynamically capable of inducing s1-head movement.developing a structure-based hamiltonian of trimeric spike protein simulation:a structure-based hamiltonian of trimeric spike protein for sar-cov2 is derived using the super-symmetric contact map. in the current structure-based model amino acids are represented by single beads at the location of the c-α atom (15, 25, 31, 32) . the coarse-grained structurebased model, a well-established model, comprehends a novel way to investigate the mechanisms associated with protein folding and function (20-22, 24, 33-38) . in the current context of decoding virus entry mechanism, this model successfully characterized class-i viral fusion protein dynamics including conformational rearrangement of a viral surface glycoprotein, influenza hemagglutinin (ha) during its prefusion and postfusion states (26, 39) .as described in the pipeline method, the complete hamiltonian comprises of two terms: and, intra up down sharedthe first non-local term of the hamiltonian used in a/b/c intra h represents non-bonded interaction potential in the form of 10-12 lennard-jones potential that is used to describe the interactions that stabilize the native contacts (15) . a native contact is defined for a pair of residues (i and j) present in the native state using shadow criteria and when (i−j)>3. δ ij is defined in such a way that if any i and j residues belong to intra c , δ ij = 1 turning on 10-12 lennard-jones potential;otherwise δ ij = 0. for all non-native pairs for which δ ij = 0, a repulsive potential with σ = 4å is used. all the interaction coefficients used in this potential are given in table s1 .as described in the method pipeline, inter h will include only the non-local inter-chain contacts residing at the interface of the dimer which comprises of accounting for asymmetric-dimer similar to our early approach, δ ij is such defined that if any i and j residues belong to inter c , δ ij = 1, turning on 10-12 lennard-jones potential; otherwise δ ij = 0. here, interto begin every simulation an initial structure is energetically minimized under the structure-based hamiltonian using the steepest descent algorithm. atomic coordinates of the energy minimized structure have been evolved using langevin dynamics with a time step of 0.0005 r  . we used an underdamped condition for rapid sampling (40) . for explicit particles, reduced mass of 1 r  and a drag coefficient all temperatures mentioned here are in reduced units. temperature dependence of the conformational transition has been performed over several temperatures. three representative reduced temperature-dependent (t*=0.50t r , t*=0.58t r, and t*=0.83t r ) analyses are shown for clarity in fig. s4 . population distribution as a function of the fraction of native inter-chain contacts formed in the s1-head-down state is monitored over these temperatures. four states emerge as indicated in fig. 3b and fig. s4 . as the temperature increases the population shifts more towards the s1-head-up state. at t*=0.58t r the population of 1up-2down state appears as a predominant population in the conformational landscape which correlates well with the recent cryo-em data (7) . we have performed all our simulations being consistent with this selected temperature. the rmsd analyses ensure the correctness of the simulation progress and the emergence of the correct structure (fig. s3) .the population shifts more towards the s1-head-up state conformations as the temperature increases. it suggests that the s1-head-up states are more dynamic and entropically stable. note that the dynamical transition between 1up-2down and 2up-1down states may tolerate a wide range of temperatures by a population shift mechanism. so far, we have examined that it tolerates the temperature range from t*=0.50t r to t*=1.67t r . temperature dependence of rbd hinge motion has also been studied (fig. s4) . population distribution as a function of the fraction of native intra-chain hinge-region contacts formed by the rbd at different temperatures has been monitored. a bimodal distribution reflects the population of the 'rbd-up' and 'rbddown' states for any individual chain being in trimeric spike. as temperature increases, the rbd-up states start to enhance their populations.free energy calculation:in a system, if a state "a" described by its reaction coordinate, x a (which in our case is the fraction of native contact) is separated from another state "b" described by its reaction coordinate, x b , by a finite barrier, the free energy of transition from a to b can be expressed as,where, ( ) b p x is the probability to find the system in state b at the reaction coordinate, q b . the same holds for ( ) a p x . from a finite set of unbiased simulations of trimeric spike protein, a complete thermodynamic description is obtained. probability distributions are obtained by sampling the configurational space running 50 molecular dynamics simulation sets. fig. s1 : inter-chain interaction from the 's1-head-up' and the 's1-head-down' states of sars-cov-2 spike. a. inter-chain rbd-ntd domain closure in the s1-head-up state. the domain closure is mediated by double hydrogen bonds connecting arg of chaina with asn and cys residue of chainb. b. inter-chain rbd-s2 domain closure in the s1-head-down state. the s2 stalk connection with rbd is mediated by a proline residue of chaina with the formation of a ch-п type interaction with tyrosine and hydrophobic interaction with another proline of chainb. fig. s2 : the structural alignment of two chains in the s1-head-down state. chainb (orange) and chainc (green) in the s1-head-down state extracted from the cryo-em structure (pdb:6vsb) of trimeric spike. low rmsd between these two chains suggests that contact information extracted from any of these chains will be equivalent. this supports our contact map generation shown in the method pipeline. fig. s3 . rms deviation of each chain from their initial state during a typical simulation progress. a. the initial state of chain a in the trimeric spike was in 's1-head-up' state and chain b/c was in 's1-head-down' state. b. the lower rmsd for chain a corresponds to chain a's head-up state. c. the lower rmsd for chain b corresponds to chain b 's head-down state. d. the lower rmsd for chain c corresponds to chain c's head-down state. the rmsd analyses ensure the correctness of the simulation progress and the emergence of the correct structure. fig. s4 . temperature dependence of s1-head up-down transition and rbd open-close breathing transition. a. population distribution as a function of the of native inter-chain contacts formed in the s1-head-down state as shown in fig. s1 . four states emerge as shown in fig. 3b . as temperature increases the population shifts more towards the s1-head-up state conformations indicating that s1-head-up states are more dynamic and entropically stable.note that the dynamical transition between 1up-2down and 2up-1down states may tolerate a wide range of temperatures by a population shift mechanism. b. population distribution as a function of the fraction of native intra-chain hinge-region contacts formed by the rbd. a bimodal distribution reflects the 'rbd-up' and the 'rbd-down' states for any individual chain being in trimeric spike. as the temperature increases, rbd-up started populating more. temperature analysis helps to choose an intermediate temperature to obtain correct population distribution. fig. s5 . sequence alignment of sars-cov-2 spike (pdb: 6vsb) with that of sars-cov spike(pdb:5x5b), mers-cov spike (pdb: 5x5f) and ratg13 spike. only the rbd is highlighted in green. the unique histidine residue (highlighted in yellow) of the rbd of sars-cov-2 is noted. identical residues are denoted by an "*" beneath the consensus position. the multiple sequence alignment is continued over the next page. fig. s6 .the opening of rbd-s1 cleft in the 's1-head-up' state of sars-cov-2 s differs from that of sars-cov s. the opening is measured by a characteristic distance between a serine and proline residues at two edges of the cleft. for sars-cov-2 s the distance is 2.43 nm while for sars-cov-s, it is 1.65nm. it appears that inter-chain rbd-ntd connection influences the sars-cov s rbd hinge motion significantly where the cleft opening is supported by those inter-chain interactions. fig. s7 . the free energy landscape in the presence and absence of inter-chain rbd-s1 contacts. a. in the presence of inter-chain rbd-s1 contacts, the enhanced population of the 1up-2down compared to 2up-1down. b. in the absence of inter-chain rbd-s1 contacts, the population shifts from 1up-2down state 2up-1down state.movie s1: conformational dynamics of full-length trimeric sars-cov-2 spike protein showing rapid symmetry breaking.movie s2:conformational dynamics of full-length trimeric sars-cov-2 spike protein showing rapid symmetry breaking. in this movie the ntd domains are not shown for better demonstration of the rbd movement.movie s3: conformational dynamics of a monomer of the full-length sars-cov-2 showing rbd hinge motion.the recent pandemic of covid-19 is the third outbreak of the diseases caused by beta coronavirus in humans, following severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) (cui et al., 2019) . by 13th march 2020, over 1.7 million of global population has been infected with mortality rate of 21% in closed cases (who covid-19 situation report-84). genetically, etiological agent of covid-19, sars-cov-2, is closely related to sars-cov compared to mers-cov (wu et al., 2020) . similarly, like for sars-cov, angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2) has been identified as the primary receptor for sars-cov-2 spike protein (li, 2015; lan et al., 2020) . whereas mers-cov spike protein interacts with the dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) as the first site of attachment to the host cell (li, 2015) . spike protein of sars-cov-2 is 1273 amino acid long protein with two functionally distinct regions, s1 and s2, involved in the attachment and entry of the virus, respectively. sars-cov-2 entry in the host cell is mediated by proteolytic cleavage of its spike protein, a process dubbed as priming. recently, human transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) has been shown to carry out the priming of the sars-cov-2 spike protein by generating two distinct fragments of the viral spike protein, s1/s2 and s2' (hoffman et al.,recently, co-crystal structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein complexed with ace2 receptor has been resolved unraveling the finer details of intermolecular interactions (lan et al., 2020) . the however, no complex structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein with tmprss2 has been resolved to date. moreover, the molecular structure of human tmprss2 protein is also not known.resultantly, structural details of intermolecular interactions between sars-cov-2 and tmprss2 are largely unknown. although, like many other protease inhibitors (zhang et al., 2020) , tmprss2 inhibitor has been suggested and/or shown to antagonize the entry of the virus into the host cells (hoffman et al., 2020). this study aims to investigate the interaction points between tmprss2 and sars-cov-2 spike protein using an array of bioinformatic tool. the findings not only provide structure-function relationship of tmprss2 of humans but also predict the sites of interactions between tmprss2 and sars-cov-2 spike protein. this could lead to the development and/or directed screening of disruptor and/or inhibitor molecules.protein sequence of human tmprss2 (o15393) was retrieved from uniprot and subjected to human tmprss2 is 492 amino acid long protein with three functional domains: an n-terminal ldl-receptor class a domain (113-148) followed by srcr (153-246) and finally at c-terminal peptidase s1 domain spanning from 256 to 487 amino acid ( figure 1a) . till now molecular structure of the protein has not been resolved and our xtalpred analysis showed the least possibility for this molecule to be crystalized, potentially due to the high percentage of coiled structure, isoelectric point and surface hydrophobicity ( figure 1b ). this may be the reason that therefore, we used multiple approaches to develop the full length molecular model of tmprss2. the finally selected refined model of tmprss2 has 96.32% residues within the allowed regions of ramachandran plot, which is acceptable considering the n-terminal portion of the protein was predicted to be intrinsically disordered. secondly, it has been demonstrated rather frequently that many of the resolved structures of the proteins such as usp7 (pdb id: 2f1z) have more than 20% of the residues outside the allowed region in ramachandran plot.moreover, gibbs free energy values (-14212.818 kk/mol) and prosa z score (-6.89) both suggest structural reliability of the model ( figure 1c;d) .full length molecular models of tmrpss2 has considerable structural homology with the template molecule (pdb: 1z8g), where the deviation between the cα back bone of model and template was found as 0.33å ( figure 1e ;f). all three domains, ldl-receptor class a, srcr and peptidase s1, formed distinct structural units in the molecular model. n-terminal region and ldl-receptor class a of tmprss2 were found more or less unstructured ( figure 1g ;h).putative ca 2+ biding residues (asp134, his138, asp144, glu145 and ile256) were found on a the entry of the sars-cov-2 in the host cell is driven by the proteolytic cleavage of its spike protein resulting in the formation of two fragments, s1/s2 and s2' (hoffman et al., 2020) . the precise positioning of the proteolytic cleavage sites have been mapped by sequence comparison and found to be at the junction of arg685/ser686 and arg815/ser816. the cleavage at the later site results in the production of s1/s2 and s2' fragments, which is necessary for the viral entry (table 1 ; figure 2d ).whereas, at the second cleavage site (arg815/ser816), out of the three residues of catalytic triad, his296 and ser441 established hydrogen bond interactions with pro809, lys814 and ser810 of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (table 1 ; figure 3d ). ser810 also formed a hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interaction with ser460, substrate binding site, and his296, catalytic site of tmprss2, respectively (table 1 ; figure 3d ). since the functionally important residues of (table 1 ). in order to explore the druggability, interacting residues of tmprss2 for each cleavage site of sars-cov-2 spike protein were assessed for the volume, area and drug score. consistent to the molecular docking simulations, intermolecular interactions between tmprss2 and arg815/ser816 of sars-cov-2 spike protein appeared as a suitable target for drug designing and development ( figure 2e -f; 3e-f).human tmprss2 is a 70kda protein, a member of large superfamily of serine protease, mainly expressed in prostate, colon, stomach, and salivary gland (vaarala et al., 2001) . in prostate gland its expression is regulated by androgens and found overexpressed in prostate carcinoma (afar et al., 2001) . physiologically, the protein is important in the functioning of epithelial sodium transport (donaldson et al., 2002) and angiogenesis (aimes et al., 2003) . therefore, the present study could also be advanced in relation to explore the effect of natural polymorphism found in human tmprss2 on priming of sars-cov-2 spike protein.the authors declare that they have no conflict of interestnovel coronavirus diseases outbreak or coronavirus disease-2019 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is probably the biggest threat for mankind today. most of the countries, as many as 225 countries, have become victims of this pandemic viral infection. 1 hitherto, more than 2.47 lacs death have been recorded alongside 35 lacs individuals are infected with covid-19 throughout the globe. 1 the first evidence on the recent outbreak of covid-19 has been diagnosed for causing pneumonia amongst the infected individuals from wuhan, china at the end of 2019. 2 covid-19 is considered as a β coronavirus of 2b group and phylogenetic studies revealed that covid-19 belongs to the family coronaviridae and order nidovirales. 3 alike other flucausing viruses, covid-19 is also an rna containing virus having a protein core/capsid surrounding its rna genome comprising a positive-sense single-stranded rna. [4] [5] [6] the virus transmits from human-to-human via sneeze, cough, and respiratory droplets. 6, 7 the actual mechanistic insight of the pathogenesis of sars-cov2 is yet unclear. this is due to the dearth of knowledge that why the virus has selected human as a principal host and how the virus escapes the human innate immune system. especially, the interaction between the viral antigens and human toll-like receptors (tlrs) as well as the mechanistic insights of cytokine storm affecting multiple human organs are particularly unknown. however, the pathophysiology of covid-19 typically involves entry of the virus through respiratory droplets into the respiratory system, principally the alveoli of lungs, through the airways. 8 the viral glycoprotein on its capsid typically termed as "spike protein" binds to the angiotensinconverting enzyme-2 (ace-2) receptor and the rna genome enters the host cell (mostly the alveolar cells) via receptor-mediated endocytosis. 8 after entering the host cell, the viral rna replicase is formed from the messenger rna results in rapid replication of the viral rna and other necessary structural proteins. 9 on the other hand, the interaction between the viral antigen(s) and host immune cells results in the induction of proinflammatory responses which trigger vasodilation, an increase of vascular permeability, and accumulation of humoral factors. all these factors cumulatively cause fever and majorly interrupts gaseous exchange to cause breathing difficulty. 9 lack of complete understanding about the pathogenesis and immunological peculiarity of the virus made the situation more alarming to mankind. currently, no specific drug or vaccine is available to challenge this myriad threat. recent studies have suggested a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin or drugs used for conventional antiretroviral therapy (remdesivir) could be effective for treating patients with covid. 10, 11 several studies have attempted to present epitope-based vaccine candidates for the speedy emergence of an effective vaccine against covid-19. 12, 13 considering the current scenario of covid-19 pandemic, the present study aims to add a novel dimension to the existing knowledge of covid-19 biology. we have presented a comparative picture on the phylogeny, antigenicity, and structural insights on the major infective protein, that is, spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mers-cov) as well as their cognate receptor ace-2 from different animals through in silico analyses. in addition, we have also explored the involvement of the possible pattern recognition receptors that most likely recognize the viral spike protein and involved in the host-pathogen interaction in sars-cov-2 infection in human though biocomputational approach. to study the protein-protein interaction, the 3d structure of the wild-type sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein (pdb id: 6vyb) was retrieved from the rcsb protein data bank, which was actually determined de novo by using cryo-electron microscopic technique with a resolution of 3.20 å. 14 the spike glycoprotein sequences from all the selected organisms were first subjected to multiple sequence alignment using clustalw algorithm using the mega x software suite (ver. 10.1 64-bit windows). thereafter, the alignments were used for constructing the phylogenetic tree by neighbor-joining method in the mega platform. furthermore, phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using bootstrapping analyses with 1000 replications to assess the confidence of the developed phylogenetic tree.to study spike protein-ace interaction, homology modeling was used to model the structure of the ace2 receptors using the retrieved amino acid sequences using the software modeller 9. the stereochemical quality of the so built models was evaluated by plotting ramachandran plots using the structural assessment tool provided by the swiss-model web server (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/). the retrieved sequences of the ace2 receptors of the organisms (horseshoe bat, malayan pangolin, and human) were used to determine the hydrophobicity based on kyte-doolittle algorithm by using protscale web server (https://web.expasy.org/protscale/). the server was also employed to construct plots of percent accessible residues for each ace2 receptor protein. furthermore, the antigenic propensity of the proteins was also predicted and plotted through kolaskar and tongaonkar algorithm. antigenic peptides finder tool from the immunomedicine group server (http://imed.med.ucm.es).vadar (volume area dihedral angle reporter) server was also used to assess the structural contents of ace2 protein. the phylogenetic relationship amongst spike protein of sars-cov-2 and its homologs is described in figure 1a . the phylogenetic reconstruction generated an unrooted phylogenetic tree that resembles a close phylogenetic relation between sars-cov-2 and bat cov ratg13 and were found to share a monophyletic group ( figure 1a ) supported by a high bootstrap value (bv) value of 100.we have also found that spike protein of sars-cov does not share the same clade with mers cov and, therefore, are phylogenetically distantly related viruses ( figure 1a ).after studying the phylogenetic distance among the major strains of coronavirus, we studied the sequence divergence of ace2 receptor protein, the major receptor of sars-cov-2. herein, the phylogenetic relationship revealed that ace2 protein is distinct in character amongst the different genus of the animal kingdom (figure 1a ). for example, human and gorilla are closely related mammals with minimum change in the genome and phylogeny of ace2 receptor also supports the same figure 1a . since this clade is supported by a low bv (50%), it is inferred that the receptor protein in human could have followed a different ancestor than that of the gorilla. interestingly, ace2 of the bat was found to be comparatively closer to human ace2 while pangolin (m. javanica) was found to be a distantly related one.our phylogenetic analysis revealed a close relationship amongst the spike proteins of sars-cov-2 (infecting human) and bat coronavirus.on the other side, the ace2 receptor found to have distinct characteristics. we have studied the molecular characteristics of ace2 from human, bat, and pangolin separately ( figure 2 ). analyses of the homology model corresponding to pangolin, bat and human ace2 suggested that both human and bat possess similar content (55%) of alpha-helices in the native structure of ace2 while pangolin-ace2 contains 53%. the proportion of beta-sheet in the 3d structures ace2 of bat, human, and pangolin was 7%, 8%, and 9%, respectively.relative proportions of random coils in the ace2 structures were found to be 23%, 35%, and 37%, respectively for ace2 protein from bat, human, and pangolin origin (figure 2a ).the assumption of any biochemical or biophysical characteristic from the theoretically designed protein structure is dependent on its stereochemical quality. herein, the ramachandran plot of ace2 for each organism demonstrated that most of the residues are present in the favored region and hence possess good stereochemical stability ( figure 2b ). the percentage of accessible residues of human ace2 was found to be close to bat but different from pangolin ( figure 2c ).while considering the plots for percentage accessible residues choudhury and mukherjee | 3 ( figure 2c ), it is clear that the ace2 receptor of r. sinicus has much more accessible residues near the ligand-binding region as compared to those of the other two. hydrophobicity is also considered as an important property of the receptor protein and we have presented the pattern of hydrophobicity of ace2 from the three different organisms we studied ( figure 2d ). the pattern of hydrophobicity of ace2 of human was also found to follow a similar trend to that of the bat but not to that of the pangolin. in fact, the hydrophobicity plot of bat (r. sinicus) showed deeper peaks below the "0.0" midline as compared with the plots of the other two organisms.the current debate on the origin of the pathogenic transformation of coronavirus is the origin of the virus which may have a connection with bat or pangolin. to investigate this postulation, we conducted molecular docking of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 with the ace2 receptor of human, bat, and pangolin ( figure 3) . we have observed different degrees of binding interactions between spike protein and its receptor (ace2) from human and two of the most suspected zoonotic hosts/reservoirs (figure 3 ). the order of strength of binding was spike protein-bat ace2 > spike proteinhuman ace2 > spike protein-pangolin ace2 (table 1) . interaction between spike protein of sars-cov-2 and bat ace2 was found to be the strongest ( table 1 ). the interacting surface between spike protein and ace2 majorly consisting of hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction as depicted in table 1 . interestingly, the interacting surface of ace2 of human was also found to be similar to bat figure 3 and table 1 . upon close examination, it was observed that the receptor-binding domain of the sars-cov-2 spike protein majorly comprises leu, glu, ser, asn, phe, pro, and asp, while the ligand-binding region of the ace2 receptors of bat and human are consisted of glu, pro, asn, ala, and val ( figure 3 and table 1 ). the binding potential of spike protein is also supported by the antigenicity of sars-cov-2 that reveals increasing abundance antigenic peptides in sars-cov-2 in comparison to the two other strains of coronavirus, that is, sars-cov and mers-cov (table s1 ).sars-cov-2 pathogenesis principally involves disruption of physiochemical barriers, while the immunopathological consequences in f i g u r e 1 phylogeny of spike protein and its cognate receptor ace2. a, phylogenetic tree depicting the relationship amongst different coronaviruses. b, unrooted phylogenetic tree depicting the evolutionary route of human ace2 receptor. values indicated in each tree depict the corresponding %bv value. ace2, angiotensinconverting enzyme-2; bv, bootstrap value human majorly involve respiratory inflammation. 15 the extracellular domains of the surface tlrs were found to interact with the spike protein in the docked protein complexes (figure 4 ).the binding interfaces between the tlrs and the spike protein were consisted of hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions (table 2) . interestingly, more fine and high valued antigenic peaks found in the antigenicity plot for spike protein were majorly detected at the interacting face of the spike protein, that is, tlr-binding region ( figure s1 and table s1 ). asn122, asn121, ser94, thr208, and his206ser113, gln60, thr78, ser124, tyr127, and gln139hydrogen bond phe140, ile210, leu241, leu242, val83, and pro82pro178, val59, ala80, and leu73hydrophobic interactions asn137, ala93, tyr265, tyr266, his66, ser98, asn121, asn122, and thr124tyr633, ser646, asn636, tyr641, cys133, thr496, and gln139hydrogen bond bat (rhinolophus sinicus) −44.4leu242, ala93, phe135, phe140, and ile100pro178, met270, met640, leu186, pro138, and pro688hydrophobic interactionshis66, ser98, thr124, asn211, asn121, and asn125tyr649, ser646, gln175, thr662, gln139, and val670hydrogen bondala123, ala264, ile210, phe65, and ala27pro135, leu179, ile126, and leu642abbreviation: ace2, angiotensin-converting enzyme-2.tremendous ability of infection, transmission, and producing fatal outcomes. 8 there are considerable debates currently going on among the scientific communities regarding the emergence of covid-19.in in the present study, our data suggest that spike protein of sars-cov-2 is phylogenetically closer to bat sars-cov than that of pangolin sars-cov but distantly related to mers (as described in figure 1 ). previous studies in this direction indicated that sars-cov-2 genome (rna) shares 96% homology with bat coronavirus and 79.5% with sars-cov. 18 the present study is corroborated with this and indicated a close relationship between bat sars-cov and human sars-cov-2. a higher bv of >70% indicated a well-established monophyletic group. 19, 20 moreover, the spike protein of sars-cov-2 contains more antigenic peptides than that of the sars-cov and table 1 ). the present study is, therefore, suggesting that spike protein expression in the virome of sars-cov-2 is closely related to that of the bat cov ratg13 and both forms of the virus might have originated from a common ancestor. moreover, our data also hypothesized that human sars-cov-2 is a naturally modified version of bat sars-cov. interestingly, we have also observed that the cognate receptor of spike protein, that is, ace2 is phylogenetically close between human and bat. this inference was also verified through determining the relative structural content and binding efficacy of the spike protein to human, bat, and pangolin ace2 receptor (figures 2 and 3) . the structural contents, hydrophobicity and proportion of accessible residues of ace2 were very close in bat and human while the molecular docking studies revealed that spike protein of sars-cov-2 binds more strongly to bat and human than pangolin. moreover, the interaction zone in spike protein-ace2 complex of both bat and human was also found comprising similar residues. this could be the possible reason behind choosing human as a host for sars-cov-2. moreover, an abundance of human than that of bat might have promoted the pathogenic transformation to select human for speedy transmission. we, therefore, studied the involvement of the human innate immune receptors, that is, the tlrs to understand the rationale of choosing the human as a host by sars-cov-2 from an immunological point of view.immunopathology of covid infection has been reported to be caused due to the elevated inflammatory response that constitutes an abundant expression of proinflammatory cytokines like interleukin-6and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. 9 these two cytokines are the products of the tlr signaling pathway 21 our data indicated that tlr4 possesses a strong binding affinity to spike protein following tlr6 and tlr1 ( figure 4 and table 2 ). tlr4being the most efficient innate immune receptor that induces proinflammatory responses after binding with the pathogenic ligand. 22 therefore, the interaction between tlr4 and spike protein could be one the reasons behind the immunopathological manifestation of covid-19.this interaction could be useful for developing drugs against the same or using tlr4 antagonists as anticorona therapeutics. since we have used the native conformations of spike protein and tlrs, we have computed the most likely interactions, however, actual protein-protein interaction study using surface plasmon resonance can reveal the actual strength of binding and the binding constant. intriguingly, we have seen positive energy values for tlr 3, 5, and 6 which indicate a complex interaction that needs to be examined in future. however, a recent study by bhattacharya et al 12 revealed a vaccine candidate from sars-cov-2 spike protein that interacts with tlr5. since the vaccine is a peptide with much shorter than the actual protein in length and of helical structure, it is much more exposed to the tlr than that of the whole protein complex in its native configuration aimed in this study. finally, our data on mutability indicated the strongest mutability of sars-cov-2 than that of sars-cov and mers-cov. all these evidence collectively support the earlier studies 16, 17, 23 that have indicated the origin of sars-cov-2 from animals and further strengthen the view on the origin of this viral strain from bat. however, more experimental validations are particularly needed to establish these inferences.the present in silico studies indicated a close relationship between bat sars-cov and sars-cov-2 at the level of phylogeny of the major infective protein, that is, spike protein and its receptor ace2 as well as protein-protein interaction between these two. zoonotic origin of sars-cov-2 from bat is, therefore, supported in this study.spike protein of sars-cov-2 has been found to bind with surface tlrs (tlr1, 4, and 6), especially strongly with tlr4. therefore, selective targeting of tlr4-spike protein interaction by designing competitive tlr4-antagonists could pave a new way to treat covid-19.taken together, this study is expected to improve our understanding of the biology of sars-cov-2 and the findings contribute to the fundamental knowledge which could be useful in adopting an accurate intervention strategy in near future.  3 the novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, sars-cov-2) has emerged as a global pandemic by taking more than 431,192 (date: 15 th june 2020 (https://covid19.who.in) life all over the world. the rapid spread and high mortality rate (3 to 5%) 1 cov and sars-cov-2, use the homotrimer spike glycoprotein (comprising of s1 and s2 subunit) or spike protein to bind the cellular receptors and induce the dissociation of s1 and s2 subunit. this also triggers a cascade of events such as the transition of s2 from a metastable prefusion state to a more stable post-fusion state, the fusion between a cell and viral membrane, etc [6] [7] [8] . s1 subunit contains the receptor-binding domain (rbd) that binds to the peptidase domain (pd) of human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 9 . the recognition of spike protein with the ace2 enzyme is the first step of the virus lifecycle and entry to the host cell. these are the reasons the cov spike protein is a key target for developing new vaccines, therapeutic antibodies, and new drug molecules. recent in vitro studies also indicate that the rbd domain of the s1 subunit plays a key functional role for the binding of sars-cov by ace2 10 . the crystal as well as cryo-em structures of the complexes (spike/hace2) reveal key information about the interactions between the rbds and the hace2 receptor 6, 9, 11 . superposition of rbd domains of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 shows very similar structural fold with a root mean square deviation (rmsd) of 0.68 å of 139 pairs of cα atoms 12 . knowing that binding to the ace2 receptor triggers the virial lifecycle, it is also important to understand how the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 differs from the sars-cov. experimental results reveal that the binding affinity values for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 with hace2 fall in a similar range 12 .specifically, the equilibrium dissociation constant (kd) shows a slightly higher value (15.2 nm) of sars-cov-2 than that of sars-cov (15 nm) 13 . however, a recent publication shows a 20-4 fold increased binding affinity between trimeric spike protein with ace2 receptor of sars-cov-2 than that of sars-cov 6 . nevertheless, it is now well established that sars-cov-2 has a slightly better binding affinity towards hace2 than the sars-cov. the high binding affinity suggests that this novel coronavirus is evolved towards being a better binder to the same human ace2 receptor. thus, a comparison of both the rbd domains of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 is of utmost importance and it migh t give us a clue why sars-cov-2 is so deadlier than sars-cov.similar to the experiments, several computational studies are performed on the binding affinity of the rbds of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 with hace2 14, 15 . most of the earlier results are based on the homology modeled structure of the sars-cov-2, where the global fold of the spike protein was correct but the atomic level scoring function for predicting the binding affinity was not accurate. thus the earlier results predicted lower binding affinity of sars-cov-2 14, 15 . this also implies that the side-chain packing of the modeled structure was not accurate enough. recent binding free energy calculations performed on the crystal structure of rbd/hace2 of sars-cov-2 predicts high binding affinity than sars-cov 16 . another study uses rosetta interface analyzer 17 and concludes that both these viruses have a similar binding affinity 18 . thus, from in-silico perspective, it is still not fully understood why sars-cov-2 is better binder than sars-cov-2 and the results are inconclusive. hence, atomistic-level comparison is needed between these two viruses. a recent study found that the hydrogen bonding network and the hydrophobic interactions are major dominating forces that are responsible for enhanced binding in sars-cov-2 19 . till now most of the studies focus on the search for new vaccines and drug molecules against covid-19. there is very little attention paid to the atomistic label description and dynamics of the interfacial domain of spike protein with the hace2 receptor. the dynamic interactions between the rbd and the hace2 may reveal some crucial points that are not accessible from only the crystal structures.in this work, we first assess the atomistic level description of rbds of spike protein with hace2 receptor from the crystal structures. we identify the key contact residues that are responsible for the binding of the rbd domain and hace2. we also critically analyze the differences in the interfacial residues between the sars-cov and sars-cov-2. further the binding affinity of these two domains of sars-cov and sars-cov-2. next, all-atom molecular dynamics simulations of rbd domains of spike protein complexed with the human ace2 5 receptor of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are performed to extract the dynamics of these complexes. we focus our study at the interfacial region of rbds and hace2 and provide an atomistic picture of the interactions. the importance of contact residues is also highlighted and a thorough comparison was made between the sars-cov and sars-cov-2. till now, most of the in-silico work on spike-ace2 complex is done to design new antibodies or drug molecules, whereas little attention is paid to the atomistic level description and the dynamics of the spike-ace2 complex. hence, our study focuses on the interfacial region of rbd and ace2 domains.our simulation results reveal that the interfacial water molecules play an important role regarding the binding of rbds and ace2 domain, particularly, the bridge water connecting the two domains of spike protein and the hace2.the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 -rbd/ace2 (pdb id: 6vw1) and sars-cov-rbd/ace (pdb id: 2ajf) are taken from the protein database and subjected to md simulations. the two protein-protein complexes contain some notable structural elements for which special care was taken while preparing the system, like n-glycosylation of various asparagine residues, disulfide bridges between various pairs of cysteine, presence of zinc finger and other amino acids which require proper protonation states. the systems are prepared using the charmm-gui web 6 server 20 and parameter files and equilibration files are taken from the server. all the simulations were performed using the software gromacs version 2019.4 21, 22 using the charmm-36 forcefield 23 . each system is solvated in tip3p 24 water and kcl salt were added to neutralize the systems to a salt concentration of 150 mm. each system is solvated in a rectangular box of dimensions l x =138 å, l y =138 å, and l z =138 å, the distance is appropriate to avoid all finite-size effects due to long-range electrostatic interactions among neighboring simulation boxes. simulation for both the complexes is carried out at 310k and 1 atm pressure. to treat long-range electrostatic interactions, particle mesh ewald (pme) 25 method is used with a cut-off of 12 å, and to constrain hydrogen bond, the lincs algorithm 26 was applied. each system is minimized with 5000 steps of the steepest descent algorithm to eliminate the bad contacts in the system. after minimization equilibration simulation is performed for in nvt ensemble at 310 k. after nvt simulation, npt equilibration is performed for 5 ns at 1 atm pressure, and the temperature is maintained at 310 k.during the equilibration period, the position restrained is applied to the heavy atoms of the protein.velocity rescale thermostat and parinnello-rahman barostat 27 are applied to maintain the temperature and the pressure respectively. for the protein-protein binding affinity calculations, foldx software 28 is used. different visualizing and trajectory analysis software packages ucsf chimera 29 and vmd (visual molecular dynamics) 30 were used and qzyme workbench™ 31 an in-house enzyme engineering platform was used for all calculations performed and discussed in results.earlier published results highlighted the differences between the rbd domains of two spike proteins. the spike protein of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share 75% sequence similarity and their structural fold are almost identical. whereas the rbd domains have a sequence similarity of 73.7% 4 . figure 1 shows the superposition of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 and in the inset, we highlight the key residues that have changed from sars-cov to sars-cov-2.in the crystal structure of sars-cov and sars-cov-2, there are significant protein-protein contacts that can be seen and we identified some of the key residues that are important for the 7 stabilization of spike protein and hace2 receptor. in figure s1 of supporting information, we displayed the residues that are in the interfacial region of the rbd domain bound to the ace2 domain. with a distance cut-off 4 å there are 16 residues of rbd that are in contact with 20 residues of ace2 domain. a similar analysis of sars-cov-2 shows 18 residues of rbd that are in contact with 21 residues of the ace2 receptor. among the 21 ace2 residues that are interacting with two rbds, 17 are found to be common residues. most of the interacting residues of the ace2 receptor are located near the n-terminal helix. the above analysis manifests that the surface area of the interfacial domain of ace2 and rbds is almost the same. this also corroborates earlier findings where the surface area is 1,687 å 2 and 1,699 å 2 for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov 32 . within this 4 å cut-off there are 4 hydrophobic residues (leu455, phe456, ala475, and phe486) and 14 hydrophilic (i.e. not hydrophobic) residues (arg408, thr415, tyr449, tyr453, gly476, asn487, tyr489, gln493, gly496, gln498, thr500, asn501, gly502, and tyr505) are there near the interface of spike protein of sars-cov-2. whereas there are 3 hydrophobic residues (leu443, leu472, and ile489) and 13 hydrophilic residues (arg426, tyr436, tyr440, tyr442, asn473, tyr475, asn479, gly482, tyr484, thr486, thr487, gly488, tyr491) are present near the interface of spike protein of sars-cov. it is interesting to note that the interface of rbd domain is enriched with tyrosine and glycine residues for sars-cov-2 (4 tyrosine and 3 glycine out of 14 residues) as well as sars-cov (6 tyrosine and 2 glycine out of 16 residues). further, we counted the residues with a cut-off value of 8 å to get an estimation of the buried residues of both the rbd domains. we found that 53 and 51 residues are coming in contact with the ace2 domain for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 respectively (table s1, supporting information). to see the effect of the interfacial residues on the overall binding affinity with hace2, we performed computational alanine scanning on these interfacial residues to see the extent of the impact on the binding affinity due to alanine substitution.further, the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 has 13 hydrogen bonds between the rbd domain and the ace2 domain. however, sars-cov has a lesser number of hydrogen bonds between the rbd and the ace2 domain for sars-cov. it has only 5 hydrogen bonds between the two domains. as there are fewer hydrogen bonds in sars-cov, we expect that the rbd/ace2 complex of sars-cov-2 is more stable than sars-cov. further, we calculate the binding free energy of the spike/hace2 complex from the prodigy web server 33 as well as from foldx software 28 . the binding free energy is calculated on the crystal structures of the dimer and the 8 values are -10.8 and -11.7 kcal/mol for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 respectively. while the foldx calculations show binding energy -4.49 and -9.87 kcal/mol for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 respectively. though the values obtained from prodigy and foldx are not in the same range, the trend suggests that sars-cov-2 binds more effectively to hace2 and evolved as a better binder to the human receptor.as we discussed in the previous section about the interfacial residues of the rbd domain is critical for stabilizing the protein-protein complex, we performed computational alanine scanning on the contact residues of the rbd domain to highlight the importance of those residues. we mutated the interfacial residues to alanine and then calculate the binding free energy with the ace2 domain. alanine scanning is performed to identify the residues that make a significant contribution to the binding affinity with hace2. the result reveals that (figure 3) most of the residues lower the binding affinity when mutated with alanine except n501 where a slight increase in binding affinity is observed for sars-cov-2. a decrease in binding affinity suggests that both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have optimized its rbd domain to bind with the human ace2 receptor. from the alanine scanning results, we observe that y449, l455, f486, y498, g502, and v503 are found to be critical for stabilizing the overall complex.compared to sars-cov-2, the alanine mutation doesn't lower the binding affinity for all the residues of sars-cov. this result points to the fact that sars-cov-2 optimized its interfacial residues in such a manner that binding to hace2 is more enhanced. in this context, we would like to discuss a few changes that happened between the sars-cov to sars-cov-2. few mutations like tyr484→gln498, thr487→asn501, tyr442→leu455, leu443→phe456, leu472→phe486 asn479→gln493 show significant changes in binding affinity when the particular position is mutated with alanine. it is to be noted that gln474 and gly485 inserted near the interfacial domain of rbd of sars-cov-2. though these two residues are not directly interacting with the ace2, they form intramolecular hydrogen bonds two give the stability of the loop. like gln474 interacts with gly476 and gly484 interacts with cys488. the alanine mutation of these two residues does not change the binding affinity significantly. next section we discuss the results obtained from molecular dynamics simulations.during 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations, both the adducts (spike/hace2) of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are found to be stable. in figure s2 of from the molecular dynamics simulation trajectories, we extracted different components of interaction energy i.e. electrostatics and van-der-waals (vdw) interaction terms between the rbd of spike protein and the hace2 receptor. in figure 4 , the probability of different rbd and the hace2 has significance on the overall binding affinity of the protein-protein interaction. 12 a key observation that was made from the simulation trajectories is that the minimum distance between the cα atoms of rbd and the ace2 domain varies significantly for sars-cov and sars-cov2 (figure 5 (a) ). the minimum cα distance gives an idea of the relative separation between the two domains. it is observed that the average cα distance for sars-cov it is well known that water-mediated interactions are one of the major driving forces of protein folding and protein-drug recognition processes [34] [35] [36] [37] . in the previous section we observed the there is almost a 4-5 å gap in between the spik/hace2 protein-protein complex. there is a possibility that this interfacial domain or the gap region is hydrated with water molecules and those interfacial water molecules might play a significant role in stabilizing spike protein and the hace2 receptor. indeed, from our simulations, we observed that water molecules gradually populate the interfacial domain of spike protein and hace2 receptors. during the 100 ns simulation period, we observed that the interfacial domain forms a rich hydrogen-bonded network and stabilize the overall protein-protein complex.from our simulations, we analyze the water molecules that come within the 3.5 å near to the spike protein and hace2 domain. the fluctuation in the number of water molecules in the interfacial region of the ace2 domain shows high water content for sars-cov than sars-cov-2 (figure 7(a) ). the average water molecules near the ace2 domain are 214.2±8.68 and 242.7±10.04 for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov respectively though the ace2 interface is almost the same for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, there is a higher number of water molecules near the ace2 interfaces. the probability plot ( figure 7 (b) ) shows a clear difference in the number of water molecules between sars-cov and sars-cov-2. a similar result can be observed for the rbd domain of spike protein.a greater number of water molecules can be seen near the sars-cov spike domain than that of the sars-cov-2 spike domain (figure 8(a) and (b) ). the high occupancy near the interfacial domain of sars-cov can be attributed to the fluctuation of the rbd and the hace2 domain and larger gap in between these two domains.finally, we calculated the bridge-water molecules that are hydrogen-bonded with both ace2and rbd domains at the same time. we calculate the number of water molecules that are simultaneously forming hydrogen bonds with rbd and the ace2 domain. in figure 9 (a) we display the number of bridge water molecules during 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations and in figure 9 (b) we show one bridge water molecule that is hydrogen-bonded to rbd (gln493) as well as ace2(glu35) domain at the same time. from the simulation trajectories, several multiwater bridge water molecules can be observed in rbd and hace2 domains. the bridge water molecules it can be seen that there is a slightly higher number of bridge water molecules (~2) for sars-cov-2 than that of sars-cov. these bridging water molecules play a significant role in stabilizing the two domains of the complex. we expect that these bridge water molecules play a significant role in stabilizing spike/ace2 domain. here we want to highlight one key point that in the crystal structure (sars-cov-2) the gln493 is engaged in a hydrogen bond with the glu35, whereas from md simulation we observed that water molecules enter into the interfacial region and connected these two residues.to have an idea about how the rbd and ace2 domains are interacting with water molecules, we calculate the water-mediated hydrogen bonds with rbd and hace2 domains. in the case of hace2, the interfacial residues are making almost the same number of hydrogen bonds with the water molecules for sars-cov and sars-cov-2. this is expected as the ace2 receptor is the same in both the viruses and small changes can be attributed to the fluctuation of the hace2 domain. in figure 10 finally, we calculated the interaction energy (electrostatic+ van der waals) between the interfacial rbd and ace2 domain with water molecules (figure 11(a),(b) ). we observe that the interaction (a) (b) figure 11 total interaction energy (coulombic + van der waals) between the water molecules and the hace2 and the rbd domains. energy between the water molecules and the hace2 domain of both the viruses has almost the same that means the surface topology of hace2 are behaves similarly during the md simulations for both these viruses. the difference can be seen between the rbd of sars-cov and sars-cov-2. interaction with water molecules is more preferred with sars-cov than sars-cov-2 as the water molecules make a greater number of hydrogen bonds with the rbd domain. enhanced water interaction with the rbd of sars-cov reduces the direct interaction with the hace2 receptor.in summary, we elucidate the similarities and differences between the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 by using molecular dynamics simulation approaches. from the structural point of view, the rbd of spike protein shares a significant similarity in terms of the three-dimensional structure and the fold. however, significant differences are observed in how these two viruses bind to the hace2 receptor. we found that improvement in hydrophobic contacts that leads to enhanced van der waals interactions between the rbd and the hace2 receptor affects the high binding affinity for the sars-cov-2. the most important information we found from the study is that involvement of water molecules at the interfacial domain of the rbd and ace2 receptor. we observed that for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 the interfacial domain is spontaneously hydrated and a significant number of water molecules populate the gap in between rbd and ace2 domain. it is found that bridge water molecules play a significant role in stabilizing the protein-protein binary complex. this kind of water-mediated interaction for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 did not observe in the previous study. the present study unravels the many structural and dynamical features of this protein-protein dimer complexes that help us to understand how this virus interacts with the human cell.viral membrane fusion proteins are responsible both for binding to cellular receptors, and the subsequent fusion of viral and cellular membranes. the paradigm for class i fusion proteins consists of two heptad repeat regions, and a hydrophobic fusion peptide [1] . this motif is present in sars-cov [2] and other coronaviruses [3] , as well as the hemagglutinin (ha) of influenza [4] , gp21 of human t-cell leukemia virus type 1 [5] , gp41 of hiv [6] , gp2 of ebola virus [7, 8] , and the fusion protein of paramyxovirus [9] [10] [11] [12] . class i viral fusion proteins can also be divided into two sub-types; those whose fusion mechanism is low ph-dependent such as influenza ha, and those that are ph-independent like the retroviral fusion proteins. in retroviruses, receptor binding itself can trigger fusion, with temperature and redox conditions also influencing the fusion mechanism [13, 14] . the sars spike appears to be insensitive to redox conditions [15] . for sars-cov, it is proposed that the virus is internalized in the cell by endocytosis, and is then exposed to a low ph environment, and it is postulated that proteolytic cleavage between the s1 and s2 domains initiates the membrane fusion process [16] . although the factors which trigger fusion (endocytosis, ph sensitivity, single receptor vs. primary and co-receptor binding, redox change) differ amongst diverse virus families, all viral fusion proteins are thought to share the same basic fusion mechanism [1, 4, [17] [18] [19] [20] .a notable feature of the sars spike is its large mass (,500 kd per trimer) and striking, club-shaped appearance, from the end-on, this appears like a three-bladed propeller with a radius of 90 å [21] . despite the structural differences, the sars spike performs the same fundamental task in viral entry to the host cell as other class i viral fusion proteins, such as the influenza ha (,220 kd per trimer). the sars spike can be subdivided into four structural domains (from n to c terminus); the two large external domains s1 and s2 are largely responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion, respectively. in many class i viral fusion proteins the analogous peptides are generated by proteolysis of the spike precursor during the maturation process in the host cell, resulting in two peptides with the fusion peptide on the n-terminus of s2. in sars-cov the s1/s2 assignment is given based on sequence homology to other viral fusion proteins, however there is no peptide cleavage during maturation. the final two small domains are comprised of a transmembrane domain, and a carboxyterminal cytoplasmic domain, which principally anchor the spike to the viral envelope. the cell-surface molecule ace2 is the receptor for the sars spike protein [22] and is a relatively large macromolecule with a diameter of 70 å . in comparison, the receptor for influenza ha, sialic acid, is much smaller with a 10 å diameter. the precise mechanisms by which class i viral fusion proteins gain access to the host cell remain unknown. the hypothetical entry process includes several steps that take place in sequence: receptor binding, fusion core re-arrangement, fusion peptide insertion in host cell membrane, refolding of heptad repeats, membrane fusion, and finally viral nucleocapsid transfer [23] .the structures of ace2 bound to a fragment of the sars spike containing the receptor-binding domain and the pre-and postfusion configurations of the fusion core heptad repeats of the spike have been solved to atomic resolution [2, 3, [24] [25] [26] . in addition, the atomic resolution structures of two neutralizing antibodies bound to the sars spike receptor-binding domain have been solved [27, 28] showing that blocking of the receptor binding domain, preventing attachment of virions to cell-surface ace2, is the likely mechanism of virus neutralization by these antibodies. the aim of the present study was to delineate any possible structural changes in the sars spike that accompanied receptor-binding, and to precisely localize the receptor binding domains (which are only 14% of the total mass of the spike) within the overall structure, employing cryo-em and image processing of intact virions bound to soluble ace2. we demonstrate the structural dynamics which accompany spike-receptor binding, which may be involved in triggering membrane fusion.to study the structure of the spike-ace2 complex, we infected vero e6 cells with sars-cov and purified supernatant virus by iodoxanol density gradient centrifugation. previously, we have shown that specimens could be c-irradiated with a sufficient dose (2mrad) for viral inactivation, while still preserving protein antigenicity. inactivation was verified by passage in cell culture and testing by quantitative pcr [29] . purified c-irradiated sars-cov preparations had a fusogenic activity when added to vero e6 cells at high multiplicity (,500-3000 virions per cell), causing the formation of syncytia in the absence of replication or cytopathic effects ( figure 1a ). these syncytia had identical morphology to those observed in cytopathic studies of sars-cov in tissues and in tissue cultured cells; syncytia have also been observed upon expression of coronavirus s protein, or following addition of cells expressing the s-protein to cells with surface-expressed ace2. [22, [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] . the same inactivated c-irradiated virus preparations were incubated with a human ace2-human fc chimeric protein, for analysis of the complex by cryo-em, 3d image processing, and immuno-electron microscopy (immuno-em) ( figure 1 , movie s1). the ace2-fc construct was selected since it is soluble and dimeric, and it was anticipated that the additional mass was would be beneficial in locating the receptor attached to the spike. immuno-em confirmed that recombinant ace2 protein bound to virions, and that binding affinity was not affected by c-irradiation ( figure 1b) . we did not observe any structural changes associated with prior irradiation. image averaging further suppressed any possible random radiation induced structural changes.cryo-em coupled with 3d single particle image analysis was employed to investigate the binding of ace2 to the spike of sars-cov. although sars-cov is approximately spherical when observed by cryo-em, both its size and shape vary slightly, and thus it is not amenable to single-particle averaging techniques. however, individual spikes on the surface envelope of the virus do provide a repetitive structure that is ideal for single particle techniques. spikes on the surface of virus particles are readily imaged by cryo-em in the frozen-hydrated state ( figure 1c ). three-dimensional image processing was carried out on 11,153 selected spike images taken at various defocus levels, using routine single-particle image processing [35, 36] . the resolution of the final 3d structure was evaluated by a fourier shell correlation of 0.5 to be 18.5 å (figure 2 ). the structure of the unbound spike was compared with that of the spike-ace2 complex ( figures 1e, 1f , 3, movie s2). in both cases the spike portion of the 3d structure is fairly similar, indicating that ace2 binding does not result in a fundamental structural unfolding of the spike. however, the overall height of the spike was reduced from 160 å to 150 å following ace2 binding. when viewed from the end-on perspective and the spike undergoes a rotation of ,5u following binding (movie s2), and the mass at the center of the axis of symmetry on the distal end of the spike redistributes itself from one small central blob to three blobs or nubs (figure 3 the precise location of ace2 binding on the distal end of the spike is centered at 70 å from the central axis of the spike, with a 30 å gap between the axis of symmetry and ace2. one ace2 molecule was bound to each of the three propeller-like blades of the spike, making a structure 220 å high ( figure 1f ). the density of these ace2 molecules is high in the 3d density map, indicating a high occupancy of binding sites. in addition, the structure shows that binding of one ace2 to the spike would not sterically hinder binding of additional ace2 molecules on the other two propellerblades of each trimer.the cryo-em 3d structures of the spike and the spike-ace2 complex were combined with the atomic resolution structures of the sars spike receptor-binding domain-ace2 complex [24] and the heptad repeat pre-and post-fusion cores [2, 25] to interpret the cryo-em structure. the receptor-binding domain-ace2 data were docked with a correlation score of 0.965 using the situs software package ( figure 4 ) [37] . as expected the receptor-binding domain docked to the distal end of the spike with ace2 filling the extra mass on the spike (shown by the color violet in figure 4 ). the empty upper region of the mass is likely composed of the fc component of the chimeric protein. although this chimeric molecule is dimeric, only one leg of the ace-2 is able to bind to each of the three receptor binding domains of the trimer. we anticipate the mass distal to the hinge region to be flexible, and therefore components were blurred out in the averaging process, leaving only a portion of the additional mass in the 3-d map. the c-terminus of the docked ace2 is in a location consistent with this interpretation. previously we modeled the putative location of the receptor-binding domain and ace2 in the cryo-em structure of the unbound spike using solely the receptor-binding domain atomic resolution data [21] . in the present study, we have shown that our previous prediction of the location of the receptor-binding domain was only partially correct. the actual location of the receptor binding domain and ace2 are in fact shifted 29 å towards the 3-fold axis, corresponding to about 40% of the diameter of ace2. the results from the present study will aid in the precise location of future atomic resolution structure fragments of the sars spike, as well as in the structural mapping of neutralizing antibody-binding epitopes (which are in progress). the coordinates of the three dimensional reconstruction of the sars spike (emd-1423) and the sars spike-ace2 complex (emd-1425) have been deposited in the macromolecular database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ msd).our cryo-em results demonstrate that there is a structural transition of the spike that occurs upon receptor binding (figure 3 , movie s2). the overall height of the spike is reduced by 10 å due to a shift in the mass in the s1 domain (figure 3 d,i) and the three s1 blades of the spike twist ,5u along the axis of symmetry. on the distal end of the spike, a small blob feature is replaced by three small nubs which appear radially. (figure 3 f,j) . we propose that this structural re-arrangement represents an initial ''priming'' of the spike for membrane fusion, which brings the cellular and viral membranes 10 å closer to each other to facilitate fusion. the coronavirus s protein is known to mediate both virion-cell membrane fusion, and intercellular membrane fusion [22, [30] [31] [32] [33] and in the present study we have shown that purified inactivated virions are also fusion-competent. we show that the addition of sars-cov virions to cultured cells that express ace-2 can induce fusion, presumably from the fusion activity of spikes on virions bridging neighboring cells. similar observations on the induction of ''fusion-from-without'' were made when cells surfaceexpressing the spike protein were mixed with cells expressing ace-2 [35] . the trigger that initiates membrane fusion varies amongst class i fusion proteins, with some activated by receptor binding, others by ph, and others by redox conditions. in most proposed models of membrane fusion it is postulated that the s1 domain or analogous receptor binding domains dissociate from the spike during the membrane fusion process. this dynamic process was demonstrated for influenza ha by kemble et al. [38] in their investigation where they engineered intermonomer disulfide bonds between the ha s1 subunits. the result of this was that fusion activity was impaired; however it could be restored under reducing conditions. it is likely that the sars spike shares a similar mechanism, and the structural changes that we have detected represent the initial step in this process.by analogy with other class i viral fusion proteins, we anticipate that the fusion core of the sars spike must undergo similar structural re-arrangements during fusion. the receptor-binding domain is localized in a position on the distal end of the molecule, closer to the 3-fold axis than anticipated, yet still in a position that would not impede these structural re-arrangements. putative mechanisms by which class i viral fusion proteins achieve membrane fusion have been proposed [1, 4, [17] [18] [19] , but complete structural evidence for the role of intermediate structures in these mechanisms has yet to be obtained. the structural biology of this process has been best characterized for the influenza hemagglutinin, and paramyxovirus fusion (f) protein, for which the prefusion and membrane fusion ph structures have been determined by x-ray crystallography [4, 11, 12, 39, 40] . all of the subsequent models for class i viral fusion proteins are based on the structural data of these two fusion proteins. a drawback in all of these models is that they are based on recombinant ectodomains that are not proven to exist as a component in the complete molecule, and they lack both membrane-interacting residues, and lipids [4] . the cryo-em structures presented in this investigation are of intact sars spike bound to native virion lipid envelopes. the cryo-em data are very instructive when atomic resolution fragments are docked within the overall molecule, especially as the entire sars spike has proven to be a difficult subject for x-ray crystallography, and atomic resolution data exist for only a few fragments of the sars spike. our cryo-em results show that it is possible for the spike to attach to three ace2 receptors at once; this may serve to hold on to the host membrane like a tripod so as to accurately orientate the fusion core. in addition the 30 å gap between the axis of symmetry and ace2 provides sufficient space for fusion core rearrangement. damico et al., [14] demonstrated that the kinetics of binding of the rous sarcoma virus envelope protein to its receptor suggested that binding of each spike molecule to multiple receptor monomers occurred. it may therefore be possible that other structurally homologous viral envelope proteins can also bind multiple receptors, and this may be a general adaptation that provides the correct temporal and spatial arrangement to bring about membrane fusion. the observation that the sars spike could bind three soluble ace2 receptors provides three possible binding states with one, two or three membrane-bound receptors attached to the spike. with one or two receptors bound, the spike and virus have a wide range of movement possible. whereas, in the case of three bound receptors the spike and its fusion core will be arranged perpendicular to the cell surface with minimal movement possible. it is interesting to note that binding three receptors is the minimum number of binding events required to achieve this perpendicular orientation in three dimensional space. this observation matches up with the conserved trimeric structures of class i fusion proteins which are common amongst enveloped viruses, thus indicating a possible conserved structural-functional relationship may exist. another line of reasoning is that oligomerisation favors a better ''chance'' of successful receptor binding and subsequent insertion of the fusion peptide into the host membrane. according to this model, oligomeric multiples higher then three would be favored, whereas the ''tripod'' model of receptor binding favors the conserved trimeric structures of class i viral fusion proteins.in figure 3 we have we have presented the ace2-sars structures as they were solved in this cryo-em investigation. for other fusion proteins like influenza ha1 and hiv gp120 it has been modeled that the re-arrangements upon membrane fusion are dramatic involving a shedding of the above mentioned domains. in this investigation we have detected structural movement of s1 upon ace2 binding. this could represent the initial phase of this dramatic process that is followed by fusion core re-arrangement, fusion peptide insertion in the host cell membrane, refolding of heptad repeats, and finally membrane fusion.analyzing the structure of the spike-receptor complex is essential to understanding how viruses can adapt to utilize receptors from different species and how they may evolve to gain specificity for new receptor types. rna viruses have a high rate of mutation and recombination [41] . in sars coronaviruses, the spike is able to retain specific binding affinity for the ace2 of more than one host species, and rapid evolution to gain specificity for novel ace2 species has been demonstrated [42, 43] . the structure and large size of the spike of coronaviruses appears to be an adaptation related to utilization of large host cell-surface molecules such as ace2 as specific receptors. amongst the coronavirus family, specific cell surface receptors for the spike protein are all in the range of 60-110 kd [44] . these large host receptor molecules are in turn functionally constrained and thus conserved across species barriers. in utilizing binding to a large receptor molecule, it may be important that the spike s1 domain also acts as a ''spacer arm'' holding the receptor far enough away from the three-fold axis of symmetry of the spike s2 domain to permit fusion core re-arrangement and subsequent membrane fusion. such a property necessitates having a large spike molecule. moreover, multiple receptor binding may have functional significance, enhancing the binding and entry of viruses. crosslinking of adjacent host receptor molecules could increase the affinity of the virus for its target cell, as well as improving the kinetics of fusion. the sars spike-ace2 complex is an ideal model system for the investigation of class i viral fusion protein dynamics, utilizing cryo-em to investigate fusion protein binding and structural changes in the native state, within virion membranes that are fusogenic. the presence of a common cell fusion mechanism shared by diverse virus families holds the prospect of developing broad-spectrum anti-virals that target these conserved mechanisms, as well as the potential use of these fusogenic proteins in drug delivery systems.sars-cov (tor3 strain) was inoculated onto vero e6 cells grown in dulbecco's modified eagle medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum, 100 u/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin, and 0.22 mg/ml l-glutamine at 37uc with 5% co 2 . cell supernatant was harvested (300 ml) with a sars-cov tcid 50 titre of 5610 7 /ml and virus was pelleted using a beckman sw32 rotor at 28000 rpm for 90 minutes. the virus pellet was resuspended in pbs buffer, layered onto of a 12-30% iodoxanol gradient (optiprep) and centrifuged in a sw40 rotor at 38000 rpm for 2.5 hours. fractions (0.7 ml) were collected from the gradient with an auto densi-flow gradient collector (labcono) and dialyzed against pbs. sars-cov-enriched fractions were checked by sds-page and western blotting, and rendered noninfectious by irradiation in a gamma cell on dry ice with a 2mrad exposure for 90 minutes. irradiated specimens were tested for infectivity by inoculation onto vero e6 cells, and examined for cytopathogenic effects for 10 days, followed by blind passage of the cells and testing for the growth of sars-cov by pcr [29] .to test for spike fusogenic activity vero e6 cells were cultured in 96 well plates (corning). once the cells were confluent the medium was removed from each well and 20 ml of gamma irradiated sars-cov containing 10 10 pfu/ml diluted 1:1 and 1:9 in culture media. the virus dilutions were incubated with the cells for 1 hour at 37uc. after the incubation the plates were washed three times with fresh culture medium to remove unbound virus.the vero e6 cells were observed by light microscopy 2 and 4 days post treatment for the presence of syncytia. virus growth was not detected at either dilution of irradiated virus, and no cytopathic effect was observed. the presence of nucleic acid in syncytia was investigated by propidium iodide staining and observation by fluorescence microscopy.the human ace2-fc (human igg1) recombinant protein (adipogen) had an initial concentration of 1 mg/ml in pbs and was diluted 1:10 in pbs for incubation with sars-cov, for the remainder of this document this is referred to as ace2. 2 ml of sars-cov were injected into 4 ml of pbs on a formvar-carbon coated 400-mesh nickel grid, and incubated for 1 minute. all incubations were carried out at 20uc. grids were then washed in pbs six times for 1 minute, followed by a 10-minute block in pbs-g-bsa (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine, 2% bsa). grids were then washed in pbs-g (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine) six times for 1 minute, followed by a 1-hour incubation on a 20 ml drop of ace2. grids were then washed in pbs-g (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine) six times for 1 minute, followed by a 1-hour incubation with rabbit anti-human ace2 polyclonal igg (adipogen; diluted 1:200 in pbs). grids were then washed in pbs-g (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine) six times for 1 minute, followed by a 30 minute incubation with goat anti-rabbit igg (conjugated to 10 nm gold, sigma; diluted 1:10 in pbs). grids were then washed in pbs-g (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine) three times for 1 minute. grids were fixed for 2 minutes (1% paraformaldehyde, 2% glutaraldehyde in pbs), washed in deionised water and negatively stained with 2% methylamine tungstate (nanoprobes), and observed by transmission electron microscopy in a tecnai 20 g2 transmission electron microscope (fei) operated at 200 kv, digital images were collected using an amt advantage xr-12 digital camera.sars-cov was incubated with ace2 for one hour, and 4 ml samples were applied to glow-discharged holey carbon films supported on 400-mesh copper grids. after blotting immediately for 2-5 seconds with filter paper, grids were plunged into liquid ethane cooled by liquid nitrogen, using a custom built gravityoperated freezing device. specimens were transferred to a tecnai 20 g2 transmission electron microscope (fei) operated at 200 kv, equipped with a gatan 626.dh low-temperature specimen holder. observations were made at temperatures of ,2185uc and images recorded at 29,0006 magnification on kodak so-163 electron image film at a dose of 10-20 electrons/å 2 with an exposure of 1-2 seconds. film was developed in kodak d19 for 12 minutes at room temperature, rinsed for 2 minutes in water, and fixed for 10 minutes with kodak fixer.the exact magnification in the microscope that sars-cov was imaged at was determined to be 29,9686 using a calibration grid (pelco international). images of sars-cov were digitized on a nikon super coolscan 9000 ed scanner at a pixel size of 2.125å . processing was carried out using the eman and spider/web image processing program packages [35, 45] on sgi fuel and tezro workstations running irix 6.5, or a dell pe6850 with 4way 64-bit xeon dual core 3.6 ghz cpus and 32gb ram running linux (fedora core 5). images were corrected for contrast transfer function (ctf) using the ''ctfit'' function in the eman software package, which estimates defocus and corrects for ctf by phase-flipping. the data set composed of images centred on spikes-ace2 (n = 11,153; recorded at 2.9-11.9 å defocus) were processed using spider by the projection matching approach [36] which incorporated three-fold symmetry into the search function and reconstruction procedure. after each refinement cycle the new reference volume was either theresholded or segmented using the ''floodfill'' function in the situs software package [37] to select the spike-ace2 structure and minimize the influence of neighbouring spikes in the reference structure that was used in the subsequent iteration of the projection match alignment. the initial reference model used in this procedure was the structure of the sars spike that we previously solved by cryo-electron microscopy [21] . the population of spike images was composed of both side view projections as well as end-on projections, with the latter being easily identified in the images with greater defocus values. these high-defocus/end-on images were essential to eliminate the ''missing cone'' from the reconstruction. the resolution of the cryo-em reconstruction was estimated by fourier shell correlation to be 18.5å using the 0.5 fsc criteria. the structures of the pre-fusion hr2 domain and the ace2-receptor-binding domain were docked into the cryo-em reconstruction using the ''floodfill'' and ''colores'' functions in the situs software package. the resultant docking generated one distinct location for the ace2-receptor-binding domain, which placed ace2 in the additional mass that was not present in the reconstruction of the spike alone. the docking of the entire 2fxp.pdb [2] structure was previously conducted [21] .three-dimensional cryo-em reconstructions, and the atomic resolution structures 2ajf.pdb [24] , 2fxp.pdb [2] , were visualized using ucsf chimera (computer graphics laboratory, university of california, san francisco, supported by nih p41 rr-01081) [46] . the spike component of the spike-viral envelope reconstruction was segmented from the entire reconstruction using the ''floodfill'' algorithm in the situs software package. movie s1 of the rotating sars spike-ace2 complex was generated on a silicon graphics workstation using ucsf chimera, and the ''mediarecorder'' and ''mediaconvert'' software provided with the silicon graphics irix 6.5 operating system. movie s2 showing the morphing of the spike between the sars spike and sars spike-ace2 complex was generated using the ucsf chimera software package with the ''morph map'' morphing tool plug-in. both reconstructions were masked with a cylindrical mask, which when applied masked the peripheral boundaries of the sars-cov envelope in both reconstructions.movie s1 three-dimensional reconstruction of the of the sars spike-ace2 complex. this movie supplements figs. 1, 4 showing both the reconstruction of the spike-ace2 complex as well as the location of the docked atomic structures. the movie starts showing the spike-ace2 complex viewed from an end-on perspective. the reconstruction then tilts 90o, followed by a 120o rotation along the three-fold axis of symmetry of the spike. in the second section of the movie the cryo-em reconstruction becomes transparent revealing the location of the docked atomic structures, followed by a final rotation of 90o back to the initial end-on perspective. the following color scheme was used: cryo-em surface; ace2, violet; spike, green; stalk, blue; envelope, beige; nucleocapsid, red. atomic structures: pdb id code, 2ajf, (sars spike receptorbinding domain, red; ace2, white; ace2 c-terminus, blue); and pdb id code, 2fxp, hr2 fusion core, yellow. found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001082.s001 (7.24 mb mov)movie s2 three-dimensional morphing of the sars spike, and ace2 bound structures. this movie supplements figs. 1, 3 showing the putative structural re-arrangement of the spike as it binds to ace2. the movie starts showing the sars spike and then gradually morphs to the sars spike-ace2 complex, and back to the sars spike. the morphing reconstruction is shown from the side and end-on perspectives, and the mass attributed to the nucleocapsid is presented without morphing. as one watches the move play back and forth (this can be done by selecting ''loop'' in a quicktime player) one can see the spike twist by ,5o when viewed from the end-on perspective, and the spike becomes squatter by ,10 &#x00c5; when viewed from the side perspective. the following color scheme was used: cryo-em surface; ace2, violet; spike, green; stalk, blue; envelope, beige; nucleocapsid, red. the transmembrane cov s-protein spike trimer is composed of interwoven protomers that include an nterminal receptor binding s1 domain and a c-terminal s2 domain that contains the fusion elements ( figure 1a and b). 2 the s1 domain is subdivided into the n-terminal domain (ntd) followed by the receptor binding domain (rbd) and two structurally conserved subdomains (sd1 and sd2). together these domains cap the s2 domain, protecting the conserved fusion machinery. several structures of soluble ectodomain constructs that retain the complete s1 domain and the surface exposed s2 domain have been determined. these include sars-2 1,3 , sars 4-8 , mers 4, 9 , and other human 2,10 and murine 11 β-cov spike proteins. these structures revealed remarkable conformational heterogeneity in the s-protein spikes, especially in the rbd region. within a single protomer, the rbd could adopt a closed 'down' state ( figure 1a) , in which the rbd covers the apical region of the s2 protein near the c-terminus of the first heptad repeat (hr1), or an open 'up' state in which the rbd is dissociated from the apical central axis of s2 and the ntd. further, cryo-em structures strongly suggest a large degree of domain flexibility in both the 'down' and 'up' states in the ntd and rbd. while these structures have provided essential information to identify the relative arrangement of these domains, the degree to which conformational heterogeneity may be altered via mutation during the natural evolution of the virus and in a vaccine immunogen design context remains to be determined.in this study we have quantified the variability in the s1 and s2 geometric arrangements to reveal important regions of flexibility to consider and to target for structure-based immunogen design. based on these analyses, we have designed mutations that alter the conformational distribution of the domains in the sprotein. we visualized the effect of our designs using a structural determination pipeline relying first on single particle analysis by negative stain electron microscopy (nsem) for rapid and low-cost assessment of the spike ectodomains at low resolution, followed by cryo-em for high-resolution information on the changes introduced by these mutations. our results reveal a heterogeneous conformational landscape of the sars-cov-2 spike that is highly susceptible to modification by the introduction of mutations at sites of contact between the s1 and s2 domains. we also present data on modified sars-2 ectodomain constructs stabilized in conformations thathave not yet been seen in the current available structures, with great interest and direct application in vaccine design.detailed structural schema defining the geometry and internal rearrangements of movable domains of the sars-2 spike.to characterize the unique arrangement of distinct domains in the β-cov spike, we first aimed to develop a precise quantitative definition of their relative positions. examination of available sars and mers s-protein structures revealed: 1) the ntd and rbd subdomains and internal s2 domain move as rigid bodies, and 2) these domains display a remarkable array of relative shifts between the domains in the s1 region and the s2 region's β-sheet motif and connector domain (cd) ( figure 1b-f) . in order to quantify these movements, we have analyzed the relevant regions of motion and their structural disposition in all available β-cov ectodomain spike structures including 15 sars 4,5,7,8 , 10 mers 4,12 , a hku1 2,10 , an oc43 2,10 , a murine β-cov, and three sars-2 13,14 structures (figures 1e-f and 2). each protomer in those structures displaying asymmetric 'up'/down' rbd states was examined independently yielding a dataset of 76 structural states. the ntd was split into a primary n-terminal section and a secondary c-terminal section based upon visual inspection of this region in the various β-cov structures ( figures 1b-c and 2) . we next analyzed s-protein geometry using a vector-based approach. specifically, vectors connecting each region's cα centroids were generated and used to define the relative dispositions of the domains ( figure 1c and 2). the vector magnitudes and select angles and dihedrals were used to identify the breadth of differences in domain positioning and compare between strains. the results indicated that β-cov spike proteins in various strains differ markedly from one another and that considerable variability in the domain arrangements within strains exists, especially in the sars ectodomains (figures 1e-f and 2a-h). in particular, both 1 and ɸ1 (figure 2a-b) , describing the angle between the sd2 to sd1 and sd1 to rbd vectors as well as the sd1 to rbd dihedral, respectively, effectively report on the 'up' and 'down' configurations while indicating substantial differences between sars and mers in both the 'up' and 'down' states. the angular disposition of the ntd elements further indicated differences in sars and mers with a particularly marked shift from the examined β-cov spikes in the murine structure ( figure 1e ). additional s1 differences are observed between vectors involving sd2. the disposition of the s2 domain relative to s1 defined by the dihedral about the vector connecting sd2 to the s2 cd differs markedly between mers/sars-2 and sars as well with the angle between the vectors connecting the ntd' to sd2 and sd2 to the cd demonstrating a shift in sars-2. finally, the disposition of the cd to the inner portion of s2 measured as an angle between a vector connected to an interior s2 β-sheet motif and the vector connecting the cd to sd2 indicates sars differs from both mers and sars-2. interestingly, the mers disposition appears to respond to rbd triggering, displaying a bimodal distribution. these results demonstrate that, while the individual domain architectures and overall arrangements are conserved ( figure 1d ), important differences between these domains exists between strains, suggesting that subtle differences in inter-domain contacts could play a major role in determining these distributions and thereby alter surface antigenicity and the propensity of the domains to access 'up' and 'down' rbd states.identification of sites for differential stabilization of the sars-2 ectodomain spike rbd orientation.based on the observed variability in the geometric analysis of β-cov spikes, we asked whether the propensity for the rbd to display the 'down' and 'up' states could be modified via mutations without altering exposed antigenic surfaces. to this end, we identified protomer to protomer interactive sites amenable to modification and down selected mutations at these sites using the schrödinger biologics suite 38, 39, 40 . in an effort to eliminate exposure of the receptor binding site of the rbd, we examined the potential for disulfide linkages between the rbd and its contact with s2 near the c-terminus of hr1 to prevent rbd exposure. we identified a double cysteine mutant, s383c and d985c (rbd to s2 double mutant; rs2d; supplemental figure s1 ), as a candidate for achieving this goal. the transition from the 'down' state to the 'up' state involves shifts in the rbd to ntd contacts. therefore, in an effort to prevent these shifts, we identified a site in an rbd groove adjacent to the ntd for which we prepared a triple mutant, d398l, s514l, and e516l (rbd to ntd triple mutant; rnt, supplemental figure s1 ). as sd1 acts as a hinge point for the rbd 'up'/'down' transitions (figures 1a-c, 2i-j), we hypothesized that enhanced hydrophobicity at the sd1 to s2 interface might shift the position of sd1, thus influencing the hinge and potentially the propensity for rbd triggering. a double mutant, n866i and a570l (subdomain 1 to s2 double mutant; u1s2d, supplemental figure s1 ), as well as quadruple mutant, a570l, t572i, f855y, and n856i (subdomain 1 to s2 quadruple mutant; u1s2q), were identified for this purpose. finally, we asked whether linking sd2 to s2 would alter the conformational distribution of the rbds. the double cysteine mutant, g669c and t866c (subdomain 1 to s2 double mutant; u2s2d, supplemental figure s1 ), was identified for this purpose. these mutants were prepared in the context of a previously published sars-2 ectodomain construct 3 .to assess the quality of the purified spike proteins and to obtain low resolution visualization of the structures, we performed nsem analysis. the micrographs showed a reasonably uniform distribution of particles consistent with the size and shape of the sars-2 spike ectodomain ( figure 3 ). 2d class averages showed spike populations with well resolved domain features. the data were subjected to 3d-classification followed by homogeneous refinement. the unmutated construct was resolved into two classes of roughly equal proportions.the two classes differed in the position of their rbd domains. one class displayed all three rbds in their 'down' positions, whereas, the other class displayed one rbd in the 'up' position. this was consistent with published cryo-em results 15 that described a 1:1 ratio between the 'down' and '1-up' states of the sars-2 spike ectodomain. the mutant spikes were analyzed using a similar workflow as the unmutated spike. all of the mutants displayed well-formed spikes in the micrographs, as well as in the 2d class averages. following 3d classification, for the rs2d construct, we observed only the 'down' conformation; the 1-rbd 'up' state that was seen for the unmutated spike was not found in this dataset. the u1s2q mutant presented another striking finding, where we observed a new conformational state with 2 rbds in the 'up' position. the 2-rbd 'up' state has been reported before for the mers cov spike ectodomain 12 but has not been observed thus far for either the sars or the sars-2 spikes. based on the nsem analysis we selected the rs2d and u1s2q constructs for high resolution analysis by cryo-em.to visualize the mutations and their effect on the structure of the spike, we collected cryo-em datasets for the search for open state spikes in the dataset. we were unable to find any such states, confirming that the sars-2 spike was locked in its 'down' conformation in the rs2d mutant. the rs2d disulfide-linked density at the mutation site confirmed disulfide formation in the double mutant (rs2d) ( figure 5 ). comparison of the domain arrangements of this construct with that of the unmutated 'down' closed state structure indicated the protein structure was otherwise unperturbed (supplemental figure s4a ).in contrast to the rs2d design, the u1s2q design displayed widespread rearrangement of the s1 domains (supplemental figure s1b ). in the 'down' state structure, density in the mutated s2 position remained in the configuration observed in the unmutated construct, with the n855i and f856y residue loop in close proximity the s2 residue l966 and s1 residue p589. this suggested these mutations had little impact on the observed shifts.however, the s2-interactive sd1 displayed a rigid body movement relative to both the rs2d and unmutated constructs with 1 and ɸ3 displacements of 3.4° and 1.8°, respectively ( figure 5a with the relatively small contact area between the s1 and s2 subunits observed here suggested that, despite a relatively low mutation rate, dramatic changes in s-protein structure may occur from few mutations. indeed, recent evidence for a mutation in the sd2 to s2 contact region suggests a potential fitness gain for acquisition of such interfacial residues 29 . based upon our results, this mutant, d614g, may indeed alter the conformational landscape of the sars-cov-2 s-protein. as an immunogen provides a platform from which to induce such non-rbd responses that may be needed to protect against such an evasion. the second area of interest concerns cryptic pocket targeting antibodies which have proven effective in the neutralization of sars. these antibodies target an epitope presented only in the 'up' state rbds and appear to require a two rbd 'up' configuration 33 . the current stabilized ectodomain construct in wide use in sars-cov-2 clinical trials was demonstrated previously, and recapitulated here by nsem, to display only the 'down' and one rbd 'up' states. however, the u1s2q, sd1/s2 targeting design developed here display a prominent two rbd 'up' state distribution compatible with these cryptic-epitope targeting mabs. this suggests it is capable of inducing such antibodies. while complicating factors, such as a potential for vaccine enhancement, may favor the use of truncated, single domain constructs which may display fewer potentially weakly or non-neutralizing epitopes, these, along with the designs presented here will allow for a detailed characterization of not only vaccine immunogenicity but also antigenicity, paving the way for next generation vaccines for the novel sars-cov-2 and the eventual development of a broadly neutralizing β-cov vaccine. thus, while the previous generation of stabilizing mutations ensure well folded trimer, the rational design approach developed here provides a means by which precisely controlling the rbd orientation distribution, thus allowing exploratory efforts to understand the role of conformational dynamics from the perspective of vaccine and drug development.initial cryo-em data were collected on the titan krios at the shared materials and instrumentation the datasets generated and/or analyzed during this study are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request.the code developed during this study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.vector analysis was performed using available cryo-em structures for sars-2 13 (711-716 and 1072-1122) . vector magnitudes, angles, and dihedrals between these centroids were determined and used in the subsequent analysis. vector analysis was performed using the vmd 34 tcl interface. principal component analysis performed in r with the vector data centered and scaled 35 .structures for sars (pdb id 5x58 4 ), mers (pdb id 6q04 36 ), and sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6vxx 15 ) were prepared in maestro 37 using the protein preparation wizard 38 followed by in silico mutagenesis using schrödinger's cysteine mutation 39 and residue scanning 40 tools. residue scanning was first performed for individual selected sites allowing mutations to leu, ile, trp, tyr, and val followed by scanning of combinations for those which yielded a negative overall score. scores and visual inspection were used in the selection of the prepared constructs.the sars-cov-2 ectodomain constructs were produced and purified as described previously (ref- wrapp et al., mclellan) . briefly, a gene encoding residues 1−1208 of the sars-cov-2 s (genbank: mn908947) with proline substitutions at residues 986 and 987, a "gsas" substitution at the furin cleavage site (residues 682-685), a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization motif, an hrv3c protease cleavage site, a twinstreptag and an 8xhistag was synthesized and cloned into the mammalian expression vector pαh. all mutants were introduced in this background. expression plasmids encoding the ectodomain sequence were used to transiently transfect freestyle293f cells using turbo293 (speedbiosystems). protein was purified on the sixth day post-transfection from the filtered supernatant using streptactin resin (iba).purified sars-cov-2 spike preparations were diluted to a concentration of ~1 mg/ml in 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3. 2.5 µl of protein was deposited on a cf-1.2/1.3 grid that had been glow discharged for 30 seconds in a pelco easiglow™ glow discharge cleaning system. after a 30 s incubation in >95% humidity, excess protein was blotted away for 2.5 seconds before being plunge frozen into liquid ethane using a leica em gp2 plunge freezer (leica microsystems). frozen grids were imaged in a titan krios (thermo fisher) equipped with a k3 detector (gatan). data were acquired using the leginon system 41 . the dose was fractionated over 50 raw frames and collected at 50ms framerate. this dataset was energy-filtered with a slit width of 30 ev. individual frames were aligned and dose-weighted. ctf estimation, particle picking, 2d classifications, ab initio model generation, heterogeneous refinements, and homogeneous 3d refinements were carried out in cryosparc 42 .structures of the all 'down' state (pdb id 6vxx) and single rbd 'up' state (pdb id 6vyb) from the previously published sars-cov-2 ectodomain were used to fit the cryo-em maps in chimera 43 . the 2 rbd 'up' state was generated in pymol using the single rbd 'up' state structure. mutations were made in pymol 44 . coordinates were then fit manually in coot 45 followed by iterative refinement using phenix 46 real space refinement and subsequent manual coordinate fitting in coot. structure and map analysis were performed using pymol and chimera. supplemental figure s4 . alignment of the rs2d and u1s2q designs with the unmutated construct. a) structure of rs2d (dark blue) aligned to the unmutated construct (pdb id 6vxx; red). b) structure of u1s2q (green) aligned to the unmutated construct (pdb id 6vxx; red). c) the u1s2q (green) mutation sites compared to the unmutated form (red).the transmembrane cov s-protein spike trimer is composed of interwoven protomers that include an nterminal receptor binding s1 domain and a c-terminal s2 domain that contains the fusion elements ( figure 1a and b). 2 the s1 domain is subdivided into the n-terminal domain (ntd) followed by the receptor binding domain (rbd) and two structurally conserved subdomains (sd1 and sd2). together these domains cap the s2 domain, protecting the conserved fusion machinery. several structures of soluble ectodomain constructs that retain the complete s1 domain and the surface exposed s2 domain have been determined. these include sars-2 1,3 , sars 4-8 , mers 4, 9 , and other human 2,10 and murine 11 β-cov spike proteins. these structures revealed remarkable conformational heterogeneity in the s-protein spikes, especially in the rbd region. within a single protomer, the rbd could adopt a closed 'down' state ( figure 1a) , in which the rbd covers the apical region of the s2 protein near the c-terminus of the first heptad repeat (hr1), or an open 'up' state in which the rbd is dissociated from the apical central axis of s2 and the ntd. further, cryo-em structures strongly suggest a large degree of domain flexibility in both the 'down' and 'up' states in the ntd and rbd. while these structures have provided essential information to identify the relative arrangement of these domains, the degree to which conformational heterogeneity may be altered via mutation during the natural evolution of the virus and in a vaccine immunogen design context remains to be determined.in this study we have quantified the variability in the s1 and s2 geometric arrangements to reveal important regions of flexibility to consider and to target for structure-based immunogen design. based on these analyses, we have designed mutations that alter the conformational distribution of the domains in the sprotein. we visualized the effect of our designs using a structural determination pipeline relying first on single particle analysis by negative stain electron microscopy (nsem) for rapid and low-cost assessment of the spike ectodomains at low resolution, followed by cryo-em for high-resolution information on the changes introduced by these mutations. our results reveal a heterogeneous conformational landscape of the sars-cov-2 spike that is highly susceptible to modification by the introduction of mutations at sites of contact between the s1 and s2 domains. we also present data on modified sars-2 ectodomain constructs stabilized in conformations thathave not yet been seen in the current available structures, with great interest and direct application in vaccine design.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 18.102087 doi: biorxiv preprint detailed structural schema defining the geometry and internal rearrangements of movable domains of the sars-2 spike.to characterize the unique arrangement of distinct domains in the β-cov spike, we first aimed to develop a precise quantitative definition of their relative positions. examination of available sars and mers s-protein structures revealed: 1) the ntd and rbd subdomains and internal s2 domain move as rigid bodies, and 2) these domains display a remarkable array of relative shifts between the domains in the s1 region and the s2 region's β-sheet motif and connector domain (cd) ( figure 1b-f) . in order to quantify these movements, we have analyzed the relevant regions of motion and their structural disposition in all available β-cov ectodomain spike structures including 15 sars 4,5,7,8 , 10 mers 4,12 , a hku1 2,10 , an oc43 2,10 , a murine β-cov, and three sars-2 13,14 structures (figures 1e-f and 2). each protomer in those structures displaying asymmetric 'up'/down' rbd states was examined independently yielding a dataset of 76 structural states. the ntd was split into a primary n-terminal section and a secondary c-terminal section based upon visual inspection of this region in the various β-cov structures ( figures 1b-c and 2) . we next analyzed s-protein geometry using a vector-based approach. specifically, vectors connecting each region's cα centroids were generated and used to define the relative dispositions of the domains ( figure 1c and 2). the vector magnitudes and select angles and dihedrals were used to identify the breadth of differences in domain positioning and compare between strains. the results indicated that β-cov spike proteins in various strains differ markedly from one another and that considerable variability in the domain arrangements within strains exists, especially in the sars ectodomains (figures 1e-f and 2a-h). in particular, both 1 and ɸ1 (figure 2a-b) , describing the angle between the sd2 to sd1 and sd1 to rbd vectors as well as the sd1 to rbd dihedral, respectively, effectively report on the 'up' and 'down' configurations while indicating substantial differences between sars and mers in both the 'up' and 'down' states. the angular disposition of the ntd elements further indicated differences in sars and mers with a particularly marked shift from the examined β-cov spikes in the murine structure ( figure 1e ). additional s1 differences are observed between vectors involving sd2. the disposition of the s2 domain relative to s1 defined by the dihedral about the vector connecting sd2 to the s2 cd differs markedly between mers/sars-2 and sars as well with the angle between the vectors connecting the ntd' to sd2 and sd2 to the cd demonstrating a shift in sars-2. finally, the disposition of the cd to the inner portion of s2 measured as an angle between a vector connected to an interior s2 β-sheet motif and the vector connecting . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the cd to sd2 indicates sars differs from both mers and sars-2. interestingly, the mers disposition appears to respond to rbd triggering, displaying a bimodal distribution. these results demonstrate that, while the individual domain architectures and overall arrangements are conserved ( figure 1d ), important differences between these domains exists between strains, suggesting that subtle differences in inter-domain contacts could play a major role in determining these distributions and thereby alter surface antigenicity and the propensity of the domains to access 'up' and 'down' rbd states.identification of sites for differential stabilization of the sars-2 ectodomain spike rbd orientation.based on the observed variability in the geometric analysis of β-cov spikes, we asked whether the propensity for the rbd to display the 'down' and 'up' states could be modified via mutations without altering exposed antigenic surfaces. to this end, we identified protomer to protomer interactive sites amenable to modification and down selected mutations at these sites using the schrödinger biologics suite 38, 39, 40 . in an effort to eliminate exposure of the receptor binding site of the rbd, we examined the potential for disulfide linkages between the rbd and its contact with s2 near the c-terminus of hr1 to prevent rbd exposure. we identified a double cysteine mutant, s383c and d985c (rbd to s2 double mutant; rs2d; supplemental figure s1 ), as a candidate for achieving this goal. the transition from the 'down' state to the 'up' state involves shifts in the rbd to ntd contacts. therefore, in an effort to prevent these shifts, we identified a site in an rbd groove adjacent to the ntd for which we prepared a triple mutant, d398l, s514l, and e516l (rbd to ntd triple mutant; rnt, supplemental figure s1 ). as sd1 acts as a hinge point for the rbd 'up'/'down' transitions (figures 1a-c, 2i-j), we hypothesized that enhanced hydrophobicity at the sd1 to s2 interface might shift the position of sd1, thus influencing the hinge and potentially the propensity for rbd triggering. a double mutant, n866i and a570l (subdomain 1 to s2 double mutant; u1s2d, supplemental figure s1 ), as well as quadruple mutant, a570l, t572i, f855y, and n856i (subdomain 1 to s2 quadruple mutant; u1s2q), were identified for this purpose. finally, we asked whether linking sd2 to s2 would alter the conformational distribution of the rbds. the double cysteine mutant, g669c and t866c (subdomain 1 to s2 double mutant; u2s2d, supplemental figure s1 ), was identified for this purpose. these mutants were prepared in the context of a previously published sars-2 ectodomain construct 3 .to assess the quality of the purified spike proteins and to obtain low resolution visualization of the structures, we performed nsem analysis. the micrographs showed a reasonably uniform distribution of particles consistent with the size and shape of the sars-2 spike ectodomain ( figure 3 ). 2d class averages showed spike populations with well resolved domain features. the data were subjected to 3d-classification followed by homogeneous refinement. the unmutated construct was resolved into two classes of roughly equal proportions.the two classes differed in the position of their rbd domains. one class displayed all three rbds in their 'down' positions, whereas, the other class displayed one rbd in the 'up' position. this was consistent with published cryo-em results 15 that described a 1:1 ratio between the 'down' and '1-up' states of the sars-2 spike ectodomain. the mutant spikes were analyzed using a similar workflow as the unmutated spike. all of the mutants displayed well-formed spikes in the micrographs, as well as in the 2d class averages. following 3d classification, for the rs2d construct, we observed only the 'down' conformation; the 1-rbd 'up' state that was seen for the unmutated spike was not found in this dataset. the u1s2q mutant presented another striking finding, where we observed a new conformational state with 2 rbds in the 'up' position. the 2-rbd 'up' state has been reported before for the mers cov spike ectodomain 12 but has not been observed thus far for either the sars or the sars-2 spikes. based on the nsem analysis we selected the rs2d and u1s2q constructs for high resolution analysis by cryo-em.to visualize the mutations and their effect on the structure of the spike, we collected cryo-em datasets for the the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.18.102087 doi: biorxiv preprint arrangements of this construct with that of the unmutated 'down' closed state structure indicated the protein structure was otherwise unperturbed (supplemental figure s4a ).in contrast to the rs2d design, the u1s2q design displayed widespread rearrangement of the s1 domains (supplemental figure s1b ). in the 'down' state structure, density in the mutated s2 position remained in the configuration observed in the unmutated construct, with the n855i and f856y residue loop in close proximity the s2 residue l966 and s1 residue p589. this suggested these mutations had little impact on the observed shifts.however, the s2-interactive sd1 displayed a rigid body movement relative to both the rs2d and unmutated constructs with 1 and ɸ3 displacements of 3.4° and 1.8°, respectively ( figure 5a and b). this resulted in displacement of the a570l+t572i containing loop from the unmutated position which resides near the s2 l966 residue ( figure 5b and supplemental figure s1c ). the s2 contact disruption is accompanied by an angular shift of the ntd away from the primary trimer axis owing to sd1 to ntd' contacts, yielding 3 7 ). the structural details presented here indicate that, while locking the 'down' state rbd into its unmutated position had little impact on the overall configuration of s1, altering the disposition of sd1 had wide ranging impacts, consistent with the observed strain-to-strain differences in the geometric analysis described in figures   1 and 2 . conformational plasticity is a hallmark of enveloped-virus fusion-protein structure, owing to the necessity of protecting the conserved viral fusion elements from host immune responses while retaining a sufficiently steep free-energy gradient to enable host cell fusion 16 . exposed elements are generally well conditioned to be permissive and responsive to mutations through genetic drift and host immune adaptation. conformational plasticity, however, presents an important difficulty in the context of vaccine and drug design. indeed, lessons learned in the continued effort to produce a broadly protective hiv-1 vaccine have demonstrated the importance of a detailed understanding and control of fusion protein dynamics [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . the novel sars-cov-2 is likely no exception in this regard and indeed the conformational plasticity of the sars-2 s-protein appeared greater than that of the hiv-1 env. we aimed to develop a quantitative understanding of β-cov structural states between strains and within each rbd 'down' and 'up' state configuration. the wide breadth of domain arrangements along with the relatively small contact area between the s1 and s2 subunits observed here suggested that, despite a relatively low mutation rate, dramatic changes in s-protein structure may occur from few mutations. indeed, recent evidence for a mutation in the sd2 to s2 contact region suggests a potential fitness gain for acquisition of such interfacial residues 29 . based upon our results, this mutant, d614g, may indeed alter the conformational landscape of the sars-cov-2 s-protein. the datasets generated and/or analyzed during this study are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request.the code developed during this study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.vector analysis was performed using available cryo-em structures for sars-2 13 structures for sars (pdb id 5x58 4 ), mers (pdb id 6q04 36 ), and sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6vxx 15 ) were prepared in maestro 37 using the protein preparation wizard 38 followed by in silico mutagenesis using schrödinger's cysteine mutation 39 and residue scanning 40 tools. residue scanning was first performed for individual selected sites allowing mutations to leu, ile, trp, tyr, and val followed by scanning of combinations for those which yielded a negative overall score. scores and visual inspection were used in the selection of the prepared constructs.the sars-cov-2 ectodomain constructs were produced and purified as described previously (ref- wrapp et al., mclellan) . briefly, a gene encoding residues 1−1208 of the sars-cov-2 s (genbank: mn908947) with proline substitutions at residues 986 and 987, a "gsas" substitution at the furin cleavage site (residues 682-685), a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization motif, an hrv3c protease cleavage site, a twinstreptag and an 8xhistag was synthesized and cloned into the mammalian expression vector pαh. all mutants were introduced in this background. expression plasmids encoding the ectodomain sequence were used to transiently transfect freestyle293f cells using turbo293 (speedbiosystems). protein was purified on the sixth day post-transfection from the filtered supernatant using streptactin resin (iba).purified sars-cov-2 spike preparations were diluted to a concentration of ~1 mg/ml in 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3. 2.5 µl of protein was deposited on a cf-1.2/1.3 grid that had been glow discharged for 30 seconds in a pelco easiglow™ glow discharge cleaning system. after a 30 s incubation in >95% humidity, excess protein was blotted away for 2.5 seconds before being plunge frozen into liquid ethane using a leica em gp2 plunge freezer (leica microsystems). frozen grids were imaged in a titan krios (thermo fisher) equipped with a k3 detector (gatan). data were acquired using the leginon system 41 . the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.18.102087 doi: biorxiv preprint dose was fractionated over 50 raw frames and collected at 50ms framerate. this dataset was energy-filtered with a slit width of 30 ev. individual frames were aligned and dose-weighted. ctf estimation, particle picking, 2d classifications, ab initio model generation, heterogeneous refinements, and homogeneous 3d refinements were carried out in cryosparc 42 .structures of the all 'down' state (pdb id 6vxx) and single rbd 'up' state (pdb id 6vyb) from the previously published sars-cov-2 ectodomain were used to fit the cryo-em maps in chimera 43 . the 2 rbd 'up' state was generated in pymol using the single rbd 'up' state structure. mutations were made in pymol 44 . coordinates were then fit manually in coot 45 followed by iterative refinement using phenix 46 real space refinement and subsequent manual coordinate fitting in coot. structure and map analysis were performed using pymol and chimera.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.18.102087 doi: biorxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . figure s1 . sites identified for differential stabilization of the sars-cov-2 sprotein. single protomer colored according to figure 1 with remaining two protomers color according to s1 (light blue) and s2 (grey). spheres indicate candidate mutation sites. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.18.102087 doi: biorxiv preprint supplemental figure s4 . alignment of the rs2d and u1s2q designs with the unmutated construct. a) structure of rs2d (dark blue) aligned to the unmutated construct (pdb id 6vxx; red). b) structure of u1s2q (green) aligned to the unmutated construct (pdb id 6vxx; red). c) the u1s2q (green) mutation sites compared to the unmutated form (red).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.18.102087 doi: biorxiv preprintthe recent pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 (covid-19) has posed the most challenging global health and sanitation concern of the twenty-first century, with 6,663,304 confirmed cases of infected and 392,802 confirmed fatalities (world health organization, updated on june 6th, 2020 1 ). moreover, this pandemic has caused a widespread lockdown, affecting more than 1 in 2 individuals in the world.the virus responsible for covid-19, sars-cov-2, emerged in late 2019, in the region of wuhan, china. 2 sars-cov-2 belongs to the family coronaviridae, which is characterized by large, enveloped, positive-stranded rna viruses that can potentially cause gastrointestinal, nervous system, and respiratory distress. 3 this family also includes sars-cov and mers-cov, 4 which, despite several similarities, present some interesting differences from sars-cov2. 4, 5 sars-cov-2, mers-cov, and sars-cov use an envelope protein, termed the spike (s) protein, to gain access to host cells. 4, 6 the s protein displays the highest degree of genetic variability in the virus genome. 6 additionally, the sars-cov-2 s protein exhibits a greater affinity for the ace2 receptor with respect to analogs in sars-cov and mers-cov. 7, 8 the sars-cov-2 s protein shares a 96.2% sequence similarity with the bat sars-like ratg13 s protein, indicating the natural origin of the virus. 5, 9 due to its crucial role in the very first stage of viral infection, several studies 7,10−14 point to the s protein as an elective target to develop coronaviruses therapies and vaccines (the s protein is also the main target of neutralizing antibodies 15−17 ) .the s protein belongs to the viral fusion class i proteins, 7 has a trimeric, crown-like shape, protrudes from the virus envelope, and targets diverse host cell receptors in different species (see table 1 in ref 4) . both sars and sars-like (mers and sars-cov-2) coronaviruses target the angiotensin-convertingenzyme 2 (ace2) present in pneumocytes and enterocytes in the respiratory system and other susceptible cells (e.g., intestinal mucosal, renal tubular epithelial, cerebral neurons, and immune cells). 18 the s-ace2 interaction occurs at the very first stage of viral entry to initiate viral fusion with the host cell. 19, 20 the hallmark of sars-cov-2 is that its s protein is optimized for ace2 binding. 9 the s protein comprises two subunits, termed s1 and s2, which are cleaved during the first stage of viral infection. the s1 subunit is responsible for the interaction of the s protein with the host receptor (ace2), while s2 promotes viral fusion. 21 the receptor binding domain (rbd) resides between residues 318 and 513 22 in sars-cov-2 and 318 and 510 in sars-cov. 13 the development of therapeutics targeting the s-ace2 complex requires a comprehensive study of this complex interface and its associated dynamics. 23 thus, investigating the allosteric nature of the s-ace2 complex will help to understand and quantify the extent by which the s protein binds to ace2, and therefore the molecular basis of virus infectivity.the identification of allosteric modulation regions (amrs) allows for the design and testing of allosteric drugs (i.e., drugs targeting a different site from the complex interface) with enhanced bioactivity with respect to orthosteric drugs targeting the protein−protein interaction interface, 24 which are often tightly packed and scarcely accessible. the field of allosteric drugs is a rapidly developing field in drug discovery and may play a crucial role in the therapeutic strategy for sars-cov-2. 25−28 in this study, we adopted a multifaceted computational approach to identify promising "druggable" allosteric sites of viral s protein. we first applied the method of protein contact networks (pcns) to the s-ace2 complex in sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. in previous studies, we adopted this method to investigate both protein−protein interactions 29−31 and the allosteric nature of binding. 32, 33 in this work, the application of pcns clearly highlighted a region in the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 s protein, which acts as the putative locus for allosteric modulation (amr). amr was further investigated in terms of its relevance in the stability of the complex and ability to transmit modulating signals to the binding site by means of independent computational approaches.specifically, we adopted a monomer-based approach 34 which can predict the affinity of the s protein to its ligand. in this step, the ensembles for the ground state of the structures have been produced using the anisotropic network model (anm) approach. 35 moreover, we adopted an unsupervised blind procedure to predict possible interaction sites on s proteins and their affinities for tentative partners using a softness-based prediction of intersubunits affinity (sepas). in addition, the dynamical difference in rbd between the s proteins of the two virus strains suggested that they may have different binding and allosteric properties.we also provided biophysical evidence based on the elastic network modeling (enm) approach, combined with perturbation-response scanning (prs) 36 that amrs in both viruses acted as a mediator of intermolecular allostery between the s protein and ace2. "the three methods converged in allosteric character for residues in amr in both complexes. this allowed us to state that residues in amr for sars-cov-2 amr are more susceptible to allosteric drug targeting than for sars-cov.a recent study 37 suggested that the many residues in the amr may be one of the most efficient epitopes for antibody recognition.preliminary docking studies individuated some molecules that bind to amr (hepcidin), which were independently shown to exhibit strong sequence similarities with the amr. 38 the analyzed structures consist of the following: complex sarsspike glycoprotein-human ace2 complex (stabilized variant, all ace2-bound particles, pdb code 6cs2, 39 termed the sars-cov s/ace2 complex) and the sars-cov-2 analogous spike glycoprotein-human ace2 complex 40 .purposed software was used to transform the full structural information in the pdb files into a protein contact network (pcn): the network nodes are the amino acid residues represented by α-carbons. links between nodes (residues) exist if the mutual distance of the residues (centered on αcarbons) were in the range between 4 and 8 å, thus including only significant (<8 å) noncovalent (>4 å) bonds, while discarding "obliged" contacts due to proximity along the sequence.the adjacency matrix a mathematically represented the pcn in terms of undirected, unweighted network and is defined asthe topological role of nodes (residues) addressed the functional role at the corresponding residues, based on the value of network descriptors. the method is widely discussed elsewhere. 41 the basic network descriptor was the node degree k i , defined asto detect allosteric sites and, more generally, the functional regions activating upon binding, we adopted a method based on network spectral clustering. 42, 43 spectral clustering was based on the laplacian matrix spectral decomposition, where the laplacian matrix l is defined aswhere d is the degree matrix (i.e., a diagonal matrix whose diagonal is the degree vector). the spectral clustering was based on the eigenvalue decomposition of laplacian l. the sign of the fiedler vector (the eigenvector corresponding to the second minor eigenvalue) was used for binary partition (each network was parted into two clusters, which in turn could be parted into four, and so on), as outlined in refs 43 and 44. we previously demonstrated that network clusters (group of residues) correspond to functional regions in the protein. 43 once network nodes (again, protein residues) were parted into the given number of clusters (an independent user-defined parameter for the clustering software), it was possible to define the participation coefficient p where k si is the degree of the ith residue computed in the cluster it belongs (i.e., accounting only for links with nodes pertaining to the same cluster).this network descriptor has been demonstrated to represent the functional role of residues in binding and stability. 33, 41, 43, 45 residues with a high p value are responsible for the communication between clusters (functional regions) and are thus addressed via the role in allosteric communication. 46 in this study, the participation coefficient maps were projected onto ribbon protein structures (as heat maps), to highlight activating hotspots in the spike-ace2 complex. participation coefficient maps are visualized by pymol (https://pymol.org/2/).we characterized the spike protein/ace2 interface by means of descriptors stemming from the structural information and the network analysis described above:• the interchain degree k i ic was defined as the node degree, but was only computed over contacts between nodes (residues) belonging to different chains the interface roughness q/r 29 was defined for each chain participating in an interface, q was the number of chain residues in the interface and r, the sequence range of chain residues in the interface.• the interface amino acid range 29 iar = r/n, where n was the total number of residues in the chain • the interface energy matrix, e, defined as elastic network models (enms) provide efficient methods for investigating the intrinsic dynamics and allosteric communication pathways in proteins. we adopted two elastic network models: (1) anisotropic network model (anm); and (2) gaussian network model (gnm). in anm, 47 the interaction potential for a protein of n residues was:in anm, the 3n × 3n hessian matrix, h, determined the systems dynamics.where x i , y i , and z i represented the cartesian components of the ith residue, v was the potential energy of the system. we selected r c = 13 å.anms provide information about the amplitudes, as well as the direction of residue fluctuations. the similarity between two anm modes, u k and v l , evaluated for proteins with two different conformations, can be quantified in terms of the inner product of their eigenvectors:gnm 36 was based on the description of the protein structure as a network of c α connected by springs of uniform force constant γ if they were located within cutoff distance r c . in gnm, the interaction potential for a protein of n residues waswhere r ij 0 and r ij were the equilibrium and instantaneous distance between residues i and j, and γ was the n × n kirchhoff matrix:thus, the square fluctuations were( 3 )the normal modes were extracted by eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix γ = uλu t , with u being the orthogonal matrix whose kth column u k was the kth mode eigenvector. λ was the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues λ k . the perturbation response scanning (prs) approach was based on the linear response theory and allowed evaluation of residue displacements in response to external forces. 48 our study performed a prs analysis based on gnm by constructing the inverse laplacian matrix, γ −1 .the n-dimensional vector δr of node displacements in response to the application of a perturbation (a n-dimensional force vector f) obeys hooke's law (f = h • δr).the purpose of prs was to exert a force of a given magnitude on the network, one residue at a time, and f for other residues not being perturbed, equal to zero. thus, the force exerted on residue i was expressed as 12) and the resulting response wasδr (i) was an n-dimensional vector that described the deformation of all the residues in response to f (i) . a metric for the response of residue k was the magnitude ⟨∥δr k (i) ∥ 2 ⟩ of the kth block of δr (i) averaged over multiple f (i) , expressed as the ikth element of the n × n prs matrix, s prs . the elements of s prs referred to the unit (or uniform) perturbing force. the response to unit deformation at each perturbation site was obtained by dividing each row by its diagonal value i k j j j j j j j j j j j y { z z z z z z z z z z zthe average effect of the perturbed effector site i on all other residues was computed by averaging over all sensors (receivers) residues j and can be expressed as ⟨(δr i ) 2 ⟩ sensor . the effector profile ⟨(δr i ) 2 ⟩ effector described the average effect that the local perturbation in the effector site i had on all other residues. the maxima along the effector and sensor profiles corresponded to the functional mobile residues that underwent allosteric structural change.because the crystallized structure presented one snapshot of the protein dynamic life at the bottom of a potential well, we created a trajectory of protein dynamics in its ground state by setting the rmsd cutoff to 5 å using the anm 36,47 approach implemented in prody. 49 to predict the most possible protein binding patches (pbps) on spike proteins, we utilized ispred to predict the interface residues. 50 the ispred-predicted interface residues acted as a seed to create a possible pbp based on the procedure as previously described. 34 the predictions of monomer-based affinities based on the mechanical softness of pbps were performed by utilizing sepas ver. 1. 34 we introduced ala mutations into the covid-spike using foldx suite. 51we computed the general interface properties of the spike/ ace2 complex using pisa software, 52 figure 1b ). the chains are also shown to highlight which chains participate in the two clusters ( figure  1a ).the interface between the fusion peptide and the ace2 ectodomain was so strong (in terms of number of contacts between viral and host proteins) that the clustering partition algorithm recognized the fusion+ace2 region as a single cluster, even though it comprised sequences belonging to different chains.the map of the participation coefficient projected onto the ribbon structure of the sars-cov/ace2 complex ( figure 1c ) shows an active region (p > 0) in the junction between the fusion peptide and the trimeric bulk phase of the spike protein. active residues are shown more in greater detail in red in figure 1d . as previously demonstrated, the participation coefficient describes the attitude of residues toward participating in the intercommunication between clusters; thus, it was a putative score of the involvement of the residues in allosteric communication. therefore, this region was a good candidate to intervene in the allosteric regulation of complex formation and there was value in investigating allosteric drugs that target this portion of the protein. figure 2 refers to the analogous analysis for the sars-cov2 s/ace2 complex.a similar active region appeared at the junction of the fusion peptide to the body of the spike protein; however, the active region in the sars cov s/ace2 was more compact than that of sars-cov2 s/ace2. active regions in both complexes were characterized by two β-sheets and unfolded traits, and could thus be targeted to peptides due to flexibility of the region and absence of a pocket to bind small organic molecules. 53 table 1 reports the values of the participation coefficient p in residues with p > 0, all of which were located in the chain carrying the fusion peptides of the sars-cov s/ace2 (chain b, in cyan in figure 1a ) and sars-cov2 s/ace2 (chain c, in magenta in figure 1a) complexes. the sars cov s/ace2 and sars-cov2 s/ace2 complexes accounted for 21 and 22 active residues, respectively. the average value was similar for the two distributions (0.47 for sars cov s/ace2, 0.48 for sars-cov2 s/ace2). however, the absolute values of higher p residues (>0.6) were higher for covid19 s/ace2, indicative of a corresponding larger reactivity of the active region.characterization of the s-ace2 interface table 2 reports the properties of interface s/ace2 in the two complexes. the interface area and the absolute value of energy of the sars cov s/ace2 complex were higher than the corresponding area for the sars-cov-2 s/ace2 complex; however, the specific values for the unit area and single residues were higher for sars-cov-2 s/ace2, indicating a more efficient yet less stable interface.this implied an optimized complex formation with the ace2 of sars-cov-2, as observed in ref 9 . this helped to explain the more rapid kinetics of infection, mediated by a faster complex formation with main receptor, ace2.the rbds for the two proteins are reported as a wide peptide, which comprised approximately 200 residues for both structures; however, a more limited core region, termed the receptor binding motif (rbm), was claimed to actively participate in the complex formation of the spike protein with its receptor, ace2. we independently identified the residues in the spike protein for sars-cov and sars-cov2 using the method of pcns. the position and the value of the interchain degree are reported in table 3 for both complexes. the two residues in the two structures with the highest value of interface degree were 488g in sars-cov and 502g in sars-cov-2, respectively.these two residues could be considered the hotspots of the ppi interface in the s/ace2 complex; both are glycine residues, likely due to the high steric adaptability of the small glycine residues in the most tightly packed region of the s-ace2 interface. this confirmed the high density of the interface and its extremely scarce accessibility to small molecules targeting the region, which also suggested the need to interfere with the s/ ace2 interface through allosteric regulation.in the previous sections, the amrs of the s/ace2 complexes have been identified for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov using the pcns approach ( table 1 ). the amr is accessible for binding, which is at odds with the pbd.one critical property of the protein complexes was the intersubunit affinity. therefore, besides the s/ace2 stability, we predicted the affinity between the amr and incomingdesigned molecule (peptide molecules), which will be designed to affect the function of amr.this was a crucial step that will provide an independent proofof-concept of both the allosteric features of amr (by definition, an allosteric site must "sense" the microenvironment) and the druggability of the predicted amr.we reviewed the need for complete 3d knowledge of the s/ ace2 complex by means of a recently introduced method to predict the intersubunit affinity of protein complexes using protein binding patch (pbp) on a single subunit by computing the pbp mechanical softness. 34 to alleviate the static presentation of the protein structure in a crystallized state, we created ensembles of protein complexes in their ground state using the anm approach. in the first step, we predicted the affinity of the sars-cov-2 and sars-cov s proteins for ace2.we compared the predicted affinity between the s protein and ace2 when the s protein was in its monomeric or trimeric state to obtain some hints about the effect of adjacent subunits on the affinity between spike and its ligand (figure 3 ). subunits (chains) are denoted as sa, sb, and sc.to manage the potential states of the spike protein, we propose different forms of pbps on the s protein:• the sa subunit is alone and waiting for its partner (left column, figure 3 ). we suppose that sa may interact with ace2 using pbps similar to those in the ensemble of s/ ace2 in its dimeric state (the first row, figure 3 ) or by using pbps similar to ones sa displays in the trimer spike and ace2 ensemble (second row, figure 3 ) • subunit sa finds ace2 and binds it directly (right column, figure 3 ). sa binds to ace2 via the pbps that it displays, either when no sb subunit is available (the first row, figure 3 ) or in association with sb monomers (second row, figure 3 ).our computations suggested that sars-cov-2 sa (dark blue curves, figure 3 ) was more sensitive to the presence of the sb subunit than sars-cov sa (red curves, figure 3 ). this result suggested approaches that potentially disrupted the sa-sb association may provide an efficient therapeutic route. we observed a higher affinity between s and ace2 in sars-cov-2 in sars-cov. this observation may explain the higher infectivity of sars-cov-2.we are interested in predicting the affinities between possible pbps on spike proteins and tentative protein partners. in this case, we did not know the pbps on spike proteins because we did not have the resolved 3d structures of all possible protein complexes between the spike protein and other natural or synthesized partners. we predicted the seed interface residues on the spike surface using the ispred approach. 50 by expanding the selection radius for defining the pbp region, 34 many possible pbps were generated for both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike proteins. using sepas, the affinities between the generated pbps and unknown partners were predicted.the affinities averaged over the whole are presented in figure  4a and b (for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spikes, respectively); the average affinities mapped on the surface of the spike proteins are reported in supporting information figures 1 and 2 . some of the predicted regions with an affinity < −5 kcal/mol resided in the interface region of the spike subunits. there were some residues in the proposed pbps that belonged to amr (indicated as red triangles in figure 4 ). this meant that amr could act as a distinct pbp for some partners, suggesting that targeting amr may be a good choice for drug design.thus, in considering amr as distinct pbp, we were able to 1. predict the affinities between amr and unknown druglike protein partners, simply by using a 3d structure of amr on the spike subunit in different ensembles (monomer, case "c" in figure 5a ) 2. account for the effect of ace2 binding on amr affinity for its possible partners. we assumed the spike monomer in association with ace2 then predicted the affinity between amr and its possible partners (dimer, case "dc" in figure 5a ) 3. address the effect of the sb spike chains on the affinity of amr in the sa spike chain for its partners, feeding sepas with the trimeric state of spikes (trimer, case "abc" in figure 5a ) 4. analyze the condition of a trimer spike and ace2 in terms of a holo-complex (s/ace2 complex, case "abcd" in figure 5a )these results indicated that the amr of sars-cov-2 spike exhibited a higher affinity for generic peptides than the amr of sars-cov spike. interestingly, the affinity of amr for their partners was increased upon binding to ace2, which suggested an interplay between the two distant regions, the ace2-binding site of spike and amr. this last result could be considered to be another proof-of-concept of the allosteric character of the amr. . predicted affinities of spikes to ace2 are presented. the affinity of sars-cov 2 spike (blue curve) and sars-cov spike (red curve) to ace2 is predicted using sars-cov 2/sars_x_c/b_y summarized the state of spike proteins in affinity prediction: x denotes number of chain in predictions. x = 1 means s1 protein in monomer form is considered, x = 2 means s1 + ace2 complex, and x = 4 means whole spike complex + ace2. y notes the considered pbp in computations: y = 2 means the pbp's residues of s1 in s1-ace2 complex is used to predict the affinity and y = 4 means the pbp's residues of s1 in whole spike proteins-ace2 complex is used to predict the affinity between s1 and ace2. horizontal axis presents predicted affinity (kcal/mol). normalized density denotes in y-axis.journal of proteome research pubs.acs.org/jpr article to further investigate the effect of the induced structural perturbation in amr on the binding affinity of the spike protein to ace2, we introduced two sets of ala mutations in amr. in one set, the amr residues that play a major role in allosteric modulation (p > 0.5 in table 1 ) were mutated to ala, and in the other set, all residues of amr on sars-cov-2 sa were mutated to ala.to simulate an sa perturbation, we used the ensemble of structures generated using the anm approach after setting the rmsd cutoff to 8 å for selecting normal mode states. such global perturbation only distorts the ace2-binding site of sa to less than 1.5 å. in figure 5b , we reported that wild-type sa exhibits a shoulder in its affinity density curve at a high affinity region. our observations suggested that the structural perturbation of amr due to the ala mutation of native residues decreased the affinity of sa for ace2. this was further confirmation of the allosteric properties of the amr.in order to explore amr druggability, we started by recognizing the strict structural similarity of the amr region with hepcidin, a crucial protein for iron regulation. moreover, a recent preprint reported a distant (albeit relevant) sequence similarity between hepcidin and the sars-cov-2 spike protein. 38 it has been established that there was some proof of the similarity between the hydrophobicity spectra of ligand− receptor pairs, which fostered the observed sequence similarity between hepcidin and the sars-cov-2 s-protein. 55, 56 moreover, hepcidin is strictly involved in interleukin 6 (il-6) regulation, 57 given that il-6 is the main actor associated with the "cytokine storm" that is linked to fatalities provoked by sars-cov-2 infection. 58 a preliminary docking analysis showed a perfect fit between hepcidin and the amr region; however, this now must only be considered as a first step with which to prioritize different peptides as allosteric effectors.in addition to the characterization of the s/ace2 interface, a comparison of rbd dynamics between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 was also important to understand the functional mechanism of the s/ace2 interaction. to this aim, the overlapping values between the slowest anm modes (eigenvectors) were calculated to compare the intrinsic dynamics of rbds in both s proteins (eq 8 in materials and methods). in figure 6a , the dot products (overlap values) were plotted in the map for the rbds in sars-cov versus sars-cov-2 for the first 10 anm modes. in this map, the upper limit of 1 indicated a perfect overlap (red) correspondent to a perfectly shared dynamics, while 0 indicated no overlap (blue), figure 4 . affinity of possible pbps on the s1 subunit of the spike to tentative proteins are predicted. possible pbps are defined for the s1 subunit. the affinity of the pbps on sars-cov2 (a) and sars-cov (b) s1 protein for their possible partners is presented. left vertical axis points to the averaged predicted affinity (kcal/mol) of the proposed pbps. right vertical axis denotes the p metric (table 1 ) of the amr participat residues. x-axis notes the residue of the pbp's central residue. red triangles represent the position of amr residues on the s1 protein sequence. figure 5 . affinity of amr for tentative protein partners and the effect of amr perturbation on ace2 affinity are presented. (a) affinity (kcal/ mol) of amr to possible partners are predicted when s1 is a monomer (state c), s1 is associated with ace2 (stade dc), s1 is accompanied by two s2 subunits (state abc), and when the whole spike binds to ace2 (state abcd). (b) affinity of s1 for ace2 is predicted when amr is intact (wt), residues of amr with p > 0.5 are mutated to ala (p > 0.5), or all amr residues are mutated to ala (p > 0). the affected region of affinity density curve is marked with vertical gray arrow. x-axis notes predicted affinity (kcal/mol) and vertical axis presents normalized density of affinities.indicating that they showed independent dynamics. although rbds in the two complexes showed very high structural similarity with an rmsd of 0.68 å, the overlap between the first 10 anm modes of two rbds exhibited some differences. overlap values with ∼0.6 for the first three modes indicated a weaker dynamical overlap, even at the lowest frequencies, which were those endowed with most important functional meaning.to further understand the relative motions and dynamics of the interface structures, the anm motions of the first mode for two rbds are shown in figure 6b and c. in anm 1, most of the interfacial residues were very stable (blue), while the peripheral loop exhibited the highest fluctuation (red). the most relevant dynamical difference between the two systems referred to this loop motion. for sars-cov rbd, the highest fluctuations point to residues 463d and 465 k, while the sars-cov-2 rbd displayed higher flexibilities at 476g to 479p (orange beads). this loop was found to be located at the c terminal of the α1 helix of the rbd, interacting with ace2 through van der waals forces, hereinafter referred to as an "interfacial c loop". we suppose that the difference in the dynamics of such an interfacial c loop may be caused by the amino acid mutations in their respective interfaces with ace2 (i.e., 442y to 455l, 443l to f, 460f to 473y, and 479n to 493q) from sars-cov-rbd to sars-cov-2-rbd. 59 thus, we further mapped these interfacial mutations onto the structures (yellow beads). thus, the lower fluctuations of these mutations in sars-cov-2-rbd may account for the higher affinity of such interface.accordingly, despite the overall structural similarity, rbds in the two s proteins showed different dynamics, especially for the s-ace2 interfaces. these differences in dynamics may also indicate that these two s-ace2 interfaces achieved their activities, including substrate binding and allosteric regulation.we performed perturbation response scanning (prs) based on gnm to quantify the allosteric properties of amrs and identify the key residues for which perturbation provokes structural dynamical changes at a long distance. first, the prs map provided information regarding the sensitivity and effectiveness of a given residue in transmitting signals. the column of the matrix corresponding to a single residue (e.g., for r313v) described how well-connected that residue was within the amr region and its likely relevance in transmitting allosteric signals to distal parts of the s-ace2 complex.here, we adapted this method to probe the allosteric response of the amr region upon perturbation on residues with p > 0.5 from the pcn prediction (table 1 ). for the s/ace2 complex in sars-cov, the dynamical changes of the other residues in amr (red arrows in figure 7a ) have been caught due to their close distance in space. in addition, all amr residues have allosteric effects on the interfacial c loop with high fluctuation. because the effectiveness of the three residues with p > 0.5 was almost identical, we only reported in figure 7a for the case of the perturbation of 568s that had the highest p value (0.64). it is appreciated that three residues (313v, 529n, and 568s) displayed long-range allosteric effects on some particular regions in ace2 through the s/ace interface. the residues relative to the amr in sars-cov-2 could be classified into three types according to their allosteric character.the first class included most residues, including 320q, 321p, 322t, 323e, 539n, 548t, and 578p. upon perturbation, these residues exerted a moderate dynamical effect on other amr residues, and a relatively weak but sensible intramolecular allosteric effect on residues of the s/ace2 interface, especially on the highly flexible c loop. the perturbation of these amr residues largely affected the dynamics of ace2 through stronger long-range allosteric communications.the perturbation of the second type of (531n and 532l) residues provokes a large intermolecular allosteric effect in the rbd, including some peaks at the interfacial c loop (figure 7c ). in addition, the perturbation weakened the intermolecular communications from amr to ace2.the last type only included 580t, which exhibited similar dynamical effects on three regions (amr, rbd, and ace2) via long-range communications.accordingly, our prs analysis provided important insight into amr allostery. among other findings, 3 residues in sars-cov amr and 10 residues in sars-cov-2 amr were predicted to have wide-ranging allosteric effects on the ace2 protein. this result in conjunction with the statistically significant higher effectiveness of the sars-cov-2 amr perturbation (si figure  3) , suggested that its allosteric character was stronger than that of amr in sars-cov. notably, in both complexes, the interfacial c loop formed a bridge to transmit the signal from amr to ace2. the reported rbd-ace2 interfacial mutations from sars-cov to sars-cov-2 were close to the interfacial c loop. therefore, we propose that the different allosteric properties of amr residues were due to mutations in the s-ace2 interface.in figure s3 , the box plot shows that amr in sars-cov-2 had a statistically higher effectiveness than that of sars-cov (under the p-value of 7.4 × 10 −5 by wilcoxon signed-ranked test).the application of pcns, sepas (affinity by flexibility) and prs based on elastic network modes to two complexes of the spike protein with its receptor, ace2, generated highly consistent results. the integrated computational approach disclosed active zones in the sars-cov and sars-cov2 complexes with the ace2 ectodomain. these active zones, as demonstrated in previous studies 41, 60, 61 and in the present research by the convergence among different approaches, have an extremely high probability of acting as allosteric sites, which can modulate spike/ace2 protein binding.these regions are worthy of further investigation from the perspective of drug or vaccine development as indicated by a preliminary docking simulation. from a methodological perspective, our results highlighted the need to identify convergence of different simulation methods arising from independent theoretical premises, in order to obtain a reliable picture of the associated biomolecular systems.the supporting information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00273. figure s1 : affinity for the sars-cov s/ace2 complex. figure s2 : affinity for the sars-cov2 s/ace2 complex. figure s3 : wilcox test for effectiveness (pdf)coronaviruses (covs) have caused a major outbreak of human fatal pneumonia since the beginning of the 21st century. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) broke out and spread to five continents in 2003 with a lethal rate of 10% 1, 2 (mers-cov) broke out in the arabian peninsula in 2012 with a fatality rate of 35% 3, 4 . both sars-cov and mers-cov are zoonotic viruses, and their hosts are bat/civet and dromedary, respectively 5, 6 . to date, no specific therapeutic drug or vaccine has been approved for the treatment of human coronavirus. therefore, covs are considered to be a kind of viruses, of which the outbreak poses a huge threat to humans. because wuhan viral pneumonia cases were discovered at the end of 2019, the coronavirus was named as 2019 novel coronavirus or "2019-ncov" by the world health organization (who) on january 12, 2020 7, 8 . since 2019-ncov is highly homologous with sars-cov, it is considered a close relative of sars-cov. theinternational virus classification commission (ictv) classified 2019-ncov as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) on february 11, 2020. at the same time, who named the disease caused by 2019-ncov as covid-19. common symptoms of a person infected with coronavirus include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath, and dyspnea. in more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure, and even death. there is currently no specific medicine or treatment for diseases caused by sars-cov-2 9 .covs are enveloped viruses with a positive rna genome, belonging to the coronaviridae family of the order nidovirales, which are divided into four genera (α, β, γ, and δ). the sars-cov-2 belongs to the β genus.covs contain at least four structural proteins: spike (s) protein, envelope (e) protein, membrane (m) protein, and nucleocapsid (n) protein 10 . among them, spike promotes host attachment and virus-cell membrane fusion during virus infection. therefore, spike determines to some extent the host range.potential anti-coronavirus therapies can be divided into two categories depending on the target, one is acting on the human immune system or human cells, and the other is on coronavirus itself. in terms of the human immune system, the innate immune system response plays an important role in controlling the replication and infection of coronavirus, and interferon is expected to enhance the immune response 11 .blocking the signal pathways of human cells required for virus replication may show a certain anti-viral effect.in addition, viruses often bind to receptor proteins on the surface of cells in order to entering human cells, for example, the sars virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor [12] [13] [14] and the mers binds to the dpp4 receptor 15, 16 . the therapies acting on the coronavirus itself include preventing the synthesis of viral rna through acting on the genetic material of the virus, inhibiting virus replication through acting on critical enzymes of virus, and blocking the virus binding to human cell receptors or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process through acting on some structural proteins.in the fight against coronavirus, scientists have come up with three strategies for developing new drugs 17 .the first strategy is to test existing broad-spectrum anti-virals 18 . interferons, ribavirin, and cyclophilin inhibitors used to treat coronavirus pneumonia fall into this category. the advantages of these therapies are that their metabolic characteristics, dosages used, potential efficacy and side effects are clear as they have been approved for treating viral infections. but the disadvantage is that these therapies are too "broad-spectrum" and cannot kill coronaviruses in a targeted manner, and their side effects should not be underestimated. the second strategy is to use existing molecular databases to screen for molecules that may have therapeutic effect on coronavirus 19, 20 . high-throughput screening makes this strategy possible, and new functions of many drug molecules can be found through this strategy, for example, the discovery of anti-hiv infection drug lopinavir/ritonavir. the third strategy is directly based on the genomic information and pathological characteristics of different coronaviruses to develop new targeted drugs from scratch.theoretically, the drugs found through these therapies would exhibit better anti-coronavirus effects, but the research procedure of new drug might cost several years, or even more than 10 years 11 .for the development of medicines treating sars-cov-2, the fastest way is to find potential molecules from the marketed drugs. once the efficacy is determined, it can be approved by the green channel or approved by the hospital ethics committee for rapid clinical treatment of patients. herein, bioinformatics analysis on the proteins encoded by the novel coronavirus genes was systematically conducted, and the proteins of sars-cov-2 were compared with other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and mers-cov. we conducted homology modeling to build all possible protein structures, including viral papain like protease (plpro), main protease (3clpro, also named 3-chymotrypsin-like protease), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, spike, etc. further, we used these proteins and human relative proteins [human ace2 and type-ii transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) enzymes] as targets to screen zinc u. s food and drug administration (fda)-approved drug database (zinc drug database, zdd), our own database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine), and the database of commonly used anti-viral drugs (78 compounds) by virtual ligand screening method. this study predicts a variety of compounds that may inhibit novel coronaviruses and provides scientists with information on compounds that may be effective. subsequent validation of anti-viral effects in vitro and in vivo will provide useful information for clinical treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia.the complete genome of wuhan-hu-1 (nc_045512.2) was downloaded from ncbi nucleotide database. the nucleotide sequences were aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes (alogorithm parameters, max target sequences: 1000, expect threshold: 10). we obtained the sars-cov-2 genome from gene bank. the genome sequence of wuhan-hu-1 was aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes. after phylogenetic analysis and sequence alignment of 23 coronaviruses from various species. we found three coronaviruses from bat (96%, 88% and 88% for bat-cov ratg13, bat-sl-covzxc12 and bat-sl-covzc45, respectively) have the highest genome sequence identity to sars-cov-2 (fig. 1a) . moreover, as shown in fig is helicase. as a new coronavirus, structure biology study about these proteins still at early stage. until now, only one crystal structure of 3clpro has been deposited in pdb (pdb code: 6lu7).in order to acquire more three-dimensional structure information of proteins about these new coronaviruses for subsequent drug screening, we aligned all protein sequences from sars-cov-2 with all sequences in pdb1018 database in fold & function assignment system (supporting information figs. s19-s34). fortunately, most of these proteins have found their high homology proteins that have three-dimensional structure, with homology between 72%-99% (supporting information table s1 ). those pdb codes were labeled below the corresponding sequences in fig. 2b . unsurprisingly, all these proteins with the highest homology are from sars. nevertheless, there are some proteins still have not high homologous in the database. after the prediction of transmembrane helices in these proteins carried out in tmhmm server, as expected, we found that all these proteins are transmembrane proteins except for nsp2 (supporting information figs. s35-s41). so far, we have found as much structural information of this viral proteins as possible, which provides the basis for subsequent homology modeling and drug screening. before homology modeling, all these proteins sequences were aligned with model sequences derived from sars-cov and predicted secondary structure as the same time ( fig. 3a and table s1 ). interestingly, as shown in fig. 3a , important anti-virus drug target protein like 3clpro, plpro, and rdrp are highly conserved between those two human coronaviruses, especially in functional region. as shown in table s1 , all these potential drug target proteins have been homologously modeled, and all generated protein models were provided as the pdb files in supporting information. all other coordinates of target-screening hit complexes can be provided upon request.in order to verify the accuracy of homologous modeling, we aligned the computational structure of the sars-cov-2 3clpro that modeled from the sars-cov 3clpro with its crystal structure of sars-cov-2 3clpro (6lu7) just solved and released during this manuscript was being prepared. sequence between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is 76% (fig. 3c ). recent researches speculated that sars-cov-2 could also bind to ace2, and this was verified by computational docking and elisa measurement 24, 25 . moreover, homology of the spike-rbd sequence between sars-cov-2 and bat-covratg13 is as high as 95%. despite the high homology of ratg13 and sars-cov-2 in spike sequence, our analysis found that four among the five most important amino acids (l465, l495, y502, d510, and h514) that bind to ace2 12 in bat-cov ratg13 differ from sars-cov-2 ( fig. 3c ). and there is no related research literature about whether bat-cov ratg13 can infect human yet. we also performed homology modeling on the bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd (supporting information fig. s1 ). three spike rbd structures have been docked with human ace2. among them, for the conformations which most resemble the crystal structure of sars rbd-ace2 complex 26 , the binding free energy between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and human ace2 was -33.72 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s2 ), that between sars-cov spike rbd and ace2 was -49.22 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s3 ), and that between bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd and ace2 was -31.06 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s4 ).the therapies that act on the coronavirus can be divided into several categories based on the specific pathways:(1) some acting on enzymes or functional proteins that are critical to virus, preventing the virus rna synthesis and replication; (2) some acting on structural proteins of virus, blocking virus from binding to human cell receptors, or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process; (3) some producing virulence factor to restore host's innate immunity; (4) some acting on host's specific receptors or enzymes, preventing virus from entering into host's cells. the related target proteins include nsp1, nsp3 (nsp3b, nsp3c, plpro, and nsp3e), based on homology models of the above 18 viral proteins (19 models) and 2 human targets, we resorted to structure-based virtual ligand screening method using icm 3.7.3 modeling software (molsoft llc) to screen potential small-molecule compounds from a zinc drug database (2924 compounds) and a small in-house database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine) and derivatives (1066 compounds). compounds with lower calculated binding energies (being expressed with scores and mfscores) are considered to have higher binding affinities with the target protein.as plpro is responsible for the cleavages of n-terminus of the replicase poly-protein to release nsp1, nsp2 and nsp3, which is essential for correcting virus replication 27 .plpro was also confirmed to be significant to antagonize the host's innate immunity [28] [29] [30] . as an indispensable enzyme in the process of coronavirus replication and infection of the host, plpro has been a popular target for coronavirus inhibitors. it is very valuable for targeting plpro to treat coronavirus infections, but no inhibitor has been approved by the fda for marketing.the screening results (table 1 and anti-viral drug ribavirin was predicted to bind to plpro with low binding energy (scores=-38.58). from generated docking model, ribavirin was bound in the active site of the enzyme as reported sars-plpro inhibitors (pdb code 3e9s). hydrogen bonds were predicted between gly164, gln270, tyr274, asp303 and the compound. also, π-π stacking was found between tyr265 and triazolering in the compound ( fig. 4a and b). the strong hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction between ribavirin with the enzyme imply it may be a potent plpro inhibitor.the 3clpro, also known as nsp5, is first automatically cleaved from poly-proteins to produce mature enzymes, and then further cleaves downstream nsps at 11 sites to release nsp4-nsp16 31 . 3clpro directly mediates the maturation of nsps, which is essential in the life cycle of the virus. the detailed investigation on the structure and catalytic mechanism of 3clpro makes 3clpro an attractive target for anti-coronavirus drug development. inhibitors targeting at sars-cov 3clpro mainly include peptide inhibitors and small-molecule inhibitors [32] .3clpro monomer has three domains, domain i (residues 8-101), domain ii (residues 102-184) anddomain iii (residues 201-303), and a long loop (residues 185-200) connects domains ii and iii. the active site of 3clpro is located in the gap between domains i and ii, and has a cyshis catalytic dyad (cys145 and his41) 33 . as shown in table 3 and supporting excel file 3clpro.xlsx), anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline and oxytetracycline), anti-hypertensive drugs (nicardipine and telmisartan), and conivaptan treating hyponatremia show highest binding affinity to 3clpro. several natural compounds and derivatives with anti-virus and anti-inflammatory effects also exhibited high binding affinity to 3clpro (table   4 and supporting excel file 3clpro_np.xlsx), including a series of andrographolide derivatives (chrysin-7-o-β-glucuronide from scutellaria baicalensis, betulonal from cassine xylocarpa, 2β-hydroxy-3,4-seco-friedelolactone-27-oic acid, isodecortinol and cerevisterol from viola diffusa, hesperidin and neohesperidin from citrus aurantium, kouitchenside i and deacetylcentapicrin from the plants of swertia genus. the above results suggest that these small-molecule compounds might be the potential 3clproinhibitors and could probably be used for treating sars-cov-2.it's worth mentioning, anti-asthmatic drug montelukast also showed low binding energy to 3clpro. as shown in fig. 5a , montelukast was well fitted into the active pocket of 3clpro, in which lots of hydrophobic amino acids, just like thr24, leu27, his41, phe140, cys145, his163, met165, pro168 and his172 compose a relatively hydrophobic environment to contain the compound and stabilize its conformation. hydrogen bonding was predicted between asn142 and the carbonyl group of the compound (fig. 5b ). dna and rna along the 5′-3′ direction in an ntp-dependent manner 37 . importantly, it has been reported that the sars-nsp13 sequence is conserved and indispensable, and is a necessary component for the replication of coronavirus. therefore, it has been identified as a target for anti-viral drug discovery, but there are few reports about nsp13 inhibitors 38, 39 .based on structure modeling of helicase protein, anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, cefsulodine and rolitetracycline), anti-fungal drug itraconazole, anti-human immunodeficiency virus-1 (hiv-1) drug saquinavir, anti-coagulant drug dabigatran, and diuretic drug canrenoic acid were predicted to be helicase inhibitors with high mfscores through virtual ligand screening. the natural products, such as many flavanoids from different sources (α-glucosyl hesperidin, hesperidin, rutin, quercetagetin 6-o-β-d-glucopyranoside and homovitexin), showed high binding affinity to this target.besides the above targets, some non-structural proteins, including nsp3b, nsp3e, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp9, nsp10, nsp14, nsp15, and nsp16, also play an important role in the virus rna synthesis and replication, suggesting these proteins may be useful targets for the anti-viral drug discovery. the virtual screening results showed many anti-bacterial, anti-viral, or anti-inflammatory drugs from zinc drug database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database displayed potential good affinity to these targets, and the detailed information of virtual screening results is shown in supporting excel files (for zdd screening results, file names as target.xlsx; for natural products screening results, file names as target_np.xlsx).spike is the main structural protein of coronavirus and assembles into a special corolla structure on the surface of the virus as a trimer. spike is a main protein that interacts with the host by binding to host cell receptors to mediate virus invasion and determine viral tissue or host tropism 40 . spike is cleaved into s1 and s2 by the host cell protease like tmprss2, etc. the main function of s1 is to bind with host cell surface receptors, and the however, most of above compounds were not predicted to bind with the binding interface of the spike-ace2 complex. the only compound that could target the binding interface between spike and ace2 was hesperidin, as shown in fig. 6a . hesperidin was predicted to lie on the middle shallow pit of the surface of rbd of spike, where the dihydroflavone part of the compound went parallel with the β-6 sheet of rbd.and the sugar part was inserted into the shallow pit in the direction away from ace2, where a few hydrophobic amino acids, including tyr436, try440, leu442, phe443, phe476, try475, try481 and tyr49 form a relatively hydrophobic shallow pocket to contain the compound (fig. 6b) . hydrogen bonding was predicted between tyr440 and the compound. by superimposing the ace2-rbd complex to the hesperidin-rbd complex, a distinct overlap of hesperidin with the interface of ace2 could be observed (fig.   6c ), suggesting hesperidin may disrupt the interaction of ace2 with rbd.except for spike protein, e protein (e-channel) possesses important biological functions for the structural integrity of coronavirus and host virulence. nrbd and crbd of coronavirus n protein are needed for n proteins in host cells to bind with coronavirus rna efficiently. therefore, e protein or n protein (nrbd and crbd domains) can be used as targets for the discovery of anti-viral drugs. through virtual screening, many anti-bacterial, anti-viral, anti-tumor, anti-asthmatic, and anti-inflammatory drugs, etc. from zinc database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database were found to display relatively good affinity to these targets. and the detailed results of virtual screening are given in supplementary excel files.there are three coronavirus virulence factors nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a related to interfering host's innate immunity and assisting coronavirus immune escape. nsp1 interacts with host 40s ribosomal subunit that induces specifically host mrna degradation 42 and also inhibits type-i interferon production 43 . nsp3c has ability to bind with host's adp-ribose to help coronavirus resist host innate immunity 44 . bone marrow matrix antigen 2 (bst-2) can inhibit the release of newly-assembled coronavirus from host cells. sars-cov orf7a directly binds to bst-2 and inhibits its activity by blocking the glycosylation of bst-2 45 . these evidences suggest that nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a may be potential targets for anti-viral drug discovery.the detailed screening results of nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a showed that a series of clinical drugs and natural products with anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory effects exhibited relatively high binding affinity to these three target proteins, such as piperacillin, cefpiramide, streptomycin, lymecycline, tetracycline, platycodin d from platycodon grandifloras, wogonoside from scutellaria baicalensis, vitexin from vitex negundo, andrographolide derivatives, and xanthones from swertia genus. the detailed results of virtual screening are shown in supporting excel files.the host ace2 has been proved by many studies to be the specific receptor for the spike rbd of sars-cov 12 . the latest research shows that the host receptor of sars-cov-2 is consistent with sars-cov, exhibiting that the spike rbd sequence of sars-cov-2 is similar to sars-cov rbd and there are important interactions between several key amino acid residues of rbd receptor-binding motif and ace2 24 .based on the current research progress, ace2 is considered as a host target for the treatment of coronavirus infection to block sars-cov-2 from entering host cells.based on the virtual screening results of ace2 protein, anti-diabetes drug troglitazone, anti-hypertensive drug losartan, analgesia drug ergotamine, anti-bacterial drug cefmenoxime, and hepatoprotective drug silybin, etc., were predicted to bind with ace2 with low energy. the natural products, such as phyllaemblicin g7from phyllanthus emblica, xanthones from the plants of swertiagenus, neohesperidin and hesperidin from citrus aurantium, exhibited potentially high binding affinity to ace2 protein. however, none of above ace2binding compounds was predicted to target the ace2-rbd interface.in addition, tmprss2 was known to cut the spike to trigger the infection of sars-cov and mers-cov. studies have shown that inhibiting the enzyme activity of tmprss2 can prevent some coronaviruses from entering host cells 46 . as a possible target for anti-viral drug discovery, the virtual screen results (shown in supporting excel files) predicted many anti-bacterial drugs (pivampicillin, hetacillin, cefoperazone and clindamycin) and anti-virus natural compounds (phyllaemblicin g7, neoandrographolide, kouitchenside i), etc. to be potential tmprss2 inhibitors.in order to further verify the screening results of zinc drug database and utilize the current resource of anti-viral drugs immediately, we constructed a database of 78 anti-viral drugs for deep calculation, including compounds already on the market and currently undergoing clinical trials to treat sars-cov-2 infections.the rdrp inhibitor gpc-n114 49 .the binding pocket of remdesivir was in the bottom of the rna template channel, which position was for the acceptor template nucleotide ( fig. 7a and b) . the compound was well fitted with the shape of the pocket, where it formed three hydrogen bonds with asn497, arg569 and asp684.in addition, hydrophobic interactions with leu576, ala685 and tyr687 may further direct the favorite conformation of remdesivir (fig. 7c) .interestingly, remdesivir was predicted to bind with the target tmprss2 with low binding energy for both score and mfscore. as shown in fig. 8a , remdesivir was bound in a relatively positively-charged allosteric pocket which is far away from the enzyme active center. asn84 and arg405 formed two hydrogen bonds with the phosphate groups of the compound. weak hydrophobic interaction between the pyrrolotriazine ring of remdesivir with tyr131 and try401, and side chains of some polar amino acids may further stabilize the compound conformation (fig. 8b) . we also performed the longitudinal analysis on the drugs against 21 targets, and the results showed that only tenofovir, disoproxil, fumarate, and beclabuvir may bind to nsp1. fewer compounds were predicted to act on some targets, such as nsp1, nsp3e, nsp9, nsp10, nsp16, nrbd, crbd, orf7a, and tmprss2,showing that these selected anti-viral drugs are unlikely to acting on the above targets of the new coronavirus, which provides a meaningful reference for our future research.for other targets, such as nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp,helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2, more anti-viral drugs were predicted to bind with them, especially e-channel, rdrp, 3clpro and plpro, indicating that these targets are more likely to be useful for the discovery of sars-cov-2 therapeutic drugs from known anti-virals, and should be the focus of our subsequent research.the ongoing sars-cov-2 epidemic makes us painfully realize that our current for those targets which are difficult to find direct inhibitors, or non-druggable targets, just like nsp1, nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel, etc., currently popular protac technology may be a good strategy to degrade these proteins and then inhibit the virus. the potential binding compounds found in this study for these targets might be a good start point.for spike protein, we found only one compound, natural hesperidin was targeting the binding between spike rbd and human ace2. however, not like the ace2 binding compounds, non-interface binding compound may still meaningful applications, considering that the fusion of covs membrane with host cell membrane need the big conformational change of remained spike part after rbd removal 55 . any small molecule bound to spike at this time may interfere the re-folding of spike therefore inhibits the viral infection process. furthermore, small molecule that can target any part of spike protein may be a good start point to design protac based therapy.also, we dock existing anti-viral drugs with our targets, analyze the possible targets of each anti-viral drug horizontally, and analyze the drugs that may interact with 21 targets vertically. we analyzed 21 targets based on the docking results and found that nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp, helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2 are more likely to be therapeutic targets of anti-viral drugs. the three targets nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel are screened more anti-viral drugs. this may be due to the model problem because of flexible small protein (nsp3b and nsp3c) or partial model (e-channel).whether the screened anti-viral drugs really work on these targets needs further verification. we also do not recommend the application of new coronavirus pneumonia to compounds for which no target has been predicted.the triphosphate nucleotide product of remdesivir, remdesivir-tp, competes with rdrp for substrate atp, so it can interfere with viral rna synthesis. our docking results show that remdesivir-tp binds to sars-cov-2 rdrp, with a score of -112.8, and the docking results are consistent with its original anti-viral mechanism, so we think remdesivir may be good in treating sars-cov-2 pneumonia. in addition, remdesivir also predicted to bind with the human tmprss2, a protein facilitating the virus infection, this is a new discovery and provides ideas for subsequent research.chloroquine phosphate has shown better anti-sars-cov-2 effects in recent studies, but this drug has no clear target of action. in our docking results, chloroquine phosphate is predicted to possibly combine withnsp3b and e-channel. but we need to do further experiments to verify this conclusion.in coronaviruses (covs) have caused a major outbreak of human fatal pneumonia since the beginning of the 21st century. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) broke out and spread to five continents in 2003 with a lethal rate of 10% 1,2 . the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) broke out in the arabian peninsula in 2012 with a fatality rate of 35% 3, 4 . both sars-cov and mers-cov are zoonotic viruses, and their hosts are bat/civet and dromedary, respectively 5, 6 . to date, no specific therapeutic drug or vaccine has been approved for the treatment of human coronavirus. therefore, covs are considered to be a kind of viruses, of which the outbreak poses a huge threat to humans. the novel coronavirus found at the end of 2019 was named as 2019 novel coronavirus or "2019-ncov" by the world health organization (who) on january 12, 2020 7, 8 . since 2019-ncov is highly homologous with sars-cov, it is considered a close relative of sars-cov. the international virus classification commission (ictv) classified 2019-ncov as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) on february 11, 2020. at the same time, who named the disease caused by 2019-ncov as covid-19. common symptoms of a person infected with coronavirus include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath, and dyspnea. in more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure, and even death. there is currently no specific medicine or treatment for diseases caused by sars-cov-2 9 .covs are enveloped viruses with a positive rna genome, belonging to the coronaviridae family of the order nidovirales, which are divided into four genera (a, b, g, and d). the sars-cov-2 belongs to the b genus. covs contain at least four structural proteins: spike (s) protein, envelope (e) protein, membrane (m) protein, and nucleocapsid (n) protein 10 . among them, spike promotes host attachment and virusecell membrane fusion during virus infection. therefore, spike determines to some extent the host range.potential anti-coronavirus therapies can be divided into two categories depending on the target, one is acting on the human immune system or human cells, and the other is on coronavirus itself. in terms of the human immune system, the innate immune system response plays an important role in controlling the replication and infection of coronavirus, and interferon is expected to enhance the immune response 11 . blocking the signal pathways of human cells required for virus replication may show a certain antiviral effect. in addition, viruses often bind to receptor proteins on the surface of cells in order to entering human cells, for example, the sars virus binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor 12e14 and the mers binds to the dpp4 receptor 15, 16 . the therapies acting on the coronavirus itself include preventing the synthesis of viral rna through acting on the genetic material of the virus, inhibiting virus replication through acting on critical enzymes of virus, and blocking the virus binding to human cell receptors or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process through acting on some structural proteins.in the fight against coronavirus, scientists have come up with three strategies for developing new drugs 17 . the first strategy is to test existing broad-spectrum anti-virals 18 . interferons, ribavirin, and cyclophilin inhibitors used to treat coronavirus pneumonia fall into this category. the advantages of these therapies are that their metabolic characteristics, dosages used, potential efficacy and side effects are clear as they have been approved for treating viral infections. but the disadvantage is that these therapies are too "broad-spectrum" and cannot kill coronaviruses in a targeted manner, and their side effects should not be underestimated. the second strategy is to use existing molecular databases to screen for molecules that may have therapeutic effect on coronavirus 19, 20 . high-throughput screening makes this strategy possible, and new functions of many drug molecules can be found through this strategy, for example, the discovery of anti-hiv infection drug lopinavir/ritonavir. the third strategy is directly based on the genomic information and pathological characteristics of different coronaviruses to develop new targeted drugs from scratch. theoretically, the drugs found through these therapies would exhibit better anti-coronavirus effects, but the research procedure of new drug might cost several years, or even more than 10 years 11 .for the development of medicines treating sars-cov-2, the fastest way is to find potential molecules from the marketed drugs. once the efficacy is determined, it can be approved by the green channel or approved by the hospital ethics committee for rapid clinical treatment of patients. herein, bioinformatics analysis on the proteins encoded by the novel coronavirus genes was systematically conducted, and the proteins of sars-cov-2 were compared with other coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and mers-cov. we conducted homology modeling to build all possible protein structures, including viral papain like protease (plpro), main protease (3clpro, also named 3-chymotrypsin-like protease), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, spike, etc. further, we used these proteins and human relative proteins [human ace2 and type-ii transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) enzymes] as targets to screen zinc u. s. food and drug administration (fda)-approved drug database (zinc drug database, zdd), our own database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine), and the database of commonly used anti-viral drugs (78 compounds) by virtual ligand screening method. this study predicts a variety of compounds that may inhibit novel coronaviruses and provides scientists with information on compounds that may be effective. subsequent validation of anti-viral effects in vitro and in vivo will provide useful information for clinical treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia.the complete genome of sars-cov-2/whu02 (mn988669.1) was downloaded from ncbi nucleotide database. thenucleotide sequences were aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes(alogorithm parameters, max target sequences: 1000, expect threshold: 10). nucleotide sequence editing was conducted using bioedit and dnaman, and sequence alignment was conducted using dna-man and clustaiw. the evolutionary history was inferred using the neighbor-joining method in mega seven software package. the percentage of replicate trees in which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test was determined by 500 replicates. protein sequence management and analysis were carried out by using snap gene view, and sequence alignment was performed using clustalw method in jalview software. the second structure of protein sequences were predicted by jpred4.the homology model prediction was carried out through searching in pdb1018 database included in fold and function assignment system (ffas.godziklab.org) 21 . prediction of transmembrane helices in proteins was carried out in tmhmm server v. 2.0 online (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/tmhmm/). 3d structure structures are aligned by pymol structure alignment tool.approved drug database was from the subset of zinc database, zdd (zinc drug database) containing 2924 compounds 22 . natural products database was constructed by ourselves, containing 1066 chemicals separated from traditional chinese herbals in own laboratory and naturally occurring potential anti-viral components and derivatives. anti-viral compounds library contains 78 known anti-viral drugs and reported anti-viral compounds through literature search.corresponding homology models predicted by fold and function assignment system server for each target protein were downloaded from protein data bank (www.rcsb.org). alignment of two protein sequences and subsequent homology modeling were performed by bioinformatics module of icm 3.7.3 modeling software on an intel i7 4960 processor (molsoft llc, san diego, ca, usa). for the structure-based virtual screening, ligands were continuously resiliently made to dock with the target that was represented in potential energy maps by icm 3.7.3 software, to identify possible drug candidates. 3d compounds of each database were scored according to the internal coordinate mechanics (internal coordinate mechanics, icm) 23 . based on monte carlo method, stochastic global optimization procedure and pseudo-brownian positional/torsional steps, the position of intrinsic molecular was optimized. by visually inspecting, compounds outside the active site, as well as those weakly fitting to the active site were eliminated. compounds with scores less than à30 or mfscores less than à100 (generally represents strong interactions) have priority to be selected. proteineprotein docking was followed the manual of icm software.we obtained the sars-cov-2 genome from gene bank. the genome sequence of sars-cov-2/whu02 was aligned with whole database using blastn to search for homology viral genomes. after phylogenetic analysis and sequence alignment of 22 coronaviruses from various species. we found three coronaviruses from bat (96%, 88% and 88% for bat-cov ratg13, bat-sl-covzxc12 and bat-sl-covzc45, respectively) have the highest genome sequence identity to sars-cov-2 (fig. 1a) . moreover, as shown in fig. 1b , bat-cov ratg13 exhibited the closest linkage with sars-cov-2. among all coronaviruses from human, sars-cov (80%) exhibited the highest genome sequence identity to sars-cov-2. and mers/isolate nl13845 also has 50% identity with sars-cov-2. sars-cov is the most clearly studied one among all these viruses according to previous literatures. structure and function of its most genome encoded proteins have been elucidated in recent years. in this study, because of high genome identity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, the structure and function prediction of sars-cov-2 genome encoded protein were mainly based on those researches on homology protein in sars-cov. sars-cov-2 genome has 10 open reading frames ( fig. 2a) . orf1ab encodes replicase polyprotein 1 ab. after cleaved by two proteases, replicase proteins showed multifunction involved in transcription and replication of viral rnas. orf2-10 encodes viral structural proteins such as s, m, n, and e proteins, and other auxiliary proteins. the s, m, e proteins are involved in the formation of the viral coat, and the n protein is involved in the packaging of the rna genome (fig. 2c ). by aligning with the amino acid sequence of sars pp1ab and analyzing the characteristics of restriction cleavage sites recognized by 3clpro and plpro, we speculated 14 specific proteolytic sites of 3clpro and plpro in sars-cov-2 pp1ab (fig. 2b ). plpro cleaves three sites at 181e182, 818e819, and 2763e2764 at the n-terminus and 3clpro cuts at the other 11 sites at the c-terminus, and forming 15 non-structural proteins. among them, nsp3 contains multiple domains, including a segment of sars unique domain and a deubiquitination and proteolytic enzyme plpro. nsp5 is 3clpro, nsp12 is an rdrp, analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 and nsp13 is helicase. as a new coronavirus, structure biology study about these proteins still at early stage. until now, only one crystal structure of 3clpro has been deposited in pdb (pdb code: 6lu7).in order to acquire more three-dimensional structure information of proteins about these new coronaviruses for subsequent drug screening, we aligned all protein sequences from sars-cov-2 with all sequences in pdb1018 database in fold & function assignment system (supporting information figs. s19es34). fortunately, most of these proteins have found their high homology proteins that have three-dimensional structure, with homology between 72%e99% (supporting information  table s1 ). those pdb codes were labeled below the corresponding sequences in fig. 2b . unsurprisingly, all these proteins with the highest homology are from sars. nevertheless, there are some proteins still have not high homologous in the database. after the prediction of transmembrane helices in these proteins carried out in tmhmm server, as expected, we found that all these proteins are transmembrane proteins except for nsp2 (supporting information figs. s35es41). so far, we have found as much structural information of this viral proteins as possible, which provides the basis for subsequent homology modeling and drug screening. before homology modeling, all these proteins sequences were aligned with model sequences derived from sars-cov and predicted secondary structure as the same time ( fig. 3a and table s1 ). interestingly, as shown in fig. 3a , important anti-virus drug target protein like 3clpro, plpro, and rdrp are highly conserved between those two human coronaviruses, especially in functional region. as shown in table s1 , all these potential drug target proteins have been homologously modeled, and all generated protein models were provided as the pdb files in supporting information. all other coordinates of target-screening hit complexes can be provided upon request.in order to verify the accuracy of homologous modeling, we aligned the computational structure of the sars-cov-2 3clpro that modeled from the sars-cov 3clpro with its crystal structure of sars-cov-2 3clpro (6lu7) just solved and released during this manuscript was being prepared. the computational model of sars-cov-2 3clpro showed a ca rmsd of 0.471 å on the overall structure compared to the sars-cov-2 3clpro structure (fig. 3b) . what's more, the ca rmsd between their substrate binding regions is only 0.126 å , showing very subtle difference.ace2 molecule was known as a human entry receptor for spike which facilitates its cross-species transmission. sequence alignment results show that the homology of the spike-receptor binding domain (rbd) sequence between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is 76% (fig. 3c ). recent researches speculated that sars-cov-2 could also bind to ace2, and this was verified by computational docking and elisa measurement 24, 25 . moreover, homology of the spike-rbd sequence between sars-cov-2 and bat-cov ratg13 is as high as 95%. despite the high homology of ratg13 and sars-cov-2 in spike sequence, our analysis found that four among the five most important amino acids (l465, l495, y502, d510, and h514) that bind to ace2 12 in bat-cov ratg13 differ from sars-cov-2 (fig. 3c) . and there is no related research literature about whether bat-cov ratg13 can infect human yet. we also performed homology modeling on the bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd (supporting information fig. s1 ). three spike rbd structures have been docked with human ace2. among them, for the conformations which most resemble the crystal structure of sars rbdeace2 complex 26 , the binding free energy between sars-cov-2 spike rbd and human ace2 was à33.72 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s2 ), that between sars-cov spike rbd and ace2 was à49.22 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s3 ), and that between bat-cov ratg13 spike rbd and ace2 was à31.06 kcal/mol (supporting information fig. s4 ).the therapies that act on the coronavirus can be divided into several categories based on the specific pathways: (1) some acting on enzymes or functional proteins that are critical to virus, preventing the virus rna synthesis and replication; (2) some acting on structural proteins of virus, blocking virus from binding to human cell receptors, or inhibiting the virus's self-assembly process; (3) some producing virulence factor to restore host's innate immunity; (4) some acting on host's specific receptors or enzymes, preventing virus from entering into host's cells. the related target proteins include nsp1, nsp3 (nsp3b, nsp3c, plpro, and nsp3e), nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp9ensp10, and nsp14ensp16, 3clpro, e-channel (e protein), orf7a, spike, ace2, c-terminal rna binding domain (crbd), n-terminal rna binding domain (nrbd), helicase, rdrp, and tmprsss2.based on homology models of the above 18 viral proteins (19 models) and two human targets, we resorted to structure-based virtual ligand screening method using icm 3.7.3 modeling software (molsoft llc) to screen potential small-molecule compounds from a zinc drug database (2924 compounds) and a small in-house database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products (including reported common anti-viral components from traditional chinese medicine) and derivatives (1066 compounds). compounds with lower calculated binding energies (being expressed with scores and mfscores) are considered to have higher binding affinities with the target protein.as significant functional proteins of coronavirus, nsps are involved in rna transcription, translation, protein synthesis, plpro is responsible for the cleavages of n-terminus of the replicase poly-protein to release nsp1, nsp2 and nsp3, which is essential for correcting virus replication 27 . plpro was also confirmed to be significant to antagonize the host's innate immunity 28e30 . as an indispensable enzyme in the process of coronavirus replication and infection of the host, plpro has been a popular target for coronavirus inhibitors. it is very valuable for targeting plpro to treat coronavirus infections, but no inhibitor has been approved by the fda for marketing. the screening results (table 1 and supporting excel file plpro.xlsx) showed that a series of anti-virus drugs (ribavirin, valganciclovir and thymidine), anti-bacterial drugs (chloramphenicol, cefamandole and tigecycline), muscle relaxant drug (chlorphenesin carbamate), anti-tussive drug (levodropropizine) may have high binding affinity to plpro. the natural products ( table 2 and supporting excel file plpro_np.xlsx), such as platycodin d from platycodon grandiflorus, baicalin from scutellaria baicalensis, sugetriol-3,9-diacetate from cyperus rotundus, phaitanthrin d and 2,2-di (3-indolyl)-3-indolone from isatis indigotica, catechin compounds ((e)-epigallocatechin gallate and 2-,5,7-tetrol) exhibited high binding affinity to plpro protein, suggesting the potential utility of these compounds in the treatment of sars-cov-2.anti-viral drug ribavirin was predicted to bind to plpro with low binding energy (scores z e38.58). from generated docking model, ribavirin was bound in the active site of the enzyme as reported sars-plpro inhibitors (pdb code 3e9s). hydrogen bonds were predicted between gly164, gln270, tyr274, asp303 and the compound. also, pep stacking was found between tyr265 and triazolering in the compound ( fig. 4a and b) . the strong hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction between ribavirin with the enzyme imply it may be a potent plpro inhibitor.the 3clpro, also known as nsp5, is first automatically cleaved from poly-proteins to produce mature enzymes, and then further cleaves downstream nsps at 11 sites to release nsp4ensp16 31 . 3clpro directly mediates the maturation of nsps, which is essential in the life cycle of the virus. the detailed investigation on the structure and catalytic mechanism of 3clpro makes 3clpro an attractive target for anti-coronavirus drug development. inhibitors targeting at sars-cov 3clpro mainly include peptide inhibitors and small-molecule inhibitors 32 .3clpro monomer has three domains, domain i (residues 8e101), domain ii (residues 102e184) and domain iii (residues 201e303), and a long loop (residues 185e200) connects domains ii and iii. the active site of 3clpro is located in the gap between domains i and ii, and has a cyshis catalytic dyad (cys145 and his41) 33 . as shown in table 3 and supporting excel file 3clpro.xlsx), anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline and oxytetracycline), anti-hypertensive drugs (nicardipine and telmisartan), and conivaptan treating hyponatremia show highest binding affinity to 3clpro. several natural compounds and derivatives with anti-virus and anti-inflammatory effects also exhibited high binding affinity to 3clpro (table 4 and supporting excel file 3clpro_np.xlsx), including a series of andrographolide derivatives, chrysin-7-o-b-glucuronide from s. baicalensis, betulonal from cassine xylocarpa, 2b-hydroxy-3,4seco-friedelolactone-27-oic acid, isodecortinol and cerevisterol from viola diffusa, hesperidin and neohesperidin from citrus aurantium, kouitchenside i and deacetylcentapicrin from the plants of swertia genus. the above results suggest that these small-molecule compounds might be the potential 3clpro inhibitors and could probably be used for treating sars-cov-2.it's worth mentioning, anti-asthmatic drug montelukast also showed low binding energy to 3clpro. as shown in fig. 5a , montelukast was well fitted into the active pocket of 3clpro, in which lots of hydrophobic amino acids, just like thr24, leu27, his41, phe140, cys145, his163, met165, pro168 and his172 compose a relatively hydrophobic environment to contain the compound and stabilize its conformation. hydrogen bonding was predicted between asn142 and the carbonyl group of the compound (fig. 5b ).nsp12, a conserved protein in coronavirus, is an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and the vital enzyme of coronavirus replication/transcription complex. the rdrp domain of polymerase is located at the c-terminus and has a conserved ser-asp-asp motif 34 . nsp8 can de novo synthesize up to six nucleotides in length, which can be used as a primer for nsp12-rdrp rna synthesis. further, the nsp7_nsp8 complex increases the binding of nsp12 to rna and enhances the rdrps enzyme activity of nsp12 35 . in the research of sars-cov and mers-cov inhibitors, nsp12-rdrp has been used as a very important drug target. in principle, targeted inhibition of nsp12-rdrp could not cause significant toxicity and side effects on host cells, but no specific inhibitors have been found until now 36 .virtualscreeningresultsofrdrpdemonstratedsomedrugsmightbe potentialinhibitorswith mfscoreslowerthanà110,suchasseveralantifungal drug itraconazole, anti-bacterial drug novobiocin, gallstonedissolving drug chenodeoxycholic acid, anti-allergic drug cortisone, anti-tumor drug idarubicin, hepatoprotective drug silybin, muscle relaxant drug pancuronium bromide, and chronic enteritis, anticoagulant drug dabigatran etexilate (table 5 and supporting excel file rdrp.xlsx). the natural products and derivatives with anti-virus, antiinflammation and anti-tumor effects exhibited high binding affinity to rdrp, such as betulonal from c. xylocarpa, gnidicin and gniditrin from gnidia lamprantha, 2b,30b-dihydroxy-3,4-seco-friedelolactone-27lactone from v. diffusa, 14-deoxy-11,12-didehydroandrographolide from andrographis paniculata, 1,7-dihydroxy-3-methoxyxanthone from swerti apseudochinensis, theaflavin 3,3 0 -di-o-gallate from camellia sinensis, and andrographolide derivative (r)-((1r,5as,6r,9as )-1,5a-dimethyl-7-methylene-3-oxo-6-((e )-2-(2oxo-2,5-dihydrofuran-3-yl)ethenyl)decahydro-1h-benzo [c]azepin-1-analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 yl)methyl 2-amino-3-phenylpropanoate (table 6 and supporting excel file rdrp_np.xlsx).helicase (nsp13), a multi-functional protein, include n-terminal metal binding domain (mbd) and helicase domain (hel). n-terminal structure contains 26 cysteine residues to form a zn 2þ binding domain and helicase domain with a conserved motif at the c-terminus. nsp13 can unravel double-stranded (ds) dna and rna along the 5 0 e3 0 direction in an ntp-dependent manner 37 . importantly, it has been reported that the sars-nsp13 sequence is conserved and indispensable, and is a necessary component for the replication of coronavirus. therefore, it has been identified as a target for anti-viral drug discovery, but there are few reports about nsp13 inhibitors 38, 39 .based on structure modeling of helicase protein, anti-bacterial drugs (lymecycline, cefsulodine and rolitetracycline), anti-fungal drug itraconazole, anti-human immunodeficiency virus-1 (hiv-1) drug saquinavir, anti-coagulant drug dabigatran, and diuretic drug canrenoic acid were predicted to be helicase inhibitors with high mfscores through virtual ligand screening. the natural products, such as many flavanoids from different sources (a-glucosyl hesperidin, hesperidin, rutin, besides the above targets, some non-structural proteins, including nsp3b, nsp3e, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp9, nsp10, nsp14, nsp15, and nsp16, also play an important role in the virus rna synthesis and replication, suggesting these proteins may be useful targets for the anti-viral drug discovery. the virtual screening results showed many anti-bacterial, anti-viral, or antiinflammatory drugs from zinc drug database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database displayed potential good affinity to these targets, and the detailed information of virtual screening results is shown in supporting excel files (for zdd screening results, file names as target.xlsx; for natural products screening results, file names as target_np.xlsx).spike is the main structural protein of coronavirus and assembles into a special corolla structure on the surface of the virus as a trimer. spike is a main protein that interacts with the host by binding to host cell receptors to mediate virus invasion and determine viral tissue or host tropism 40 . spike is cleaved into s1and s2 by the host cell protease like tmprss2, etc. the main function of s1 is to bind with host cell surface receptors, and the s2 subunit mediates virusecell and cellecell membrane fusion. spike structural integrity and cleavage activation play a key role in virus invasion and virulence 41 . therapeutic strategies to block coronavirus from entering host cells by targeting spike proteins or specific receptors on the host surface are valuable for the development of anti-viral drugs.on the basis of virtual screening results of small-molecule compounds against spike protein, some drugs showed high analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 9 + model binding affinity (mfscore<e150 or score<e35), such as antihypertensive drugs (rescinnamine, iloprost and prazosin), antifungal drugs (posaconazole and itraconazole), anti-bacterial drug (sulfasalazine, azlocillin, penicillin and cefsulodin) and anticoagulant drug dabigatran etexilate. some natural flavanoids, licoflavonol from glycyrrhiza uralensis, cosmosiin from s. baicalensis, neohesperidin from c. aurantium, mangostin from garcinia mangostana, kouitchenside d from swertia kouitchensis, excoecariatoxin from excoecaria agallocha, phyllaemblicin g7 from p. emblica, and piceatannol from vitis vinifera, exhibited high binding affinity. the detailed virtual screening results are shown in supporting excel files. however, most of above compounds were not predicted to bind with the binding interface of the spikeeace2 complex. the only compound that could target the binding interface between spike and ace2 was hesperidin, as shown in fig. 6a . hesperidin was predicted to lie on the middle shallow pit of the surface of rbd of spike, where the dihydroflavone part of the compound went parallel with the b-6 sheet of rbd. and the sugar part was inserted into the shallow pit in the direction away from ace2, where a few hydrophobic amino acids, including tyr436, try440, leu442, phe443, phe476, try475, try481 and tyr49 form a relatively hydrophobic shallow pocket to contain the compound (fig. 6b) . hydrogen bonding was predicted between tyr440 and the compound. by superimposing the ace2erbd complex to the hesperidinerbd complex, a distinct overlap of hesperidin with the interface of ace2 could be observed (fig. 6c) , suggesting hesperidin may disrupt the interaction of ace2 with rbd.except for spike protein, e protein (e-channel) possesses important biological functions for the structural integrity of coronavirus and host virulence. nrbd and crbd of coronavirus n protein are needed for n proteins in host cells to bind with coronavirus rna efficiently. therefore, e protein or n protein (nrbd and crbd domains) can be used as targets for the discovery of anti-viral drugs. through virtual screening, many antibacterial, anti-viral, anti-tumor, anti-asthmatic, and antiinflammatory drugs, etc. from zinc database and our in-house natural products/derivatives database were found to display relatively good affinity to these targets. and the detailed results of virtual screening are given in supplementary excel files.there are three coronavirus virulence factors nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a related to interfering host's innate immunity and assisting 42 and also inhibits type-i interferon production 43 . nsp3c has ability to bind with host's adp-ribose to help coronavirus resist host innate immunity 44 . bone marrow matrix antigen 2 (bst-2) can inhibit the release of newly-assembled coronavirus from host cells. sars-cov orf7a directly binds to bst-2 and inhibits its activity by blocking the glycosylation of bst-2 45 . these evidences suggest that nsp1, nsp3c and orf7a may be potential targets for anti-viral drug discovery. the detailed screening results of nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a showed that a series of clinical drugs and natural products with anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory effects exhibited relatively high binding affinity to these three target proteins, such as piperacillin, cefpiramide, streptomycin, lymecycline, tetracycline, platycodin d from platycodon grandifloras, wogonoside from s. baicalensis, vitexin from vitex negundo, andrographolide derivatives, and xanthones from swertia genus. the detailed results of virtual screening are shown in supporting excel files.the host ace2 has been proved by many studies to be the specific receptor for the spike rbd of sars-cov 12 . the latest research shows that the host receptor of sars-cov-2 is consistent with sars-cov, exhibiting that the spike rbd sequence of sars-cov-2 is similar to sars-cov rbd and there are important interactions between several key amino acid residues of rbd receptor-binding motif and ace2 24 . based on the current research progress, ace2 is considered as a host target for the treatment of coronavirus infection to block sars-cov-2 from entering host cells.based on the virtual screening results of ace2 protein, antidiabetes drug troglitazone, anti-hypertensive drug losartan, analgesia drug ergotamine, anti-bacterial drug cefmenoxime, and hepatoprotective drug silybin, etc., were predicted to bind with ace2 with low energy. the natural products, such as phyllaemblicin g7 from p. emblica, xanthones from the plants of swertia genus, neohesperidin and hesperidin from c. aurantium, exhibited potentially high binding affinity to ace2 protein. however, none of above ace2 binding compounds was predicted to target the ace2erbd interface.in addition, tmprss2 was known to cut the spike to trigger the infection of sars-cov and mers-cov. studies have shown that inhibiting the enzyme activity of tmprss2 can prevent some coronaviruses from entering host cells 46 . as a possible target for anti-viral drug discovery, the virtual screen results (shown in supporting excel files) predicted many anti-bacterial drugs (pivampicillin, hetacillin, cefoperazone and clindamycin) and antivirus natural compounds (phyllaemblicin g7, neoandrographolide, kouitchenside i), etc. to be potential tmprss2 inhibitors.in order to further verify the screening results of zinc drug database and utilize the current resource of anti-viral drugs immediately, we constructed a database of 78 anti-viral drugs for deep calculation, including compounds already on the market and currently undergoing clinical trials to treat sars-cov-2 infections. the compounds were docked with 19 constructed targets of sars-cov-2 and two human targets to predict their possible targets, and also to search possible binding partners of certain important targets. special attentions were paid to the drugs currently in clinical trials. all results of calculated docking scores were listed in the supporting excel file (anti-virals_vs_targets_scores), significant scores (score<e32, mfscore<e110) were highlighted in brighten yellow. remdesivir (gs-5734), a nucleoside analogue, is an rdrp inhibitor. it can inhibit virus by inhibiting synthesis of viral nucleic acid and has not yet been approved for marketing in any country. on january 31 of this year, the new england journal of medicine reported the diagnosis and treatment of the first sars-cov-2 patient in the united states 47 . remdesivir showed some potential in the treatment of the first patient with novel coronavirus infection. on vero e6 cells, the ec 50 of remdesivir for sars-cov-2 is 0.77 mmol/l, and the selection index si is greater than 129 48 . remdesivir is currently undergoing a randomized, double-blind, controlled phase iii clinical study in china. our molecular docking results show that the potential targets of remdesivir is nsp3b (score z e36.5), rdrp (mfscores z e112.8), e-channel (mfscore z e125.1), and tmprss2 (score z e36.23, mfscores z e109.4).for rdrp, from generated docking model, remdesivir could bind to the rna-binding channel of the sars-cov-2 rdrp, and the binding mode and site were highly similar to that of coxsackievirus b3 (cvb3) rdrp inhibitor gpc-n114 49 .the binding pocket of remdesivir was in the bottom of the rna template channel, which position was for the acceptor template nucleotide (fig. 7a and b) . the compound was well fitted with the shape of the pocket, where it formed three hydrogen bonds with asn497, arg569 and asp684. in addition, hydrophobic interactions with leu576, ala685 and tyr687 may further direct the favorite conformation of remdesivir (fig. 7c) .interestingly, remdesivir was predicted to bind with the target tmprss2 with low binding energy for both score and mfscore. as shown in fig. 8a , remdesivir was bound in a relatively positively-charged allosteric pocket which is far away from the enzyme active center. asn84 and arg405 formed two hydrogen bonds with the phosphate groups of the compound. weak hydrophobic interaction between the pyrrolotriazine ring of remdesivir with tyr131 and try401, and side chains of some polar amino acids may further stabilize the compound conformation (fig. 8b ). lopinavir and ritonavir have been marketed in china and are mainly used to treat hiv-1 infection in adults and children over 2 years of age. in vitro studies have shown that lopinavir and ritonavir can inhibit the replication of mers-cov and sars-cov to exert anti-viral effects. the drug is listed as a recommended drug in the anti-viral drugs section of the new coronavirus infected pneumonia diagnosis and treatment program. the molecular docking results showed that ritonavir's possible target is nsp3c or e-channel with the mfscores of à152.100 and à277.769, respectively. lopinavir's possible target is nsp3b, nsp3c, helicase, nrbd or e-channel with the mfscores of à158.050, à189.140, à114.018, à171.127, and à221.785, respectively.arbidol is a broad-spectrum anti-viral drug, mainly for the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections caused by influenza a and b viruses, etc. in recent years, many studies have proven its effectiveness against both sars-cov and mers-cov. arbidol hydrochloride can block virus replication by inhibiting the fusion of the lipid membrane of the virus with the host cells. compared with the untreated control group, arbidol can effectively inhibit coronavirus up to 60 times at a concentration of 10e30 mmol/l, and significantly inhibit the virus's pathological effects on cells. the docking results of arbidol with the possible drug targets of the new coronavirus showed that it may interact with nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, e-channel, or spike with the mfscores of à136.087, à118.253, à118.253, à117.879, and à145.125, respectively.darunavir is an hiv-1 protease inhibitor that selectively inhibits the cleavage of hiv-encoded gag-pol polyprotein in virally infected cells, thereby preventing the formation of mature infectious virus particles. at a concentration of 300 mmol/l, darunavir can significantly inhibit virus replication, and the inhibition efficiency is 280 times compared with the untreated group. our docking results showed that the possible targets of darunavir are nsp3c, plpro, e-channel or spike proteins with the mfscores of à126.149, à110.759, à157.184, and à111.865, respectively.favipiravir, a broad-spectrum anti-viral drug, is used to treat flu. the shenzhen health commission has now initiated clinical studies on the use of favipiravir to treat sars-cov-2 infections.while, the scores of favipiravir docking with the targets in our virtual screening are relatively low.chloroquine phosphate has been used in the treatment of malaria since the 1940s and later in rheumatoid arthritis. chloroquine has been reported in some earlier studies to have direct anti-viral effects, such as inhibiting flavivirus, retrovirus (such as hiv), and many coronaviruses. recent study showed that with ec 50 of 1.13 mmol/l and si greater than 88, chloroquine can effectively inhibit sars-cov-2 in the cell level. its efficiency in the human body for sars-cov-2 infection has not yet been clinically proven. chloroquine phosphate was turned into chloroquine in the body to play therapeutic effect. our docking results showed that the possible target of chloroquine is nsp3b or echannel with the docking mfscores of à130.355 and à107.889, respectively.we also performed the longitudinal analysis on the drugs against 21 targets, and the results showed that only tenofovir, disoproxil, fumarate, and beclabuvir may bind to nsp1. fewer compounds were predicted to act on some targets, such as nsp1, nsp3e, nsp9, nsp10, nsp16, nrbd, crbd, orf7a, and tmprss2, showing that these selected anti-viral drugs are unlikely to acting on the above targets of the new coronavirus, which provides a meaningful reference for our future research.for other targets, such as nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp, helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2, more anti-viral drugs were predicted to bind with them, especially e-channel, rdrp, 3clpro and plpro, indicating that these targets are more likely to be useful for the discovery of sars-cov-2 therapeutic drugs from known anti-virals, and should be the focus of our subsequent research.the progressed to the (early) preclinical stage to date. as with the sars virus 17 years ago and the current sars-cov-2, emerging coronaviruses in the future may continue to pose a threat to global public health. therefore, finding broad-spectrum inhibitors that may reduce the effects of human coronavirus infection remains a challenging research focus. given the time-consuming nature of anti-viral drug development and registration, existing treatments for other diseases may be the only fastest treatment option for emerging infectious diseases. for most of these drugs that have been prepared, the medication has sufficient experience and dosage, and their safety and adme situation are well known.in this study, based on the results of bioinformatics analysis, 20 homology structures of 18 sars-cov-2 proteins and one human protein were built, plus human ace2 structure, totally 21 targets were setup for high throughput virtual ligand screening. the special double scoring system icm-pro soft allowed us to evaluate the docking results more accurately. the score of icm software is calculated by the overall empirical function of predicted physical interaction, whiles the mfscore (mean force score) is computed by the knowledge-based potential functions derived from statistics of ligandereceptor complex in pdb 50, 51 .from proteineprotein docking results, we can deduce that sars-cov-2 spike protein have strong binding affinity to human ace2, although weaker than that of sars-cov spike protein.unexpectedly, bat-cov ratg13 spike protein only has slightly weaker binding affinity with ace2 compared to sars-cov-2. it is speculated that the virus may be capable of infecting humans directly, or it is close. if sars-cov-2 evolved from bat-cov ratg13, there may be no more than one or two host evolutions involved. but there are no published articles that directly related to intermediate hosts yet. according to the most recent research paper on the clinical characteristics of sars-cov-2 infection 52 , sars-cov-2 can spread rapidly by human-to-human transmission, this was consistent with observed proteineprotein docking results of sars-cov-2 spike rbd and human ace2, for both of ours and previous prediction 25 . however, the fast growing incidents of sars-cov-2 pneumonia and related deaths implied the weaker binding of sars-cov-2 spike with human ace2 compared to sars spike may not fully explained the current situation of this epidemic. there must have some other receptors of sars-cov-2 or infection facilitating mechanisms in the human host, or sars-cov-2 spike-rbd may take other lower energy binding conformation different from current sars-cov spike-rbd conformation found in the crystal structure, probably by induce fitting. these need to be further investigated.to search potential coronavirus therapeutic drugs as soon as possible, we first screened potential compounds from a zinc drug database (2924 compounds) and a small in-house database of natural products (about 1066 compounds). a series of clinical drugs and natural products with anti-viral, anti-bacterial and antiinflammatory effects exhibited high binding affinity to different target proteins, indicating their potential utility for treating sars-cov-2.we have identified a number of compounds that might have antiviral activity from the approved drugs library, such as anti-virus drugs (ribavirin, valganciclovir and thymidine), anti-bacterial drugs (cefpiramide, sulfasalazine, phenethicillin, lymecycline, demeclocycline, doxycycline, oxytetracycline and tigecycline), antiasthmatic drugs (montelukast, fenoterol and reproterol), and hepatoprotective drug silybin. the original pharmacological actions of these drugs could be helpful for the therapy of viral infection pneumonia. the natural products, such as flavanoids like compounds as major components might be meaningful for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infections. for ace2 target, although several compounds could bind with ace2 through virtual screening in our studies, no compound was found to bind with the contact surface of ace2espike complex, suggesting that these compounds are only the inhibitors of ace2 enzyme activities, rather than inhibitors of ace2 driven virus infections. just like what described in recently published research 53 , most of selected compounds are also unable to bind with the contact surface of ace2espike complex. actually, these potential ace2 inhibitors may not be suitable to use as drugs for treating sars-cov-2 infection because the poor prognosis would be induced by the inhibition of ace2 enzyme activities, for ace2 was considered as a protective factor of lung injury 54 .for those targets which are difficult to find direct inhibitors, or non-druggable targets, just like nsp1, nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel, etc., currently popular protac technology may be a good strategy to degrade these proteins and then inhibit the virus. the potential binding compounds found in this study for these targets might be a good start point.for spike protein, we found only one compound, natural hesperidin was targeting the binding between spike rbd and human ace2. however, not like the ace2 binding compounds, noninterface binding compound may still meaningful applications, considering that the fusion of covs membrane with host cell membrane need the big conformational change of remained spike part after rbd removal 55 . any small molecule bound to spike at this time may interfere the re-folding of spike therefore inhibits the viral infection process. furthermore, small molecule that can target any part of spike protein may be a good start point to design protac based therapy.also, we dock existing anti-viral drugs with our targets, analyze the possible targets of each anti-viral drug horizontally, and analyze the drugs that may interact with 21 targets vertically. we analyzed 21 targets based on the docking results and found that nsp3b, nsp3c, nsp7_nsp8 complex, nsp14, nsp15, plpro, 3clpro, rdrp, helicase, e-channel, spike and ace2 are more likely to be therapeutic targets of anti-viral drugs. the three targets nsp3b, nsp3c, and e-channel are screened more anti-viral drugs. this may be due to the model problem because of flexible small protein (nsp3b and nsp3c) or partial model (e-channel). whether the screened anti-viral drugs really work on these targets needs further verification. we also do not recommend the application of new coronavirus pneumonia to compounds for which no target has been predicted.the triphosphate nucleotide product of remdesivir, remdesivir-tp, competes with rdrp for substrate atp, so it can interfere with viral rna synthesis. our docking results show that remdesivir-tp binds to sars-cov-2 rdrp, with a score of à112.8, and the docking results are consistent with its original anti-viral mechanism, so we think remdesivir may be good in treating sars-cov-2 pneumonia. in addition, remdesivir also predicted to bind with the human tmprss2, a protein facilitating the virus infection, this is a new discovery and provides ideas for subsequent research.chloroquine phosphate has shown better anti-sars-cov-2 effects in recent studies, but this drug has no clear target of action. in our docking results, chloroquine phosphate is predicted to possibly combine with nsp3b and e-channel. but we need to do further experiments to verify this conclusion.in response to the recently reported anti-aids drugs lopinavir and ritonavir tablets, which have a poor effect on the treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia and have toxic side effects, we analyzed it in conjunction with the docking results. the molecular docking results show that ritonavir's possible target is nsp3c or echannel. lopinavir's possible target is nsp3b, nsp3c, helicase, nrbd or e-channel. some of these targets (such as nsp3b, nsp3c, e-channel) may be false positives due to the model inaccuracy for small flexible protein or partial model. for both lopinavir and ritonavir, we did not observe possible binding to major targets like 3clpro, plpro, rdrp, and so on. this docking result implies lopinavir and ritonavir tablets may not be suitable for treatment of sars-cov-2 infections.the results of the entire article are based on computer virtual screening. we have not conduct further in vivo and in vitro antiviral experiments yet, because we want to share our results with scientists in anti-sars-cov-2 research as soon as possible. our subsequent research will try to solve the three-dimensional structures of all 24 proteins of sars-cov-2 and their drug complexes, providing more target information for drug intervention and long-term drug design, perform in vivo and in vitro evaluations for candidate drugs obtained in this study, and prepare for clinical trial applications. analysis of therapeutic targets for sars-cov-2 21the global pandemic developing from december 2019 by a strain of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) can cause coronavirus disease 2019 disease. this emergent variant adds to the additional coronavirus strains that can infect humans including human coronavirus oc43 (hcov-oc43), human coronavirus hku1 (hcov-hku1), sars-cov, human coronavirus 229e (hcov-229e), human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), and human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63) [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . coronaviruses (covs) are positive-sense, enveloped, single-stranded rna viruses that are classified taxonomically as a family coronavirdiae and order nidovirales [4] . there are four genera of covs, including αcov, βcov, δcov, and γcov; most δcovs and γcovs target avians, whilst αcovs and βcovs infect rodents and bats [1, 7, 8] . severe acute respiratory syndrome cov (sars-cov) outbreaks have also emerged previously creating an epidemic [2, 4, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . although the mortality of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 is substantial, there are no preventative vaccines or drugs available to treat patients infected with the virus [9, 11, 12] . the current public health emergency of international concern (pheic) by the world health organization (who) has declared sars-cov-2 (covid-19; a novel βcov) as a pandemic threat. the data obtained from who (08/may/2020) suggest that the virus has caused 3,759,967 infections, 259,474 deaths, and it has affected over 200 countries.the open reading frame 1ab (orf1ab) of sars-cov-2 encodes for three proteins that are broadly recognized as drug targets, since they are key components for infections and disease progression: the sars-cov-2 protease [14, 15] , the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) [14, 16, 17] , and the sars-cov-2 spike (s) glycoprotein [15, [18] [19] [20] . the sars-cov-2 protease processes the polyproteins that are translated from the viral rna, and it has been heavily studied using small molecules inhibitors [15] . to penetrate the host, the sars-cov-2 makes use of homotrimeric class i glycosylated fusion spike protein [18, 21, 22] . fusion of the viral and host cell membranes is facilitated by the spike glycoprotein, which undergoes a significant conformational change upon fusion [18, 21, 22] . sars-cov-2 studies suggest [18, 23, 24] that the spike glycoprotein functions as a homotrimer. the recognition and subsequent fusion of the viral and cellular membranes are triggered by the s1 subunit of the spike protein, which binds the host cell receptor; angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2) [16, [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . several insights from structural biology are consistent with the role for this domain in affecting the infection rate of the virus. this host-virus interaction is mediated by the receptor binding domain (rbd) domain from s1 subunit of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein that forms a hinge-like conformation [18, 32] , i.e., "down" and "up" states that represents the host cell receptor-inaccessible and receptor-accessible [18] . this receptor-accessible "up" conformation exists in a highly fluctuating state [33] [34] [35] [36] . binding to the host target destabilizes the pre-fusion homotrimer, which sheds off the s1 subunit, and allows for the transition of the s2 subunit to a highly stable postfusion conformation [18] . interestingly, protein-mediated cell-cell fusion assays suggest that sars-cov-2 spike protein displays an elevated plasma membrane fusion capacity when compared to that of sars-cov [32, 37] .several studies have aimed to define the mechanism of binding of sars-cov-2 to the host cell receptor [38] . molecular dynamics simulations of the spike (rbd)-ace2 complex, over 10 ns indicated that spike(rbd)-ace2 binding free energy for sars-cov-2 is better than for the sars-cov [39] . similarly, other studies have shown that the sars-cov-2 spike protein has a better binding affinity to ace2 at two different "up" angles of the rbd domain than the sars-cov [40] . structural features at the spike-ace2 interface suggest that residues q493 and p499 from the spike rbd domain are responsible for maintaining protein-protein stability [41] . using a virtual high-throughput screening approach, small-molecules have been identified that can interact with the rbd domain of sars-cov-2 spike protein [42] . natural compounds present in curcuma sp., citrus sp., alpiniagalanga, and caesalpiniasappan could also target the rbd domain of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein, the protease domain (pd) from ace2, and the sars-cov-2 protease [20] . a set of b cell and t cell epitopes derived from the spike and nucleocapsid proteins that map identically to sars-cov-2 proteins, were identified as potential vaccine candidates [23] .applying an integrative, antiviral drug repurposing methodology, the interplay between the cov-host interactome and drug targets in the human protein-protein interaction network have been defined [43] . bioinformatics methodologies were used to identify neutralizing antibodies that might interact with interfaces formed by the spike glycoprotein and the ace2 host cell receptor [24] . by targeting the rbd domain of the spike protein using docking experiments, kanishka et al. identified small molecule inhibitors [44] . in the majority of studies, the most common strategy is focused on targeting the interface formed by sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein and the ace2 host cell receptor (i.e., spike(rbd)-ace2). currently, there are no robust drugs for wide-spread dissemination available against coronaviruses including; the sars-cov-2 virus. due to the relatively rapid spread in the current outbreak and the relatively high mortality rate (3.5%), more rapid development of new or repurposed antiviral drugs is of high value. although the majority of drug discovery programs target classically druggable enzymes encoded by the virus, such as the viral rna polymerase inhibited by remdesivir [13, 17, 45] , there is a paucity of information concerning the other regions of spike glycoprotein outwith the ace2-binding domains, especially the domains interacting with the viral membrane.the sars-cov-2 spike protein is a homotrimer composed of three monomers (chains a, b, and c; figure 1a ). each monomeric protein contains an n-terminal ace2 binding domain (receptor binding domain; rbd), a central helix/heptad repeat, and a c-terminal region that interacts with the plasma membrane [18] . homotrimer spike protein assembly from monomeric forms can be rate limiting in cells, suggesting a possible space for intervention on the viral life cycle [46] . our current study focuses on understanding the variability of the trimer spike glycoprotein in sars-cov-2 with respect to the genomes from other coronavirus strains, and identifying the changes in the molecular properties due to conformational flexibility in the spike protein. the analysis suggests that residues in the s2 subunit are less variable compared to the other regions. in addition, the molecular dynamics simulations (mds) identified that residues from the rbd domain obtained substantial flexibility which may be an obstacle in finding active hits. by contrast, residues in the s2 subunit (trimer cavity) showed the least flexibility representing a novel binding region for ligands. this information was used to identify potentially novel drug pockets or the active site regions specifically in the oligomeric sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein.we performed md simulations on the monomeric and trimeric form of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein, and developed a virtual screening using a food and drug administration (fda) approved chemical library. we identified and focused on an apparent cavity formed by three subunits (the homotrimer), that our simulations suggest can mediate dynamic movements that mimic a "bouncing spring" or a "sarrus linkage (converting a circular motion to a linear motion or vice versa)" when interacting with the ace2 host cell receptor. this motion might be important in the fusion of the virion and the host cell membrane. we hypothesized that such a cavity formed by three monomers or subunits of the spike protein (i.e., chains a, b, and c) might form an acceptor for small molecules, and we asked whether small molecules could be identified with a relatively high binding energy. we identified several known compounds with predicted binding energy of gbvi/wsa dg (generalized-born volume integral/weighted surface area) from −35 to −71 kcal/mol, some of which are already proposed for clinical trials including an mtor (mammalian target of rapamycin) pathway inhibitor, sirolimus (rapamycin; a macrolide type; nct03901001 not yet recruiting) [47] [48] [49] and ritonavir (open-label trial in hospitalized adults with severe covid-19) [48, [50] [51] [52] . a recent study that screened hundreds of approved molecules in a sars-cov-2 assay using artificial intelligence-enabled phenomic assays [53] , also identified sirolimus (rapamycin) as a promising candidate. in addition to the macrolides, one of the top hits we have identified, chitosan, has a recently reported derivative inhibiting sars-cov-2 coronavirus replication in cell lines [54, 55] . a previous study has also shown that the chitosan derivatives can interact with the spike protein and block its interaction with the host receptor [56] . our data suggest a mechanism whereby chitosan (and possibly its derivatives), as well as macrolide type molecules, might bind to a pocket formed by the spike protein trimer and provide a novel domain to focus on for future drug discovery projects. [18, 19] . (c) receptor binding domain (rbd) illustrating the "up" or "open" (pdb id. 6vsb [18] ) and "down" or "closed" (pdb id. 6vxx [31] ) conformation.a total of 791 viral genome sequences were downloaded from the global initiative on sharing all influenza data platform (gisaid) [57] , in order to define the evolutionary variability in different domains of the spike glycoprotein. only genomes with high coverage and complete sequences were selected. further filtering was applied to obtain complete sequences on the targeted domains which reduced the total number of strains to 768. total protein sequences were acquired from 3 frame translation using the transeq tool from emboss (european molecular biology open software suite) package (version 6.5.7) (european bioinformatics institute (embl-ebi), hinxton, cambridge, uk) [58] . the amino acid chains from the spike glycoprotein were aligned to the reference protein (pdb id. 6vsb [18, 59] ) using muscle [60] . variations in the amino acid or the residue changes were scanned on the entire spike protein sequence, along with two areas of interest in the multiple alignment file, focusing on a subset of the s2 subunit (hr1, ch, and cd domains) and the rbd domain ( figure 1 and tables s1-s3).the cryo-em (cryogenic electron microscopy) homotrimer structure of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein was retrieved from the protein data bank database (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb; pdb id. 6vsb; figure 1 ) [18, 59] . in addition, the missing amino acid (residues range: 67-78, 96-98, 143-155, 177-186, 247-260, 329-334, 444-448, 455-490, 501-502, 621-639, 673-686, 812-814, and 829-852) coordinates in the structure of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein were built using the swissmodel ( figure 1 ) [61] . molecular dynamics simulations were carried on the model systems as per the standardized pipelines [62] [63] [64] (detailed method explained in the supplementary materials; file s1). the gromacs 4.6.5 [65] program (gromacs; groningen machine for chemical simulations, university of groningen, groningen, the netherlands) was used to perform md calculations assigning the charmm27 forcefield [66] . we performed 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations on two systems: (i) the monomeric form and (ii) the homotrimer form of the spike protein. in our analysis of the md simulations, the dynamics of the monomeric form of the spike protein serves as control to the homotrimer, which is the functional unit. initially, the model systems were energy minimized, which provides a base-line model structure and resolves poorly-resolved conformations often found in crystal structures [13, 18, 62, [67] [68] [69] [70] . a simulation box of solvent atoms is then added to enhance simulation realism. following that, using the npt (number of particles (n), system pressure (p), and temperature (t); isobaric-isothermal) thermodynamic ensemble, equilibration of the systems was performed to adjust solvent molecules with counter ions in the simulation box [71] . these equilibrated systems were subsequently used to perform the final md production runs for 100 ns, and results were analyzed using gromacs [56] , biovia discovery studio (dassaultsystèmes, biovia corp., san diego, ca, usa), chimera, and visual molecular dynamics (vmd) tools [71] [72] [73] .structure-based virtual screening (sbvs) is an application of in silico methods that identify promising lead molecules from chemical libraries or databases. these methods are computational counterparts of experimental biological evaluation methods, such as high-throughput screening (hts). fda approved drug libraries were retrieved from target molecule corp. (targetmol; www.targetmol.com) and selleck chemicals (selleckchem; www.selleckchem.com) vendors. the sbvs against the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein was performed using the molecular operating environment (moe; chemical computing group inc., montreal, qc, canada) package [74, 75] . receptor-ligand binding or docking using the charmm27 forcefield [66] was evaluated using the gbvi/wsa ∆g scoring function [76] . the compounds showing best energies with the spike protein were selected for further analysis. gbvi/wsa ∆g is a forcefield based scoring function which determines the free energy of binding of the ligand from a given position [75] . in addition, we have also selected the compounds that showed comparatively stable interactions with the homotrimer spike protein. applying the "triangle matcher"placement method, receptor-ligand docking was performed defining the receptor as rigid and ligands as flexible [74, 75] .we were interested to define the evolutionary variance in the sars-cov-2 spike protein.understanding regions of high and low variance can identify domains that may be functionally conserved and potentially important to the virus life cycle, or those under positive evolutionary pressure whose selection might avoid the immune system.examining the variability of the spike protein in sars-cov-2 and its different domains, a total of 791 genome viral sequences were retrieved from gisaid [57] . a global view of the mutation space of the virus is presented in figure 2a , which represents the amino acid substitutions in bins of 10 aminoacids across the spike glycoprotein. these hotspots of variation are mostly confined to the ntd and the rbd domains (figures 1b and 2b) . we investigated the variability in the entire sequence of the spike protein, focusing on the regions that showed low-variability in the structure (figure 2 ). by investigating the variations in the residue changes across the entire spike protein sequence or all the regions of lower variability (figure 2a and table s1 ), the s2 subunit exhibited the lowest sequence variability (residue range: 816-1141; figures 1b and 2c) . moreover, previous studies have identified that the active site region for this spike protein is located in the rbd domain which interacts with the ace2 host cell receptor [18, 20, 26, [38] [39] [40] 42, 44] . comparing the variability of the rbd domain and s2 subunit domains, the rbd domain was shown to contain more mutations in its region compared to the s2 subunit (hr1, ch, and cd) domains (figure 2b ,c, and tables s1-s4). these data suggest that during mutation by natural selection, the viral-host "arms race" might operate more frequently on the rbd domain. by contrast, the s2 subunit conservation is suggestive of an important core function where mutations cannot be tolerated. these findings prompted our focus on the s2 subunit as an important region to investigate for identifying potentially novel druggable pockets.we next traced the dynamics of different domains in the spike protein using md simulations (figure 1b ). the simulated model systems of the spike protein in the monomer and the homotrimer forms were first processed to check the stability of the protein. stability of the simulated spike protein in both forms in the solvent environment was traced by rmsds (root mean square deviation), a time dependent change in the non-hydrogen atoms (figure 3a ). the rmsd plots (figure 3a) suggest that the trimer form of the spike protein is more stable compared to the monomer form. in addition, chain a in trimer has a higher rmsd (~2 å) compared to the other two chains which is a consequence of the fact that the "up" (or ace2-active) conformation [18] induces flexibility. since the monomer form has a higher rmsds compared to the trimer (figure 3a) , we performed independent triplicates (mds was repeated three times) of md simulation for the monomer form ( figure s1 ). the findings from these replicates indicate that the monomer form has a higher rmsd compared to the trimer spike protein (figure 3a and figure s1 ).the root mean square fluctuations (rmsf) were computed on the cα atoms of each residue from the spike protein, in order to trace their flexibility and thereby define the motions of different domains (figure 3b ). the rmsf findings in both forms (monomer and trimer) indicated that the amino acids in the rbd domain (residue range: 329-521) were highly fluctuating (figures 1b and 3b ). in addition, the triplicate md simulations of the monomer form, also suggests that the rbd domain has a higher rmsf in all three simulation replicates ( figure s1 ). these analyses correlate with previous studies [33] [34] [35] [36] 39] . particularly, amino acids ranging from 470-490, responsible for interacting with the ace2, that were highly fluctuating. furthermore, examining other regions of the spike protein suggests that the s2 subunit domains (residue range: 850-1141; hr1, ch, and cd) showed the least fluctuations within the entire protein sequence (figure 3b ). this correlates with the cryo-em studies performed on the spike protein; that the s2 subunit is more stable [18] compared to the rbd domain, and that this subunit is responsible for a highly stable postfusion conformation of the spike protein [18, 32] . from the perspective of designing drugs, the more stable or less flexible a region is within a protein, the more accurately we can trace a better hit molecule. in the case of the spike protein, the rmsf findings guided us towards focusing on the s2 subunit ( figure 3b) .moreover, by tracing the residues involved in the h-bond interactions between two monomers (i.e., chains a-b, a-c, or b-c) of the homotrimer, we observed that the rbd domain residues were also involved in intermolecular interactions with each other and with high occupancy (%). this suggests that intermolecular interactions between chains in the homotrimer might equilibrate the spike protein, and might stimulate conversion from a "down" to "up" conformation of the rbd domain that interacts with the ace2 receptor ( figure s2 and table s5 ).the structural dynamics over the time course for spike protein in the monomer and the homotrimer form was monitored during md simulations (figure 3c,d) . the monomeric spike protein in the solvent environment exhibited a movement from the "up" active state towards the "down" inactive state for the rbd domain (figure 1c, figure 3c , and movie s1). these correlate with the previous findings that the rbd domain can form two different conformations, i.e., "down" and "up" states, which represents the host cell receptor-inaccessible and receptor-accessible, respectively [33] [34] [35] [36] . the sars-cov-2 spike protein has a better binding affinity to the ace2 receptor at two different "up" angles of the rbd domain compared to the sars-cov [40] . figure 3c (and movie s1) describes the conformational change in other regions of the spike protein, when the rbd domain moves towards an "up" to "down" state in the monomeric form. 3d (and movie s2) represents the dynamics of the homotrimer spike protein, suggesting that the rbd domain of chain a opens more widely in its "up" state. domains hr1, ch, and cd close to the viral transmembrane exhibited the least movement (figure 3d ) during md simulations. in addition, exploration of the structural orientation of these s2 subunit domains (figure 3d and movie s2) suggests that they form a large pocket or cavity using three chains (or monomers) from a homotrimer spike protein. the slight movement observed in homotrimer during md simulation of this cavity (movies s1 and s2), and the structural orientation suggest that it could work as "bouncing spring" or "sarrus linkage". one may postulate that, when the spike protein interacts with the ace2 receptor, this "bouncing spring" or "sarrus linkage" movement may be important in the fusion of the virion with the host membrane. additionally, this cavity from the spike protein could work as a platform for the design or development of new drug leads against this protein (figure 3d ). such molecules might alter the trimer stability upon viral entry or upon viral coat assembly. there have been several studies performed to design drugs specific for the sars-cov-2 spike protein [20, [38] [39] [40] 42, 44] ; however, most of them are focused on the rbd domain. in addition, from our md simulation and variability analysis (figures 2 and 3) , the rbd domain is highly flexible and variable, therefore, drugging this variable site may be an obstacle in finding active hit molecules. by targeting the less variable s2 region, such as the cavity formed by the homotrimer (figures 2 and 3d) we suggest that this might be a novel approach to develop small molecule drug leads.we next investigated the targetability of the trimer cavity formed by the s2 subunit (hr1, ch, and cd domains) in the spike protein (figures 2 and 3 ) using the moe (chemical computing group inc.) package [74, 75] , before using it for high-throughput virtual screening (or sbvs) using a library of fda approved drugs. the "alpha shapes" construction [75, 77] geometric method was used to compute the possible residues that can be considered for ligand docking from this trimer cavity in the spike protein (figure 4a ).high-throughput virtual screening is a powerful computational approach that is increasingly being used in the drug discovery process, through the in silico identification of novel hits from large compound databases [78] . we applied the sbvs approach to dock the molecules to the trimer cavity and to check its feasibility as a target. ligand binding to this cavity might reduce or increase the "bouncing spring" movement in the spike protein, as observed in md simulations (figure 3 , movies s1 and s2). this perturbation might affect its interactions with the host cell receptor or the hinge movement of the rbd domain. the compounds that exhibit a relatively high binding affinity towards the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein trimer cavity with a binding affinity −35 to −71 kcal/mol (gbvi/wsa dg) were recorded. from the list of ligands showing best binding, the compounds that were already validated or suggested to be/can be active against the sars-cov-2 virus includes: chitosan [54] [55] [56] , rapamycin [47] [48] [49] , everolimus (rad001) [49] , paclitaxel [79] , ritonavir [48, [50] [51] [52] , selameerin (selamectin) [80] , and danoprevir [52] (table 1) .among these molecules rapamycin and everolimus drugs were previously identified as mtor pathway inhibitors [47, 50, [81] [82] [83] . the antibacterial or antiparasitic drugs from the list are chitosan [84] or selameerin (selamectin) [85] , respectively. paclitaxel, has been found to be previously target bcl-2 and microtubule associated functions [86, 87] . in addition, the fda approved drugs that target the protease are: ritonavir [88] and danoprevir (itmn-191) [89] .by docking known drugs within the trimer cavity of spike protein, the relative selectivity of the cavity suggests that the majority of higher-affinity drugs will have a molecular weight (mw) ≥~700 g/mol (table 1 and figure s3 ). however, this is with the certainty that compounds with high mw can form more interactions with the spike protein, in addition, our finding highlights the possibility that the trimer cavity can occupy large ligands deep inside the binding pocket (figure 4a ). particularly, a specific class of ligands (mostly macrolide type) were found to exhibit a better fit to the trimer cavity ( figure 4a) ; for example, rapamycin [47] [48] [49] , everolimus (rad001) [49] , paclitaxel [79] , and selameerin (selamectin) [80] (figure 4a ). the intermolecular interactions between the spike protein and the compounds suggest that residues from all three monomers (chains a, b, and c) are actively involved in binding to the drugs. in addition, placement of the compounds inside the trimer cavity suggests that they make use of the pocket space (forming different conformation) to form stable interactions with the spike protein (figure 4a ). the ligands that were found interacting with the homotrimer cavity with high binding affinity were also docked with an interface formed by the spike proteins (rbd domain; pdb id. 6lzg [90] ) that interact with the ace2 receptor. sbvs, structure-based virtual screening. in order to check the selectivity of these ligands to the trimer cavity, we docked this same subset (table 1) with the rbd domain of the viral spike protein (figure 4b ; pdb id. 6lzg [90] ). the rbd domain is involved in interacting with the ace2 host cell receptor [16, 26, 30, [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] 90, 91] . the docking suggests that all compounds from table 1 have better binding affinity to the trimer cavity compared to that of the rbd domain. in addition, chitosan [54] [55] [56] 84 ] (a linear polysaccharide; −37.29 kcal/mol) could form a linear conformation in its structure when binding tothe rbd domain (figure 4b and table 1 ), whilst the same ligand (due to its molecular structural nature) can form a slightly folded shape (as shown in 2d-diagram; figure 4a ) within the trimer cavity. by contrast, everolimus [49] (a macrolide type) exhibits high affinity for the trimer pocket, and very little selectivity for the rbd domain (table 1) . moreover, ligands (figure 4b ) that interact with the rbd domain overlap with the region bound by cr3022 (a neutralizing antibody isolated from a convalescent sars patient that, interacts with the receptor binding domain of the sars-cov-2 spike protein [92] ).the sars-cov-2 virus causing covid-19 disease uses the fusion spike glycoprotein to penetrate into the host cell, and therefore a detailed understanding of this protein forms a critical intervention point in the viral life-cycle. we interrogated the spike protein with a diversity of computational approaches. first, the variability in spike protein from 791 different viral genome sequences was evaluated. residues in the s2 subunit (residue range: 816-1141; hr1, ch, and cd domains) were found to be less evolutionarily variable compared to other regions or domains. by contrast, residues h49y, q239k, v367f, v483a, s943p, k986p, and v987p were found to be the most common amino acid substitutions in the spike protein from related viruses. secondly, md simulations revealed that residues in rbd domain (residue range: 329-521) were more flexible compared to residues in the s2 subunit, making it more complicated for drug design strategies. an examination of less variable regions revealed that the hr1, ch, and cd domains (s2 subunit) located close to the viral transmembrane formed a large cavity or pocket that is formed from three spike monomers. the md simulation traced an "up" active state and a "down" inactive state of the spike protein in its monomer form. slight movement of the trimer cavity within this structural orientation suggests that it could work as "bouncing spring" or "sarrus linkage" when interacting with the host cell receptor.the conversion between "up" and "down" states in the monomer form of spike protein using the in silico methods is defined by the md field to be relatively fast. nevertheless, there are different structural isoforms that have been identified on the spike protein using different experimental methods or virus strains. this indicates that, although conversion may be quick, there are structural endpoints which are "stable". using the recent cryo-em structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein [18] ; an asymmetric hinge-like movement was observed in only one of the three rbd domains in the s1 subunit, which was also observed in mers-cov and sars-cov [33, 34] . however, there are also other structures where all three rbd domains are in the "up" or "down" conformation [18, 31, 33, 34, 40] . these data suggest a physiological relevance due to heterogeneous protein conformational dynamics. for example, asymmetric conformational flexibility might have a functional role, perhaps in evading the exposure of b-cell epitopes (only one rbd domain is in the "up" conformation) and/or optimized interaction with the ace2 receptor depending on virus strain. in addition, because of the "bouncing spring" mechanism (communication between the trimer pocket and the rbd domain conformation), it is possible that these different spike protein conformational isoforms provide another avenue to develop drug discovery programs that exploit and/or circumvent these dynamics.our investigation into the genomic variation within virus strains, as well as our findings from the md simulations, identified a conserved trimer cavity or pocket formed by the s2 subunit in the spike protein. these findings suggest that a novel target, "the trimer cavity formed by spike protein oligomerization", may be suitable to manipulate viruses of this class. targeting the trimer pocket might identify a new functional class of drugs against this protein. applying the sbvs approach, we docked drug libraries against the trimer cavity with the hypothesis that such a ligand might perturb the predicted "bouncing spring" movement and the homotrimer formation. protein-ligand docking identified severalhits that have already been published or proposed to inhibit the sars-cov-2 virus in cell systems. for example, our studies suggest an action mechanism for molecules such as chitosan and macrolide types (e.g., rapamycin).based on the sequence variability of the coronavirus, including our findings from md simulations of the spike protein, a conserved trimer cavity (hr1, ch, and cd domains) is a feature of the spike protein in most coronaviruses. consistent with this, previous work has shown that the molecule ek1 exhibited potent inhibitory activity against all human coronaviruses (hcovs) tested through binding to the c-terminal hr1 domain [37] . additionally, the "up" and "down" conformations of rbd domain observed during md simulations, supports that concept that the spike protein can also be a target of a possible igg therapeutic [92] . from the list of the top compounds identified that dock into the trimer cavity, some of them have already been validated or suggested as sars-cov-2 virus inhibitors in cells, including; a chitosan derivative [54] [55] [56] , rapamycin [47] [48] [49] , everolimus (rad001) [49] , paclitaxel [79] , ritonavir [48, [50] [51] [52] , selameerin (selamectin) [80] , and danoprevir [52] . among these, a modified polymeric version of the chitosan drug (a top hit in our analysis) was recently shown to inhibit cov replication with evidence that the molecule inhibits the binding of the viral spike protein to the host ace2 receptor [54] [55] [56] . the protein-protein interaction map or the network-based methodologies [14, 43] suggest that sirolimus (rapamycin) emerges as a common potential drug lead for repurposing against covid-19. this rapamycin (mtor inhibitor) drug was found previously to disrupt larp1 (la-related protein 1) and mtorc1 (mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1) binding, and has been shown to reduce mers infection by~60% in vitro [47] . the postulated geroprotectors, such as sirolimus (rapamycin) and its close derivative, the rapalog everolimus (rad001), decreased infection rates in a small sample of elderly patients [49] .moreover, the drugs sirolimus (rapamycin) and ritonavir are currently in clinical trials for repurposing against covid-19 [48, 50, 51] . sirolimus (rapamycin) is registered in a clinical trial (nct03901001 not yet recruiting) designed to evaluate adjunctive use of sirolimus (rapamycin) and oseltamivir in patients hospitalized with influenza [47, 48] . ritonavir, a hiv protease inhibitor is in an open-label trial in hospitalized adults with severe covid-19 [48, 51] . the data from this small-sample clinical study showed that danoprevir boosted by ritonavir is safe and well tolerated in all patients [52] . selamectin is a potential drug for treating covid-2019 found active against the pangolin coronavirus gx_p2v, a workable model for sars-cov-2 research [80] . the antitumor drug paclitaxel increases cellular methylglyoxal to virucidal levels, providing a rationale for repurposing doxorubicin and paclitaxel for covid-19 treatment [79] . nevertheless, whether the hit molecules we have identified that dock into the trimer cavity and impact on the virus life cycle requires orthogonal validation.we hope the findings of our study can help to understand the function of the highly conserved spikea disease named covid-19 by the world health organization and caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has been recognized as responsible for the pneumonia outbreak that started in december, 2019 in wuhan city, hubei, china 1 and spread in february to milan, lombardy, italy 2 becoming pandemic. as of april 2020, the virus infected >2'000'000 people in >200 countries.sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus that shares similarities with other betacoronavirus such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) 3 . bats have been identified as the primary host for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 4,5 but the intermediate host linking sars-cov-2 to humans is still unknown, although a recent report indicates that pangolins could be involved 6 .coronaviruses use species-specific proteins to mediate the entry in the host cell and the spike s protein activates the infection in human respiratory epithelial cells in sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 7 . spike s is assembled as a trimer and contains around 1,300 amino acids within each unit 8, 9 . the receptor binding domain (rbd) of spike s, which contains around 300 amino acids, mediates the binding with angiotensin-converting enzyme, (ace2) attacking respiratory cells. another region upstream of the rbd, present in mers-cov but not in sars-cov, is involved in the adhesion to sialic acid and could play a key role in regulating viral infection 7, 10 .at present, very few molecular details are available on sars-cov-2 and its interactions with the human host, which are mediated by specific rna elements 11 . to study the rna structural content, we used cross 12 that was previously developed to investigate large transcripts such as the human immunodeficiency virus hiv-1 13 . cross predicts the structural profile of rna molecules (single-and double-stranded state) at single-nucleotide resolution using sequence information only. here, we performed sequence and structural alignments among 62 sars-cov-2 strains and identified the conservation of specific elements in the spike s region, which provides clues on the evolution of domains involved in the binding to ace2 and sialic acid.as highly structured regions of rna molecules have strong propensity to form stable contacts with proteins 14 and promote assembly of specific complexes 15, 16 , sars-cov-2 domains enriched in double-stranded content are expected to establish interactions within host cells that are important to replicate the virus 17 . to investigate the interactions of sars-cov-2 rna with human proteins, we employed catrapid 18, 19 . catrapid 20 estimates the binding potential of a specific protein for an rna molecule through van der waals, hydrogen bonding and secondary structure propensities allowing identification of interaction partners with high confidence 21 . the unbiased analysis of more than 100000 protein interactions with sars-cov-2 rna reveals that the 5' of sars-cov-2 has strong propensity to bind to human proteins involved in viral infection and especially reported to be associated with hiv infection. a comparison between sars-cov and hiv reveals indeed similarities 22 , but the relationship between sars-cov-2 and hiv is still unexplored. interestingly, hiv and sars-cov-2, but not sars-cov nor mers-cov, have a furin-cleavage site occurring in the spike s protein, which could explain the spread velocity of sars-cov-2 compared to sars-cov and mers-cov 23, 24 . yet, many processes related to sars-cov-2 replication are unknown and our study aims to suggest relevant protein interactions for further investigation.we hope that our large-scale calculations of structural properties and binding partners of sars-cov-2 will be useful to identify the mechanisms of virus replication within the human host.structured elements within rna molecules attract proteins 14 and reveal regions important for interactions with the host 25 . indeed, each gene expressed from sars-cov-2 is preceded by conserved transcription-regulating sequences that act as signal for the transcription complex during the synthesis of the rna minus strand to promote a strand transfer to the leader region to resume the synthesis. this process is named discontinuous extension of the minus strand and is a variant of similarity-assisted template switching that operates during viral rna recombination 17 .to analyze sars-cov-2 structure (reference wuhan strain mn908947.3), we employed cross 12 to predict the double-and single-stranded content of rna genomes such as hiv-1 13 . we found the highest density of double-stranded regions in the 5' (nucleotides 1-253), membrane m protein (nucleotides 26523-27191), spike s protein (nucleotides 23000-24000), and nucleocapsid n protein (nucleotides 2874-29533; fig. 1 ) 26 . the lowest density of double-stranded regions were observed at nucleotides 6000-6250 and 20000-21500 and correspond to the regions between the nonstructural proteins nsp14 and nsp15 and the upstream region of the spike surface protein s (fig. 1 ) 26 . in addition to the maximum corresponding to nucleotides 23000-24000, the structural content of spike s protein shows minima at around nucleotides 20500 and 24500 (fig. 1) .we used the vienna method 27 to further investigate the rna secondary structure of specific regions identified with cross 13 . employing a 100 nucleotide window centered around cross maxima and minima, we found good match between cross scores and vienna free energies ( fig.   1 ). strong agreement is also observed between cross and vienna positional entropy, indicating that regions with the highest structural content have also the lowest structural diversity.our analysis suggests the presence of structural elements in sars-cov-2 that have evolved to interact with specific human proteins 11 . our observation is based on the assumption that structured regions have an intrinsic propensity to recruit proteins 14 , which is supported by the fact that structured transcripts act as scaffolds for protein assembly 15, 16 .we employed crossalign 13 to study the structural conservation of sars-cov-2 in different strains (materials and methods).in our analysis, we compared the wuhan strain mn908947.3 with around 2800 other coronaviruses (data from ncbi) with human ( fig. 2) or other hosts (supp. fig. 1) . when comparing sars-cov-2 with human coronaviruses (1387 strains, including sars-cov and mers-cov), we found that the most conserved region falls inside the spike s genomic locus (fig. 2) . more precisely, the conserved region is between nucleotides 23000 -24000 and exhibits an intricate and stable to better investigate the sequence conservation of sars-cov-2, we compared 62 strains isolated from different countries during the pandemic (including china, usa, japan, taiwan, india, brazil, sweden, and australia; data from ncbi and in vipr www.viprbrc.org; materials and methods).our analysis aims to determine the relationship between structural content and sequence conservation.using clustal w for multiple sequence alignments 28 , we observed general conservation of the coding regions (fig. 3a) . the 5' and 3' show high variability due to experimental procedures of the sequencing and are discarded in this analysis 29 . one highly conserved region is between nucleotides 23000 -24000 in the spike s genomic locus, while sequences up-and downstream are variable (red bars in fig. 3a) . we then used crossalign 13 to compare the structural content (materials and methods). high variability of structure is observed for both the 5' and 3' and for nucleotides between 21000 -22000 as well as 24000 -25000, associated with the s region (red bars in fig. 3a) . the rest of the regions are significantly conserved at a structural level (p-value < 0.0001; fisher's test).we then compared protein sequences coded by the spike s genomic locus (ncbi reference qhd43416) and found that both sequence (fig. 3a) and structure (fig. 2) of nucleotides 23000 -24000 are highly conserved. the region corresponds to amino acids 330-500 that contact the host receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 30 promoting infection and provoking lung injury 24, 31 . by contrast, the region upstream of the binding site receptor ace2 and located in correspondence to the minimum of the structural profile at around nucleotides 22500-23000 ( fig. 1) is highly variable 32 , as indicated by t-coffee multiple sequence alignments 32 (fig. 3a) . this part of the spike s region corresponds to amino acids 243-302 that in mers-cov binds to sialic acids regulating infection through cell-cell membrane fusion ( fig. 3b ; see related manuscript by e.milanetti et al.) 10, 33, 34 .our analysis suggests that the structural region between nucleotides 23000 and 24000 of spike s region is conserved among coronaviruses (fig. 2) and that the binding site for ace2 has poor variation in human sars-cov-2 strains (fig. 3b) . by contrast, the region upstream, which has propensity to bind sialic acids 10, 33, 34 , showed poor structural content and high variability (fig. 3b) .in order to obtain insights on how the virus replicates in human cells, we predicted sars-cov-2 interactions with the whole rna-binding human proteome. following a protocol to study structural conservation in viruses 13 , we first divided the wuhan sequence in 30 fragments of 1000 nucleotides each moving from the 5' to 3' and then calculated the protein-rna interactions of each fragment with catrapid omics (3340 canonical and putative rna-binding proteins, or rbps, for a total 102000 interactions) 18 . proteins such as polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 1 ptbp1 (uniprot p26599) showed the highest interaction propensity (or z-score; materials and methods) at the 5' while others such as heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein q hnrnpq (o60506) showed the highest interaction propensity at the 3', in agreement with previous studies on coronaviruses ( fig.   4a ) 35 .for each fragment, we predicted the most significant interactions by filtering according to the z score. we used three different thresholds in ascending order of stringency: z ³ 1.50, 1.75 and 2 respectively and we removed from the list the proteins that were predicted to interact promiscuously with more than one fragment. fragment 1 corresponds to the 5' and is the most contacted by rbps (around 120 with z³2 high-confidence interactions; fig. 4b ), which is in agreement with the observation that highly structured regions attract a large number of proteins 14 . indeed, the 5' contains multiple stem loop structures that control rna replication and transcription 36, 37 . by contrast, the 3' and fragment 23 (spike s), which are still structured but to a lesser extent, attract fewer proteins (10 and 5, respectively), while fragment 20 (between orf1ab and spike s) that is predicted to be unstructured, does not have binding partners.the interactome of each fragment was then analysed using clevergo, a tool for gene ontology (go) enrichment analysis 38 . proteins interacting with fragments 1, 2 and 29 were associated with annotations related to viral processes ( fig. 4c ; supp. table 1 ). considering the three thresholds applied (materials and methods), we found 22 viral proteins for fragment 1, 2 proteins for fragment 2 and 11 proteins for fragment 29 (fig. 4d) .among the high-confidence interactors of fragment 1, we discovered rbps involved in positive regulation of viral processes and viral genome replication, such as double-stranded rna-specific editase 1 adarb1 (uniprot p78563 39 ), 2-5-oligoadenylate synthase 2 oas2 (p29728) and 2-5adependent ribonuclease rnasel (q05823). interestingly, 2-5-oligoadenylate synthase 2 oas2 has been reported to be upregulated in human alveolar adenocarcinoma (a549) cells infected with sars-cov-2 (log fold change of 4.2; p-value of 10 -9 and q-value of 10 -6 ) 40 . while double-stranded rna-specific adenosine deaminase adar (p55265) is absent in our library due to its length that does not meet catrapid omics requirements 18 , the omixcore extension of the algorithm specifically developed for large molecules 41 attributes the same binding propensity to both adarb1 and adar, thus indicating that the interactions might occur (materials and methods).moreover, experimental works indicate that the family of adar deaminases is active in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids derived from sars-cov-2 patients 42 and is upregulated in a549 cells infected with sars-cov-2 (log fold change of 0.58; p-value of 10 -8 and q-value of 10 -5 ) 40 .we also identified proteins related to the establishment of integrated proviral latency, including xray repair cross-complementing protein 5 xrcc5 (p13010) and x-ray repair cross-complementing protein 6 xrcc6 (p12956; fig. 4b and 4e). in accordance with our calculations, comparison of a549 cells responses to sars-cov-2 and respiratory syncytial virus, indicates upregulation of xrrc6 in sars-cov-2 (log fold-change of 0.92; p-value of 0.006 and q-value of 0.23) 40 .nucleolin ncl (p19338), a protein known to be involved in coronavirus processing, was also predicted to bind tightly to the 5' (supp. table 1) 43 .importantly, we found proteins related to defence response to viruses, such as atp-dependent rna helicase ddx1 (q92499), that are involved in negative regulation of viral genome replication.some dna-binding proteins such as cyclin-t1 ccnt1 (o60563), zinc finger protein 175 znf175 (q9y473) and prospero homeobox protein 1 prox1 (q92786) were included because they could have potential rna-binding ability (fig. 4e) 44 . as for fragment 2, we found two canonical rbps: more than simple scaffold elements, gag proteins are versatile elements that bind to viral and host proteins as they traffic to the cell membrane (supp. table 1 ) 45 .analysis of functional annotations carried out with genemania 46 revealed that proteins interacting with the 5' of sars-cov-2 rna are associated with regulatory pathways involving notch2, myc and max that have been previously connected to viral infection processes ( fig. 4e) 47, 48 .interestingly, some proteins, including ddx1, ccnt1 and znf175 for fragment 1 and trim32 for fragment 2, have been shown to be necessary for hiv functions and replication inside the cell. recently, gordon et al. reported a list of human proteins binding to open reading frames (orfs) translated from sars-cov-2 58 . identified through affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry quantification, 332 proteins from hek-293t cells interact with viral orf peptides.by selecting 274 proteins binding at the 5' with z score ³1.5 (supp . table 1) , of which 140 are exclusively interacting with fragment 1 (fig. 4b) , we found that 8 are also reported in the list by gordon et al. 58 , which indicates significant enrichment (representation factor of 2.5; p-value of 0.02; hypergeometric test with human proteome in background). the fact that our list of protein-rna binding partners contains elements identified also in the protein-protein network analysis is not surprising, as ribonucleoprotein complexes evolve together 14 and their components sustain each other through different types of interactions 16 .we note that out of 332 interactions, 60 are rbps (as reported in uniprot 39 ), which represents a considerable fraction (i.e., 20%), considering that there are around 1500 rbps in the human proteome (i.e., 6%) and fully justified by the fact that they involve association with viral rna.comparing the rbps present in gordon et al. 58 table 2) . interestingly, srp72, larp7 and larp4b proteins assemble in stress granules [61] [62] [63] that are the targeted by rna viruses 53 . we speculate that sequestration of these elements is orchestrated by a viral program aiming to recruit host genes 49 protein kinase a radixin rdx (p35241; in addition to those mentioned above; supp. table 2 ).in the list of 274 proteins binding to the 5' (fragment 1) with z score ≥1.5, we found 10 hits associated with hiv (supp. table 3 (q06787) and rna polymerase-associated protein rtf1 homologue (q92541; supp. table 3 ). by contrast, no significant enrichments were found for other viruses such as for instance ebola. 65 , among other targets. in addition, hvb-related targets are nuclear receptor subfamily 5 group a member 2 nr5a2 (chembl3544), interferon-induced, double-stranded rna-activated protein kinase eif2ak2 (chembl5785) and srsf protein kinase 1 srpk1 (chembl4375). we hope that this list can be the starting point for further pharmaceutical studies.a number of proteins identified in our catrapid calculations have been previously reported to coalesce in large ribonucleoprotein assemblies such as stress granules. among these proteins, we found double-stranded rna-activated protein kinase eif2ak2 (p19525), nucleolin ncl (p19338), atp-dependent rna helicase ddx1 (q92499), cyclin-t1 ccnt1 (o60563), signal recognition particle subunit srp72 (o76094), larp7 (q4g0j3) and la-related protein 4b heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein q hnrnpq (o60506) 63 . to further investigate the propensity of these proteins to phase separate in stress granules, we used the catgranule algorithm (materials and methods) 66 . we found that the 274 proteins binding to the 5' (fragment 1) with z score ≥1.5 are highly prone to accumulate in stress-granules (274 proteins with the lowest z score are used in the comparison; p-value<0.0001; kolmogorov-smirnoff; fig. 4g ; supp. table   4 ).this finding is particularly relevant because rna viruses are known to antagonize stress granules formation 53 . indeed, the role of stress granules and processing bodies in translation suppression and rna decay have impact on virus replication 67 .spreading. using advanced computational approaches, we investigated the structural content of sars-cov-2 rna and predicted human proteins that bind to it.we employed cross 13, 68 to compare the structural properties of 2800 coronaviruses and identified elements conserved in sars-cov-2 strains. the regions containing the highest amount of structure are the 5' as well as glycoproteins spike s and membrane m.we found that the spike s protein domain encompassing amino acids 330-500 is highly conserved across sars-cov-2 strains. this result suggests that spike s must have evolved to specifically interact with its host partner ace2 30 and mutations increasing the binding affinity are highly infrequent. as the nucleic acids encoding for this region are enriched in double-stranded content, we speculate that the structure might attract host regulatory elements, thus further constraining the variability. the fact that the spike s region is highly conserved among all the analysed sars-cov-2 strains suggests that a specific drug can be designed against it to prevent interactions within the host.by contrast, the highly variable region at amino acids 243-302 in spike s protein corresponds to the binding site of sialic acids in mers-cov (see manuscript by e. milanetti et al.) 7, 10, 34 and could play a role in infection 33 . the fact that the binding region changes in the different strains might indicate a variety of binding affinities for sialic acids, which could provide clues on the specific responses in the human population. interestingly, the sialic acid binding site is absent in sars-cov but present in mers-cov, which represents an important difference between the diseases.both our sequence and structural analyses of spike s protein indicate high conservation among coronaviruses and suggest that human engineering of sars-cov-2 is highly unlikely.using catrapid 18, 19 we computed >100000 protein interactions with sars-cov-2 and found previously reported interactions such as polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 1 ptbp1, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein q hnrnpq and nucleolin ncl 43 . in addition, we discovered that the highly structured region at the 5' has the largest number of protein partners including atp-dependent rna helicase ddx1 that was previously reported to be essential for hiv-1 and coronavirus ibv replication 54,55 , and the double-stranded rna-specific editases adar and adarb1 that catalyse the hydrolytic deamination of adenosine to inosine 49 . other predicted interactions are xrcc5 and xrcc6 members of the hdp-rnp complex associating with atp-dependent rna helicase dhx9 69 as well as and 2-5a-dependent ribonuclease rnasel and 2-5-oligoadenylate synthase 2 oas2 that control viral rna degradation 70, 71 . interestingly, ddx1, xrcc6 and oas2 are upregulated in human alveolar adenocarcinoma cells infected with sars-cov-2 40 . in agreement with our predictions, recent experimental work indicates that the family of adar deaminases is active in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids derived from sars-cov-2 patients 42 .a significant overlap exists with the list of protein interactions reported by gordon et al. 58 , and among the candidate partners we identified akap8l, involved as a dead/h-box rna helicase binding protein involved in hiv infection 59 . in general, proteins associated with retroviral replication are expected to play different roles in sars-cov-2. as sars-cov-2 massively represses host gene expression 49 , we hypothesize that the virus hijacks host pathways by recruiting transcriptional and post-transcriptional elements interacting with polymerase ii genes and splicing factors such as for instance a-kinase anchor protein 8-like akap8l and la-related protein 7 larp7 that is upregulated in human alveolar adenocarcinoma cells infected with sars-cov-2 40 .the link to proteins previously studied in the context of hiv and other viruses, if further confirmed fro, is particularly relevant for the repurposing of existing drugs 65 .the idea that sars-cov-2 sequesters different elements of the transcriptional machinery is particularly intriguing and is supported by the fact that a large number of proteins identified in our screening are found in stress granules 63 . indeed, stress granules protect the host innate immunity and are hijacked by viruses to favour their own replication 67 . moreover, as coronaviruses transcription uses discontinuous rna synthesis that involves high-frequency recombination 43 , it is possible that pieces of the viruses resulting from a mechanism called defective interfering rnas 72 could act as scaffold to attract host proteins 14, 15 .we predicted the secondary structure of transcripts using cross (computational recognition of secondary structure 13, 68 . cross was developed to perform high-throughput rna profiling. the algorithm predicts the structural profile (single-and double-stranded state) at single-nucleotide resolution using sequence information only and without sequence length restrictions (scores > 0 indicate double stranded regions). we used the vienna method 27 to further investigate the rna secondary structure of minima and maxima identified with cross 13 .we used crossalign 13,68 an algorithm based on dynamic time warping (dtw), to check and evaluate the structural conservation between different viral genomes 13 . crossalign was previously employed to study the structural conservation of ~5000 hiv genomes. sars-cov-2 fragments (1000 nt, not overlapping) were searched inside other complete genomes using the obe (open begin and end) module, in order to search a small profile inside a larger one. the lower the structural distance, the higher the structural similarities (with a minimum of 0 for almost identical secondary structure profiles). the significance is assessed as in the original publication 13 .the fasta sequences of the complete genomes of sars-cov-2 were downloaded from virus pathogen resource (vipr; www.viprbrc.org), for a total of 62 strains. regarding the overall coronaviruses, the sequences were downloaded from ncbi selecting only complete genomes, for a total of 2862 genomes. the reference wuhan sequence with available annotation (epi_isl_402119) was downloaded from global initiative on sharing all influenza data. (gisaid https://www.gisaid.org/).interactions between each fragment of target sequence and the human proteome were predicted using catrapid omics 18, 19 , an algorithm that estimates the binding propensity of protein-rna pairs by combining secondary structure, hydrogen bonding and van der waals contributions. as we used clustal w 28 for 62 sars-cov-2 strains alignments and t-coffee 32 for spike s proteins alignments. the variability in the spike s region was measured by computing shannon entropy on translated rna sequences. the shannon entropy is computed as follows:s(a) = -sum_i p(a,i) log p(a,i)where a correspond to the amino acid at the position i and p(a,i) is the frequency of a certain amino-acid a at position i of the sequence. low entropy indicates poorly variability: if p(a,x) = 1 for one a and 0 for the rest, then s(x) =0. by contrast, if the frequencies of all amino acids are equally distributed, the entropy reaches its maximum possible value.catgranule 66 was employed to identify proteins assembling into biological condensates. scores > 0 indicate that a protein is prone to phase separate. structural disorder, nucleic acid binding propensity and amino acid patterns such as arginine-glycine and phenylalanine-glycine are key features combined in this computational approach 66 . fig. 1 c oronaviruses, categorized into the order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, and subfamily coronavirinae, are a large group of viral pathogens with a wide host range 1 . their infections in humans, other mammals, and birds can cause respiratory, hepatic, enteric and neurological diseases with varying severity 2 . the zoonotic transmission of novel coronaviruses into humans poses severe threats to the global health, evidenced by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), and the sars-cov-2 that is causing the ongoing pandemic covid-19 in the world 1,3-6 . in the meantime, coronaviruses infecting domestic animals also bring substantial economic losses 7 . for example, the swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (sads-cov) (also known as seacov and peav) isolated in 2017 caused outbreaks of severe watery diarrhea of suckling piglets with a mortality up to 90% in several commercial pig farms in guangdong province of china [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . sads-cov is an αcoronavirus and other representative members in the α-genus are porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (pedv), porcine transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus (tgev), porcine respiratory coronavirus (prcv), feline infectious peritonitis virus (fipv), and human nl63 and 229e coronaviruses (hcov-nl63 and hcov-229e) 1 . representative members in other three genera include mouse hepatitis coronavirus (mhv), bovine coronavirus (bcov), sars-cov, sars-cov-2, mers-cov, hcov-oc43, and hcov-hku1 in the β-genus, avian infectious bronchitis virus (ibv) in the γ-genus, and porcine deltacoronavirus (pdcov) in the δ-genus 1 .cross-species transmission promoted by genetic recombination and/or mutations underlies the host range expansion of coronaviruses 3, [14] [15] [16] . bats are the natural reservoir of more than 30 different αand β-coronaviruses that have great potential for interspecies transmission by recombination and/or mutation 15, [17] [18] [19] . data on genetic evolution, receptor binding, and pathogenesis have demonstrated that human sars-cov and mers-cov most likely originate from bats 1 . palm civets and dromedary camels are the intermediate hosts of sars-cov and mers-cov from bats to humans, respectively 1 . the newly identified porcine sads-cov isolates are also found to sharẽ 95% sequence identity with rhinolophus bat coronavirus hku2, and this further stressed the severe results of coronavirus spillover from bats to domestic animals [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . however, the molecular mechanisms underlying the transmission of sads-cov from bats to pigs are still unknown and need to be further explored.recently it was shown that sads-cov is able to infect cells from a broad range of species including mouse, chicken, pig, monkey, and human, indicating a high potential of the sads-cov for interspecies transmission 20 .the spike glycoprotein of coronaviruses mediates viral entry by binding host receptor with the s1 subunit and fusing viral and cellular membranes with the s2 subunit, thereby determining viral host range and tissue tropism 21, 22 . as a class i viral fusion protein, the spike exists on the envelope of virion as a homotrimer and each monomer contains more than 1000 amino acid residues that can be cleaved into s1 and s2 subunits 21 . for most coronaviruses, the n-terminal domain (ntd) of the s1 subunit recognizes cellsurface carbohydrates, while the c-terminal domain (ctd) specifically binds to cellular protein receptors [21] [22] [23] . sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and hcov-nl63 utilize ctd to bind human receptor ace2 [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] ; mers-cov utilizes ctd to bind human receptor dpp4 31, 32 ; and tgev, prcv, and 229e utilize ctd to bind receptor apn [33] [34] [35] ; hcov-oc43 utilizes ntd to recognize glycans 36 ; and one exception is mhv, which utilizes the ntd to bind mouse receptor ceacam1a 37, 38 . therefore, the s1 subunit, especially its ntd and ctd, is the most variable region of the spike, and is responsible for different tropisms of coronaviruses. in comparison, the s2 subunit containing the fusion peptide (fp) and heptad repeats (hr1 and hr2) for membrane fusion are more conserved in both sequence and structure 21, 22 . for the sads-cov, receptor analysis indicated that none of the known coronavirus protein receptors including ace2, dpp4, and apn are essential for cell entry 10, 20 . there are also no reports regarding the recognition of glycans by the ntd of sads-cov.structural studies of the spike and its binding with glycans and protein receptors have provided important insights into the origin, evolution, and interspecies transmission of coronaviruses. cryo-em structures of spike trimer from all four coronavirus genera have been reported: the α-coronavirus spike structures are determined for hcov-nl63 39 , hcov-229e 34 , pedv 40 , and fipv 41 ; the β-coronavirus spike structures are determined for mhv 38, 42, 43 , hcov-hku1 44 , hcov-oc43 36 , sars-cov 24,45-47 , mers-cov 45, 48, 49 , and sars-cov-2 50, 51 ; and the γ-coronavirus spike structure is determined for ibv 52 and the δ-coronavirus spike structure is determined for pdcov 53, 54 . the cryo-em structures of bat coronavirus spike trimers have not been reported, and only crystal structures of the ctd from hku4 55 , hku5 56 , and hku9 57 were determined.the spikes of sads-cov (1130 amino acid residues) and hku2 (1128 amino acid residues) are among the shortest coronavirus spike glycoproteins 58 and their amino acid identities to other known coronavirus spikes are lower than 28%, indicating the spikes of hku2 and sads-cov are unique [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] 59 . in this study, we report the cryo-em structures of the sads-cov and hku2 spike trimers at 2.83 and 2.38 å resolution, respectively. the hku2 spike trimer structure is the first one from bat coronavirus. we analyze the hku2 and sads-cov trimer structures and also compare the ntd, ctd, sd1, and sd2 domains of the s1 subunit and the s2 subunit of hku2 with other spikes from α-, β-, γ-, and δ-coronaviruses. our results strongly support that hku2 and sads-cov preserve primitive structural features in their spikes that have a close evolutionary relationship with βcoronavirus spikes and provide insights into the evolution and cross-species transmission of coronaviruses.protein expression and structure determination. the cdnas encoding hku2 spike (yp_001552236) and sads-cov spike (avm41569.1) were synthesized with codons optimized for insect cell expression. hku2 ectodomains (residues 1-1066) and sads-cov ectodomains (residues 1-1068) were separately cloned into pfastbac-dual vector (invitrogen) with c-terminal foldon tag and strep tag. after expression in hi5 insect cells and purification to homogeneity, the cryo-em images on these two spike ectodomains were recorded using fei titan krios microscope operating at 300 kv with a gatan k2 summit direct electron detector ( supplementary fig. 1 ). about 1,400,000 particles for hku2 spike and 900,000 particles for sads-cov spike were subjected to 2d classification, and a total of 421,490 particles of hku2 spike and 152,334 particles of sads-cov spike were selected and subjected to 3d refinement with c3 symmetry to generate density maps ( supplementary fig. 2 table 1 .overall structures of hku2 and sads-cov spikes. the overall structures of hku2 and sads-cov spikes we determined here resemble the previously reported prefusion structures of coronaviruses spikes. both spike trimers have a mushroom-like shape (~150 å in height and~115 å in width) (fig. 1a) , consisting of a cap mainly formed by β-sheets of the s1 subunit, a central stalk mainly formed by α-helices of the s2 subunit, and a root formed by twisted β-sheets and loops of the s2 subunit (fig. 1a) . in each trimer there is a c3 axis along the central stalk (fig. 1a) . the amino acid identity between hku2 and sads-cov spikes is 86%, and these two spike structures are quite similar with the root mean square deviation (r.m.s.d.) being 0.53 å for 962 aligned cα atoms of the monomer and 0.56 å for 2886 aligned cα atoms of the trimer. due to the high structural similarity, we will use the hku2 structure to present the features of both spikes in the subsequent description, whereas significant differences between them will be pointed out only when necessary.the s1 subunit of the hku2 spike comprises two major domains, ntd and ctd, which are followed by two subdomains 1 and 2 (sd1 and sd2) connecting them to the s2 subunit (fig. 1b, c) . the s1 subunits from three monomers form the cap of the spike, in which the three ctds in the inner part are at the apex sitting on top of the central stalk and the three ntds are located outside the ctds surrounding the central stalk (fig. 1a) . the ntd, ctd, sd1, and sd2 of the s1 subunit are all mainly composed of β strands (fig. 1c) . in contrast, the upstream helix (uh), fp, connecting region (cr), heptad repeat 1 (hr1), and central helix (ch) of the s2 subunit are mainly composed of helices, whereas the β-hairpin (bh) and subdomain 3 (sd3) at the bottom part of the s2 subunit mainly consist of β strands and loops (fig. 1c) . moreover, the residues after the sd3, which contain the heptad repeat 2 (hr2), are not resolved in the hku2 and sads-cov spike structures, as well as in all other reported coronavirus spike structures in the prefusion state.the sd1 and sd2 of the s1 subunit and the s2 subunit are highly similar in amino acid sequence (85, 84, and 95% identities) and structure (cα r.m.s.d. less than 0.5 å) between hku2 and sads-cov spikes ( supplementary fig. 6 ). the ntd has the lowest sequence identity of 70% among all domains. structural superimposition also gave a higher cα r.m.s.d. value of 1.2 å between these two ntds. the core β-sheet structure is structurally conserved and conformational variations reside in the loops (supplementary fig. 6a ). the ctd sequence identity between hku2 and sads-cov spikes is 82%, and the cα r.m.s.d. between these two ctds is 1.1 å, also indicating more structural variations in the ctd in comparison with the highly conserved sd1, sd2, and s2 subunit. the ntd and ctd of the s1 subunit are commonly utilized by coronaviruses for binding cell-surface carbohydrates or protein receptors for cell attachment 23 . therefore, the sequence and/or structural variations indicate that hku2 and sads-cov would also bind different host receptors by ntd and/or ctd of the s1 subunit, although their receptors in bat and pig are unknown and the receptor-binding sites on spike have not been defined.ntd structure and comparisons. the ntd of hku2 has three layers of antiparallel β-sheet with the top one consisting of six strands, the middle one consisting of five strands, and the bottom one consisting of three strands. below the bottom sheet is a short α-helix (fig. 2a) . the top and middle β-sheets form a galectin-like β-sandwich fold, which is inserted between two strands of the bottom sheet (fig. 2a) . to supplement, three disulfide bonds are detected in the hku2 ntd structure: c 17 -c 56 connecting the nterminus of the ntd to its upper loop, c 124 -c 149 connecting β6 and β7 strands in the top sheet, and c 234 -c 244 connecting the bottom helix to the bottom sheet (fig. 2a) .although the ntds of all coronaviruses adopt a similar overall architecture, the ntd of hku2 has the highest structural similarity with the ntd1 (named domain 0 in previous reports) of α-coronavirus hcov-nl63 with an r.m.s.d. of 2.7 å for 186 aligned cα atoms ( fig. 2b and supplementary fig. 8d ). the ntd1 of α-coronavirus pedv is not completely modeled in the spike trimer structure; however, the partial model still fits well with the ntd of hku2 with an r.m.s.d. of 2.3 å for 73 aligned cα atoms. both hcov-nl63 and pedv have a second ntd (ntd2, also named domain a in previous reports), and the ntd of hku2 is structurally less similar to the ntd2 with an r.m.s.d. of 4.3 å against hcov-nl63 ntd2 and of 4.1 å against pedv ntd2 ( fig. 2b and supplementary fig. 8d ). recent structural represented by the ntd of hcov-229e, the ntd2s of hcov-nl63 and pedv (fig. 2b, c) . although sharing an overall architecture, these two ntd subtypes have a structural difference in the galectin-like β-sandwich fold containing the top and middle sheets stacked together through hydrophobic interactions. these two β-sheets are well aligned in the galectin-like domain of subtype i, whereas there is an alignment shift in the galectin-like domain of subtype ii (fig. 2b) . the other notable difference is the distribution of signature disulfide bonds. a signature disulfide bond c 124 -c 149 (numbered in hku2 and connecting β6 and β7 strands in the top sheet) is conserved in all subtype i ntds (fig. 2b) , and the subtype ii ntds have two signature disulfide bonds: the first one c 145 -c 168 (numbered in hcov-229e) connecting β5 and β6 strands and the second one c 81 -c 105 (numbered in hcov-229e) connecting β2 and neighbor loop (fig. 2c) . besides, c 234 -c 244 (numbered in hku2 and connecting the bottom helix to the bottom sheet) is conserved in both subtype i and subtype ii ntds (fig. 2b, c) . the ntds of β-coronaviruses including bcov, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, mers-cov, sars-cov, and mhv resemble the subtype i, rather than the subtype ii ntd in the topology and distribution of the disulfide bonds (fig. 2d) . these β-coronavirus ntds have additional loops in the n-terminus, between β1 and β2 strands, and between β6 and β7 strands (numbered in hku2 structure), forming an extensive ceiling-like structure on top of the galectin-like fold (fig. 2d) . it has been found that the evolvement of this ceiling-like structure has functional outcomes such as immune evasion or receptor binding 52 . the ntd of γcoronavirus ibv also resemble the subtype i ntd in the topology, although its disulfide bond positions are not conserved as in the subtype i ntd (fig. 2e) . of note, the ntd of δcoronavirus pdcov resemble the subtype ii ntd in the topology and distribution of the disulfide bonds (fig. 2f) . both ibv and pdcov ntds also have additional insertions including loops and short helices in the galectin-like fold compared with the two subtypes of ntd in α-coronaviruses (fig. 2e, f) .ctd structure and comparisons. the ctd of hku2 has a twisted five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet as the core with connecting loops between the strands (fig. 3a) . it contains four disulfide bonds: c 277 -c 300 and c 285 -c 290 at the n-terminus, c 341 -c 397 at the c-terminus, and the last one c 331 -c 369 connecting the β2 and β5 strands in the core β-sheet (fig. 3a) . interestingly, the ctd core of hku2 is of high structural similarity with the conserved ctd core of β-coronaviruses and the disulfide bonds in the ctd of hku2 except for c 285 -c 290 are also detected in all β-coronavirus ctds (fig. 3b ). these ctds have the core of one twisted β-sheet and here we name them as one-layer ctd subtype (fig. 3a, b) . the β-coronavirus ctds always have an insertion consisting of loops and/or strands between the β5 and β6 strands of the core (fig. 3b) . sars-cov 26 , sars-cov-2 27-30 , mers-cov 31,32 , hku4 55 , and hku5 56 have receptor-binding motif (rbm) in this insertion region responsible for binding their respective protein receptors. in the ctd of hku2, there is only one short loop between the β5 and β6 strands of the core twisted β-sheet (fig. 3a) .although as members in the α-genus, hku2, and sads-cov ctd structures are significantly different from those of other αcoronaviruses hcov-nl63, hcov-229e, pedv, tgev, and prcv that contain two layers of β-sheets (fig. 3c) . and we named these ctds as two-layer ctd subtype. all available twolayer ctd structures can be well aligned with cα r.m.s.d. in the range of 1.0-3.4 å. these two-layer ctds contain two highly conserved disulfide bonds: c 540 -c 586 and c 569 -c 596 (numbered in pedv ctd) (fig. 3c ). the c 569 -c 596 is conserved among all coronaviruses, whereas the c 540 -c 586 is conserved in all αcoronaviruses (except for hku2 and sads) and δ-coronavirus pdcov (fig. 3c) .the ctd of δ-coronavirus pdcov has a core of two β-sheets, belonging to the two-layer ctd subtype (fig. 3c) . as for the γcoronavirus ibv, the core of its ctd is also similar to the typical two-layer ctd (fig. 3c) . however, several β strands are replaced by loops and the disulfide bonds are in different positions from the two-layer ctd (fig. 3c) . ibv ctd also has an extra region of loops, reminiscent of the extra domain in the ctds of βcoronaviruses (fig. 3c) . sd1 and sd2 structures and comparisons. the sd1 and sd2 are two subdomains following the ctd in the s1 subunit, linking the ctd to the s2 subunit. the hku2 sd1 is a partial β barrel consisting of five β strands and a disulfide bond (c 409 -c 458 ) connecting its c-terminus to the β1 strand (fig. 4a) . this fivestranded β barrel and the linking disulfide bond are conserved among all four genera of coronavirus (fig. 4a) . the hku2 sd2 has a structure of two layers of β-sheet with an additional short αhelix over the top sheet (fig. 4b) . the additional α-helix and the top sheet is linked by a disulfide bond (c 482 -c 509 ), and another disulfide bond (c 524 -c 533 ) links the c-terminal loop to the bottom sheet (fig. 4b) . the two-layer core structure and the second disulfide bond are conserved among all genera of coronavirus; however, the additional α-helix and the first linking disulfide bond is a distinct feature of β-coronaviruses plus αcoronavirus hku2 and sads-cov (fig. 4b) . this additional helix appears to be an insertion between the β2 and β3 strands of the sd2, and is retained during evolution of β-coronaviruses.quaternary packing of the ntd and ctd in the spike. it has been observed that coronaviruses have two types of quaternary packing mode of the s1 subunits in the trimer: intrasubunit packing and cross-subunit packing 52 . actually, this is mainly caused by different positioning and interaction between ntd and ctd in the spike monomer. the hku2 s1 subunit, similar to those in α-coronaviruses hcov-nl63, hcov-229e, and pedv and δ-coronavirus pdcov, has an inward ctd that contacts with the ntd (fig. 5a) . the three structural ntd-ctd modules in the cap region of these spikes are composed of ntd and ctd from the same monomer, forming the intrasubunit packing in the spike trimer (fig. 5a) . the s1 subunits of other coronaviruses in the βand γ-genera including mhv, sars-cov, mers-cov, hcov-oc43, and ibv have an outward ctd that is far away from the ntd (fig. 5b) . therefore, the three structural ntd-ctd modules in the cap region of these spikes have the ntd from one monomer and the ctd from the adjacent monomer, forming the cross-subunit packing in the spike trimer (fig. 5b) . interestingly, we found that the outward ctds always have an insertion in the core structure, such as β-coronavirus ctds and γ-coronavirus ibv ctd (fig. 5b) . in contrast, all inward ctds only have the one-layer or two-layer core structure without obvious inserted region.conserved s2 subunit and a distinct cr. sequence analysis suggested that the s1/s2 protease cleavage site at the boundary between the s1 and s2 subunits is r544-m545 in hku2 spike and r546-m547 in sads-cov spike 8, 11, 59 . compared with the s1 subunit, the topology and structure of s2 subunit are highly conserved in all coronavirus spikes. the hku2 s2 subunit contains a 3-helix uh (residues 589-639), an fp helix (residues 672-684), a cr (residues 689-747), a 4-helix hr1 (residues 748-836), a ch (residues 837-887), a twisted bh (residues 888-929), and a β-sandwich like sd3 (residues 930-995) (figs. 1b and 6a) . like in other coronavirus spikes in the prefusion state, the model of hr2 after sd3 was not built in the structure due to poor density. five disulfide bonds in s2 are detected. two of them (c 590 -c 612 and c 595 -c 601 ) stabilize the folded helices of uh, c 696 -c 706 bends the cr, c 884 -c 895 links the ch and the bh, and c 934 -c 943 is within the sd3 (fig. 6a) . the first four disulfide bonds are conserved in all coronaviruses, and the last one in the sd3 has different positions in different spikes. specifically, it links the β2 and β3 strands of sd3 in the spikes of hku2, sads-cov, and mers-cov (numbered in mers-cov), and in other coronavirus spikes it links the β2 strand to the c-terminal loop of sd3 (numbered in mers-cov) (supplementary fig. 7) .all coronavirus spikes have the s2′ protease site upstream from the fp in the s2 subunit, which is essential for proteolytic fusion activation of the spike. receptor binding and cleavage at the s2′ site promote large-scale conformational changes of the fp, cr, hr1, and hr2, allowing the insertion of fp into host cell membrane and the formation of six-helix bundle. the fp and cr, which are often not well and totally resolved in other coronavirus spike structures, can be clearly modeled in the hku2 spike due to the atomic resolution of the map (supplementary fig. 5 ). the typical cr in the s2 subunit contains three helices and one short strand, with a disulfide bond bending the first and second helix to form a turn (fig. 6b) . in hku2, the second helix is replaced by a short strand (713-716) and the third helix is replaced by a loop (721-741), therefore there are two short strands and only one helix in hku2 cr (fig. 6c) . the conserved disulfide bond c 696 -c 706 makes the first helix of cr in hku2 spike turn upside down. the s2′ cleavage site (between r671 and s672) is then covered by the reversed cr helix and loops, and r671 interacts with e723 in the loop and k697 and k698 in helix 1 (fig. 6c) . in other coronaviruses, taking the mhv s2 for example, the helix 1 does not cover the s2′ site (between r869 and s870), and r869 only loosely interacts with t929 in helix 3 (fig. 6b) . after the dissociation of the s1 subunit triggered by receptor binding, the exposure of the s2′ site for cleavage is a prerequisite for the proteolytic activation of the coronavirus spike to mediate membrane fusion. the buried s2′ site indicates that hku2 spike, compared with other coronavirus spikes, would require more conformational changes around the s2′ site for the exposure.a porcine coronavirus sads-cov (also named seacov and peav in other reports) was recently identified from suckling piglets with diarrhea in southern china, and its genome sequence was most identical (~95% identity) to that of rhinolophus bat αcoronavirus hku2 [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . the sads-cov and hku2 are phylogenetically located in a sublineage closely related to the proposed α-coronavirus group-1b lineage at the complete genome level [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . however, phylogenetic analysis based on the spike glycoprotein indicated that they are members of a separate lineage clustered within β-coronavirus ( supplementary fig. 8a) , suggesting that hku2 and sads-cov probably resulted from recombination of an α-coronavirus with an unrecognized β-coronavirus s gene [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . these results, together with the lower than 28% amino acid identities to other known coronavirus glycoproteins, strongly indicate that the spike glycoproteins of hku2 and sads-cov are unique [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . in this study, we determined the cryo-em structures hcov-229e s1 pdcov s1intra-subunit packing ibv s1 mhv s1 sars-cov s1cross-subunit packing 5 quaternary packing of ntd and ctd. a α-coronavirus s1 and δ-coronavirus s1 use intrasubunit packing pattern. ntd and ctd from the first monomer are colored blue, the second are colored red, and the third are colored magenta. pdb codes: hcov-229e, 6u7h; pdcov, 6b7n. b β-coronavirus s1 and γ-coronavirus s1 use cross-subunit packing pattern. ntd and ctd from the first monomer are colored blue, the second are colored red, and the third are colored magenta. the extra loop of ibv and the extra domains of β-covs are colored yellow and labeled as ex. pdb codes: mhv, 3jcl; ibv, 6cv0; sars, 5xlr.of hku2 and sads-cov spike glycoproteins at atomic resolutions. pairwise comparisons demonstrated nearly identical overall structures, and differences mainly locate in the loops of ntd and ctd of the s1 subunit between the spikes of hku2 and sads-cov ( supplementary fig. 6) . a series of structural analysis and comparisons were also performed at the domain level between hku2 spike with other coronavirus spikes with determined structures. our results show that hku2 and sads-cov spikes maintain primitive structural features, especially in the ntd and ctd, and provide more insights into the evolution of coronaviruses. the hku2 and sads-cov have one ntd in the s1 subunit, and their structures are more similar to the ntd1 than the ntd2 of α-coronaviruses hcov-nl63 and pedv, whereas the only ntd of hcov-229e is structurally more similar to the ntd2 than the ntd1 (fig. 2) . therefore, we suggest that αcoronaviruses have two subtypes of ntd. the evolution relationship between them are not clear yet. it was once suggested that the presence of two ntds in hcov-nl63 is a result of gene duplication 39 . however, the sequence identity between these two ntds is only 15.7% in hcov-nl63 and 12.9% in pedv. considering that hku2 (sads-cov) and hcov-229e have one ntd belonging to either subtype i or subtype ii, a more plausible evolution way of the ntd in α-coronaviruses is the recombination of two separate primitive domains into the genome, resulting in the presence of two ntds in the s1 subunit of α-coronaviruses including hcov-nl63 and pedv. of note, these two ntd subtypes may represent primitive structures that could be the evolutionary ancestors of ntds of other genera coronaviruses. for example, in the current available spike structures, the ntds of β-coronavirus are similar to the hku2 ntd representing the subtype i in both architecture and disulfide bond positions. these β-coronavirus ntds also have additional loop ceiling over the top sheet, functionally facilitating immune evasion or protein receptor binding such as in mhv 37, 38 . the ntd of γ-coronavirus ibv is also architecturally similar to the subtype i, although the disulfide bond positions are not conserved (fig. 2e) . in contrast, the δ-coronavirus pdcov ntd is similar to the hcov-229e ntd representing the subtype ii in both architecture and disulfide bond positions (fig. 2f) . a previous study of the ibv spike proposed that α-coronavirus ntds are probably the most ancestral and the ntds of the four genera form an evolutionary spectrum in the order of α-, δ-, γ-, and β-genus 52 . our proposal here is similar to the previous one in the point that two ntd subtypes in α-coronaviruses may represent primitive structures that could be the evolutionary ancestors of ntds. however, we article argue that the evolution pathways may not be in the order of α-, δ-, γ-, and β-genus. a more plausible pathway is that the β-, γ-, and δ-coronavirus ntds may evolve independently and parallelly from subtype i (β-and γ-coronavirus ntds) or subtype ii (δcoronavirus ntds) ( supplementary fig. 8b) . the hku2 and sads-cov ctd structure has a one-layer core consisting of a twisted five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet. interestingly, β-coronavirus ctds also have the similar one-layer core structure and three strictly conserved disulfide bonds are also present in the core of hku2 ctd. currently, all identified rbm of β-coronavirus ctds are within an inserted domain between two strands of the core sheet, and this insertion responsible for receptor binding of β-coronaviruses is replaced by a short loop in hku2 ctd. this result firstly indicates hku2 ctd represent a primitive structure in the one-layer ctd family, while the inserted domain in β-coronaviruses results from a recombinant event during evolution (supplementary fig. 8c) . the second indication is that hku2 and sads-cov may not utilize the ctd to bind protein receptors that have not been identified yet, and their different receptor usage may be determined by the ntd that harbors almost 50% of residue difference between them. of note, the ctds from other α-coronaviruses, γ-coronavirus ibv, and δcoronavirus pdcov all belong to the two-layer subtype consisting of two layers β-sheets, although with structural variations in different viruses. these results further confirmed the previous phylogenetic analysis suggesting that hku2 and sads-cov probably resulted from a recombination of an α-coronavirus genomic backbone with an unrecognized β-coronavirus spike gene 8, 11, 59 .in contrast with the ntd and ctd having unique structural features, the sd1 and sd2 of the s1 subunit and the s2 subunits of hku2 and sads-cov are structurally conserved as those of other coronaviruses. in the evolutionary aspect, it is not surprising because this region either connects the ctd to the s2 subunit (sd1 and sd2) or mediates the membrane fusion (s2 subunits), whereas the ntd and ctd are key factors determining tissue tropism and host range of coronaviruses 23 . even highly conserved in overall structure, the s2 subunit in hku2 and sads-cov still have a secondary structure arrangement in the cr after the fp, resulting in a more buried s2′ cleavage site (fig. 6c) . it indicates that although the membrane fusion mechanism is highly conserved, the dynamic fusion procedures of hku2 and sads-cov may still have their unique features that need to be addressed in the future.the ongoing covid-19 pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 has raised worldwide alert [4] [5] [6] . we compared the domain structures of hku2 and sars-cov-2 s proteins ( supplementary fig. 9 ). the ntd of sars-cov-2 has the two conserved disulfide bonds in subtype i; the ctd core of sars-cov-2 has one layer of β-sheets; the sd1 and sd2 of sars-cov-2 have the same disulfide bonds with hku2, although the additional helix of sd2 is not built in the sars-cov-2 s model owing to poor density in this region. sars-cov-2 has the typical β-coronavirus structural features in each domain, and the inserted rbm in the ctd could be the major impetus for cross-species transmission from bats to human.in comparing the structures of hku2 and sads-cov spikes with other coronavirus spikes, we observed that additional ntds could be recombined, ceiling loops could be inserted into ntd core, and extra domain containing rbm could be inserted into the ctd core structure. these phenomena indicate the subdomains are gradually recruited into the s1 subunit during evolution, and the recruitments are required for cross-species transmission, adapting to different host range, and responding to the updating of host immune system, which provides a vivid example for the co-evolution of virus and host.expression and purification of hku2 and sads-cov spike ectodomains. the cdnas encoding hku2 spike (yp_001552236) and sads-cov spike (avm41569.1) were synthesized with codons optimized for insect cell expression. hku2 ectodomains (1-1066) and sads-cov ectodomains (1-1068) were separately cloned into pfastbac-dual vector (invitrogen) with c-terminal foldon tag for trimerization and strep tag for purification in the frame of ph promoter. they were expressed in hi5 insect cell using bac-to-bac baculovirus system (invitrogen). briefly, the construct was transformed into dh10bac competent cells and the extracted bacmid was transfected into sf9 cell using cellfectin ii reagent (invitrogen). the baculoviruses were harvested after 7-9 days. the high-titer viruses were generated after one more amplification that used to infect hi5 cells at a density of 1.5 × 10 6 /ml. after 60 h in culture, the cell medium containing spike ectodomains were concentrated and exchanged to binding buffer (50 mm tris, ph 8.0, 150 mm nacl). the spike ectodomains were purified by streptactin beads (iba) and then purified by gel-filtration chromatography using superose 6 gel filtration column (ge healthcare) pre-equilibrated with hbs buffer (10 mm hepes ph 7.2, 150 mm nacl). purified ectodomains were concentrated for electron microscopy analysis.cryo-electron microscopy. aliquots of spike ectodomains (4 μl, 0.33 mg/ml, in buffer containing 10 mm hepes ph 7.2, 150 mm nacl) were applied to glowdischarged holey carbon grids (quantifoil grid, au 300 mesh, r1.2/1.3). the grids were then blotted and then plunge-frozen in liquid ethane using fei vitrobot system (fei).images were recorded using fei titan krios microscope operating at 300 kv with a gatan k2 summit direct electron detector (gatan inc.) at tsinghua university. the automated software (autoemation) was used to collect 7663 movies for hku2 and 4568 movies for sads-cov at ×130,000 magnification and at a defocus range between 1 and 3 μm. each movie has a total accumulate exposure of 49.784 e − /å 2 fractionated in 32 frames of 175 ms exposure. data collection statistics are summarized in table 1 .whole frames in each movie were corrected for beam-induced motion using motionco2 60 . the final image was bin averaged to give a pixel size of 1.061 å. the parameters of contrast transfer function (ctf) was estimated for each micrograph using gctf 61 . particles were automatically picked using gautomatch (http://www. mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/kzhang/) and extracted using relion 62 . initially,~1,400,000 particles for hku2 and~900,000 particles for sads were subjected to 2d classification. after two or three additional 2d classifications, the best class consisting~750,000 particles (hku2) and~320,000 particles (sads-cov) were applied for creating 3d initial model, 3d refinement, and 3d classification. a total of 421,490 particles (hku2) and 152,334 particles (sads-cov) of best classes were selected and subjected to 3d refinement with c3 symmetry to generate density map. the reported resolutions based on the gold-standard fsc cutoff of 0.143 criterion were 2.38 å for hku2 spike and 2.83 å for sads-cov spike after relion post processing. local resolution variations were estimated using resmap 63 . data processing statistics are summarized in table 1 .model building and refinement. as for the hku2 spike model building, the initial model of hku2 s1 ntd was generated using the swiss-model 64 and fit into the map using ucsf chimera 65 . the other part of hku2 spike ectodomains was obtained using map to model in phenix suit 66 . as for the sads-cov spike model building, the initial model was obtained by fit hku2 s2, ntd, and ctd separately into the map using ucsf chimera 65 . manual model rebuilding was carried out using coot 67 and refined with phenix real-space refinement 66 . the quality of the final model was analyzed with molprobity 68 and emringer 69 . the validation statistics of the structural models are summarized in table 1 .reporting summary. further information on research design is available in the nature research reporting summary linked to this article.the atomic coordinates of hku2 spike and sads-cov spike have been deposited in the worldwide protein data bank with the accession codes 6m15 and 6m16, respectively; the corresponding maps have been deposited in the electron microscopy data bank with the accession codes emd-30037 and emd-30038, respectively.received: 8 february 2020; accepted: 29 may 2020;many human viral diseases are a consequence of a zoonotic event. some of the diseases caused by these zoonotic events have affected millions of people around the world, some of which have resulted in high rates of mor-bidity/mortality in humans. changes in the viral proteins that function as ligands of the host receptor may promote the spillover between species. the most recent of these zoonotic events that have caused an ongoing epidemic of high magnitude is the covid-19 epidemics caused by sars-cov-2. the aim of this study was to determine the mutation(s) in the sequence of the spike protein of the sars-cov-2 that might be favoring human to human transmission. an in silico approach was performed, and changes were detected in the s1 subunit of the receptor-binding domain of spike. the observed changes have significant effect on sars-cov-2 spike/ace2 interaction and produce a reduction in the binding energy, compared to the one of the bat-cov to this receptor. the data presented in this study suggest a higher affinity of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to the human ace2 receptor, compared to the one of bat-cov spike and ace2. this could be the cause of the rapid viral spread of sars-cov-2 in humans.role of changes in sars-cov-2 spike protein in the interaction with the human ace2 receptor: an in silico analysissevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), middle eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) , and the recently identified novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) belong to the coronaviridae family, genus betacoronavirus, that has been related to important epi-demiological outbreaks. these are enveloped viruses with a positive-sense single-strand rna of around 32 kb. the viral particles contain four main structural proteins: the spike, membrane, envelope protein, and nucleocapsid. the spike protein protrudes from the envelope of the virion and plays a pivotal role in the receptor host selectivity and cellu-lar attachment. strong scientific evidence showed that sars and sars-cov-2 spike proteins interact with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) (chen et al 2020; . also, other cellular receptors play a secondary role in the viral attachment, as the c-type lectin cd209l, and dc-sign binds to sars-cov. however, ace2 appears to be the key functional receptor for the sars-cov (coutard et al., 2020; satija and lal, 2007) and probably for sars-cov-2 (walls et al., 2020) the interaction between the viral protein and its cell membrane receptor is a critical step in the replication cycle. furthermore, the efficiency of viral infection is strongly dependent on this process. several physicochemical factors are associated with protein-protein interactions. these factors are determined by the nature of residues and the type of chemical interactions occurring between ligand and receptor. thus, the presence of residues that produce an energetically favored interaction (lower free energy) may drive binding kinetics and finally lead to the fusion event. based on that, this study aimed to evaluate the energetic profile of the interaction between the sars-cov-2 spike protein and the human cell receptor ace2.sequences analyzed were individually retrieved from genbank (accession numbers are shown in the phylogenetic tree, see figure 1) . the sequence used for the modeling process and construct the spike protein model of sars-cov2 were obtained from the protein database and correspond to 6acc (sars spike protein) and 6acd (bat-spike protein).homology structural models of viral spike protein from sars-cov-2 (qho62112.1) and bat-cov (aaz67052.1) were built by using the tools of the swiss-model modeling server and the deep-view/swiss-pdbviewer 4.01 software (arnold et al., 2006) . several models were obtained and the quality of each structure was evaluated. the best model for sars-cov-2 spike was obtained using the crystal structure of sars-cov spike protein (pdb code 6acc). on the other hand, for bat-cov, the best model was obtained using as template the crystal structure pdb code 6acd. these models were subjected to further protein structure optimization. hydrogen atoms were added and the partial charges were assigned for energy refinement. the protein model was embedded in a 100 å water box. then, energy minimization was performed while applying constraints to the protein backbone to preserve global folding and optimizing the relative position of the water molecules and protein. the obtained systems underwent md simulations using namd as described by ortega et al. (2019) . all md simulations described in this study were performed with namd 2.12 (phillips et al., 2005) , vega zz 3.1.0.21 (pedretti et al., 2004) . charmm force field (vanommeslaeghe et al., 2010) and gasteiger charges were used. the obtained structures represent the lowest energy frame of the md simulations. the quality of the models was established with prosa (wiederstein and sippl, 2007) and pro-check programs (laskowski et al., 1993) .crystal structure for sars-cov spike (pdb code 6ack) and ace2 (pdb code 1r42) were downloaded from the protein data bank. also, the homology model for sars-cov-2 spike was assayed. protein preparation was carried out as described above. then, binding patterns and affinity estimations for the interaction between the viral spike and ace2 receptor were performed using molecular docking. this process was performed through two steps; first, a blind docking between ligand (spike protein) and receptor (ace2) was performed using z-dock software (pierce et al., 2014) . then, the resulting docking data were processed and analyzed by using the tools of prodigy software (xue et al., 2016) . finally, results were clustered and analyzed considering binding energies and main interacting residues in each complex.phylogenetic analysis of the spike protein sequences of sars-cov-2 and bat-covs, sars-cov is shown in figure 1 . the results are in agreement with recent reports of an independent introduction of sars-cov-2 from a bat-cov, different from the spillover which led to the introduction of sars-cov, being the bat-cov of rhinolophus affinis the probable ancestor of this new virus (wong et al., 2020) . indeed, the sequences of the whole spike of this bat-cov and of sars-cov-2 share 97.7 % identity ( figure 1 ). more divergence is found however in the s1 subunit, particularly in the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the different spike proteins. sars-cov and bat-cov from rhinolophus sinicus (originally signaled as the most closely related virus to sars-cov-2) exhibit several amino acid substitutions and deletions in the rbd compared to sars-cov-2. the rbd of bat-cov from rhinolophus affinis, although more closely related to the one of sas-cov-2, also displayed several amino acid substitutions (figure 2) .the crystal structures of the spike protein of sars-cov and homology models of bat-cov (accession number mg772933), bat-cov of rhinolophus sinicus, and sars-cov-2 interacting with the putative binding domain site in human ace2 were analyzed. the interaction pattern between the three viral spikes is quite similar. the main region of interaction with the putative cellular receptor counter-part is formed by fifteen residues ordered into a beta-sheet conformation surrounded by two capping loops (figure 3 and supplementary figure 1) . interestingly, sequence comparison between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov revealed that the residues pre- sent in the receptor-interacting motive are highly conserved with 70 % identity, sharing nine residues between both viruses. in the sars-cov rbd are present residues that allowed the interspecies infection, known as y442, l472, n479, d480, and t487 (lu et al., 2015) . however, in sars-cov-2, slight modification of some residues could improve the interaction with the human cellular receptor: l455, f486, q493, and n501. in sars-cov, two main residues (479 and 487) have been associated to the recognition of the human ace2 receptor (lu et al., 2015) . these residues suffered a punctual mutation from civet to human, k479n and s487t (li, 2013) . in the sars-cov-2, the residues corresponding to n479 correspond to q493 and t487 to n501. these changes in the sars-cov-2 represent energetically favorable changes for the interaction with the receptor. the local environment present in the ace2 receptor allows these mutations to produce a significant number of electrostatic stabilizing interactions (table 1) . furthermore, as mentioned previously, the presence of the two capping loops in the binding do-main is likely producing a stabilization effect over the interaction with the cellular receptor. our models showed that these capping loops appear in both human-infecting viruses but are absent in the bat virus. the data showed here strongly suggest that these capping loops produce an increase in the electrostatic interactions between the spike protein and the cellular receptor. in sars-cov, the residues present in these capping loops showing direct interaction with the receptor are r426, s432, t433, y436, p462, d463, s472, and n473 and in sars-cov-2 are v445, y449, y473, q474, a475, e484, g485, f486, and n487. the counter-pairs located in the ace2 receptor are shown in table 1 . altogether, the higher number of protein-protein contacts (table 2 ) and the longer capping loops could explain the increase in binding affinities in sars-cov-2 (-15.7 kcal/mol) in comparison with sars-cov (-14.1 kcal/mol) (table 3) . thus, these loops could play an important role together with the punctual mutations being an interesting clue to determine the host receptor specificity for the viral spike protein. several amino acid substitutions in rbd were identified in the sars-cov-2 rbd compared to bat-sars-covs and sars-cov. mutations in the spike protein could change the tropism of a virus, including new hosts or increasing viral pathogenesis . hiv infection is a good model of change in viral tropism by mutations in the envelope proteins. these mutations switch co-receptor use (ccr5 to cxcr4) increasing the viral pathogenesis (mosier 2009 ). interestingly, our data showed that these changes are not only related to the ability of interaction with the human ace2 receptor but also for improving this receptor recognition. the presence of two loops around the rbd of sars-cov-2 might be promoting the interaction with the ace2 receptor, improving the binding to this recep-tor by increasing the number of atoms involved (tables 1 and 2 ). the amino acid substitutions and the longer capping loops could explain the increase in binding affini-ties in sars-cov-2 compared to sars-cov (table 1) . higher affinity values might be related to the dynamic of infection and the rapid spread observed for this virus. the origin of the sars-cov-2 has been not fully elucidated. while this study was in course, another study of wong et al. (2020) , showed a high similarity at protein level in the rbd among the coronaviruses isolated from the recent outbreak (sars-cov-2), those isolated from pangolin and rhinolophus affinis (ratg13). the authors also suggest that pangolin might be the intermediate host, with a 98 % identity with the human virus, at the receptor binding motif, between the bat and human. the spike model of ratg13 is quite similar to that obtained from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 and the loops in the rbd are also present (data not shown). the protein sequence of the receptor binding motif, has 5 important amino acids. when comparing the sequence of sars-cov-2 with that of the isolated viruses of pangolin and rhinolophus affinis, 1 and 4 differences are observed respectively in the amino acids considered key for the union with ace2 (yan et al., 2020; wong et al., 2020) . these differences should mean slightly less favorable binding energies between these viruses with ace2 compared to the sars-cov-2, shown in this study. thus, the loops observed in the spike protein of sars-cov-2 could play an important role together with the amino acid substitutions, being an interesting clue to determine the host receptor specificity for the viral spike protein. altogether, structural changes and residues composition in the viral spike protein could be associated with increased infection kinetics and viral spreading. comparative studies to determine the impact in vitro of the mutation and loops in rbd of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are required in order to predict possible zoonotic event in the future.wuhan, hubei province of china in december 2019. the death toll rose to more than 68,000 among 1,250,000 confirmed cases around the globe (until april 4, 2020) [1] . the virus causing covid-19 is named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). based on the phylogenetic studies, the sars-cov-2 is categorized as a member of the genus betacoronavirus, the same lineage that includes sars coronavirus (sars-cov) [2] that caused sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in china during 2002 [3] . recent studies showed that sars-cov-2 has a close relationship with bat sars-like covs [4, 5] [7] ].interestingly, s glycoprotein is characterized as the critical determinant for viral entry into host cells which consists of two functional subunits namely s1 and s2. the s1 subunit recognizes and binds to the host receptor through the receptor-binding domain (rbd) whereas s2 is responsible for fusion with the host cell membrane [ [8] , [9] , [10] ]. mers-cov uses dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) as entry receptor [11] whereas sars-cov and sars-cov-2 utilize ace-2 (angiotensin converting enzyme-2) [12] , abundantly available in lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes, suggesting s glycoprotein as a potential drug target to halt the entry of sars-with remarkable properties like glutamine-rich 42 aa long exclusive molecular signature (dsqqtvgqqdgsednqtttiqtivevqpqlemeltpvvqtie) in position 983-1024 of polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) [16] , diversified receptor-binding domain (rbd), unique furin cleavage site (prrar↓sv) at s1/s2 boundary in s glycoprotein which could play roles in viral pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment [17] . to date, few genomic variations of sars-cov-2 are reported [ [18] , [19] ]. there is growing evidence that spike protein, a 1273 amino acid long glycoprotein having multiple domains, possibly plays a major role in sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. viral entry to the host cell is initiated by the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of s1 head. upon receptor-binding, proteolytic cleavage occurs at s1/s2 cleavage site and two heptad repeats (hr) of s2 stalk form a six-helix bundle structure triggering the release of the fusion peptide.as it comes into close proximity to the transmembrane anchor (tm), the tm domain facilitates membrane destabilization required for fusion between virus-host membranes [ [20] , [21] ]. insights into the sequence variations of s glycoprotein among available genomes are key to understanding the biology of sars-cov-2 infection, developing antiviral treatments and vaccines. in this study, we have analyzed 320 genomic sequences of sars-cov-2 to identify mutations between the available genomes followed by the amino acid variations in the glycoprotein s to foresee their impact on the viral entry to host cell from structural biology viewpoint.analysis. the ncbi reference sequence of sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein, accession number yp_009724390 was used as the canonical sequence for the analyses of spike protein variants.variant analyses of sars-cov-2 genomes were performed in the genome detective coronavirus typing tool version 1.13 which is specially designed for this virus the dataset was then aligned with muscle [24] . entropy (h(x)) plot of nucleotide variations in sars-cov-2 genome was constructed using bioedit [25] . mega x (version 10.1.7) was used to construct the msas and the phylogenetic tree using pairwise alignment and neighborjoining methods in clustalw [26, 27] . tree structure was validated by running the analysis on 1000 bootstraps [28] replications dataset and the evolutionary distances were calculated using the poisson correction method [29] .variant sequences of sars-cov-2 were modeled in swiss-model [30] using the cryo-em spike protein structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6vsb; [8] ) as a template. the overall quality of models was assessed in rampage server [31] by generating ramachandran plots (supplementary table 1 ). pymol and biovia discovery studio were used for structure visualization and superpose [32, 33] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 3. resultsmultiple sequence alignment of the available 320 genomes of sars-cov-2 were performed and 483 variations were found throughout the 29,903 bp long sars-cov-2 genome with in total 115 variations in utr region, 130 synonymous variations that cause no amino acid alteration, 228 non-synonymous variations causing change in amino acid residue, 16 indels, and 2 variations in non-coding region (supplementary table 2 ). among the 483 variations, 40 variations (14 synonymous, 25 non-synonymous mutations and one deletion) were observed in the region of orf s that encodes s glycoprotein which is responsible for viral fusion and entry into the host cell [34] . notable that, most of the sars-cov-2 genome sequences were deposited from the usa (250) and china (50) (supplementary fig. 1 ). positional variability of the sars-cov-2 genome was calculated from the msa of 320 sars-cov-2 whole genomes as a measure of entropy value (h(x)) [35] . excluding 5′ and 3′ utr, ten hotspot of hypervariable position were identified, of which seven were located at orf1ab (1059c>t, 3037c>t, 8782c>t, 14408c>t, 17747c>t, 17858a>g, 18060c>t) and one at orf s (23403a>g), orf3a (25563g>t), and orf8 (28144t>c) respectively. the variability at position 8782 and 28144 were found to be the highest among the other hotspots ( fig. 1 ).the phylogenetic analysis of a total of 66 sequences (26 unique sars-cov-2 and 40 different coronavirus s glycoprotein sequences) was performed. the evolutionary distances showed that all the sars-cov-2 spike proteins cluster in the same node of the phylogenetic tree confirming the sequences are similar to refseq yp_009724390 (fig. 2) . bat coronaviruses has a close evolutionary relationship as different strains were found in the nearest outgroups and clades (bat coronavirus bm48-31, bat hp-beta coronavirus, bat coronavirus hku9) conferring that j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof coronavirus has vast geographical spread and bat is the most prevalent host (fig. 2) . in other clades, the clusters were speculated through different hosts which may describe the evolutionary changes of surface glycoprotein due to cross species transmission. viral hosts reported from different spots at different times is indicative of possible recombination.the s glycoprotein sequences of sars-cov-2 were retrieved from the ncbi virus variation resource repository and aligned using clustalw. the position of sars-cov-2 spike protein domains was measured by aligning with the sars-cov spike protein (fig. 3 ) [36, 37] . from the sequence identity matrix, 26 unique variants among unique sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequences were identified to have 25 substitutions and a deletion ( fig. 4a and supplementary table 3 ). 215 sequences were found identical with sars-cov-2 s protein reference sequence (yp_009724390) while 64 sequences were identical with the same variation of d614g (supplementary table 4 respectively due to substitution of amino acid that differs in charge. the remaining 15 variants were mutated with the amino acids that are similar in charge (fig. 4 a) . the sars-cov-2 spike protein variants were superposed with the cryo-electron microscopic structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein [8] . fig. 3) . the s2 subunit of spike protein, especially the heptad repeat region 2, fusion peptide domain, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail, were found to be highly conserved in the sars-cov and the sars-cov-2 variants while the s1 subunit was more diverse, specifically the n-terminal domain (ntd) and receptor-binding domain (rbd).the spatial distribution of s protein sequences having different variation over time reveals that most of the variants (17 out of 240 s glycoprotein sequences) were reported from the us j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof followed by 3 out of 2 sequences (including y145 deletion) and 2 out of 50 sequences from india and china, respectively (fig. 5) . only one variant was found out of only one available sequence in the repository from sweden, australia, south korea and peru. interestingly, all sequences are unique among countries from the sequence reported except d614g, which was found in the us and peru (fig. 5) . moreover, we have also analyzed sequences from brazil, italy, nepal, pakistan, spain, taiwan and vietnam but there is no variation in the s glycoprotein sequence was found when compared to refseq yp_009724390.covid 19 is one of the most contagious pandemics the world has ever had with 1,250,000 confirmed cases to date (april 4, 2020) and the cases have increased as high as 5 times in less than a month [1] . phylogenetic analysis showed that the sars-cov-2 is a unique coronavirus presumably related to bat coronavirus (bm48-31, hp-betacoronavirus). during this study, we [38] , [39] , [40] ]. likewise, a number of studies targeting sars-cov-2 spike protein have been undertaken for the therapeutic measures [41] , but the unique structural and functional details of sars-cov-2 spike protein are still under scrutiny. we also found a variant (r408i) at receptor binding domain (rbd) that mutated from positively charged arginine residue to neutral and smaller sized isoleucine residue (fig. 4 i) . this change might alter the interaction of viral rbd with the host receptor because the r408 residue of sars-cov-2 is known to interact with the ace2 receptor for viral entry [42] . similarly, alterations of rbd (g476s, v483a, h519q, and a520s) also could affect the interaction of sars-cov-2 spike protein with other molecules j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f which require further investigations. qia98583 and qis30615 variants were found to have an alteration of alanine to valine (a930v), and aspartic acid to tyrosine (d936y) respectively in the alpha helix of the hr1 domain. previous reports have indicated that hr1 domain plays a significant role in viral fusion and entry by forming helical bundles with hr2, and mutations including alanine substitution by valine (a1168v) in hr1 region are predominantly responsible for conferring resistance to mouse hepatitis coronaviruses against hr2 derived peptide entry inhibitors [43] . this study hypothesizes the mutation (a930v) found in that of sars-cov-2 might also have a role in the emergence of drug-resistance virus strains. also, the mutation (d1168h) found in the heptad repeat 2 (hr) sars-cov-2 could play a vital role in viral pathogenesis. moreover, we found that 20 variants including one deletion out of 26 were located within s1 especially within ntd and rbd region of glycoprotein s (fig. 4a) which region is responsible for the preliminary interaction with the host cell receptor ace2.this indicates that the ntd and rbd are very prone to mutations. however, the ntd and rbd portions harbour potential epitopes that might serve as potential peptide vaccine candidates against sars-cov-2 as reported in different studies [44] [45] [46] . the reason behind choosing the sequences from s protein domain ntd and rbd is they are situated in the outer surface of the virus that could be more accessible for the immune system (fig. 3c ). so the variations reported herein within the outer domains of s glycoprotein could help to design effective epitope-based vaccines or antivirals.the sars-cov-2 s protein contains additional furin protease cleavage site, prrars, in s1/s2 domain which is conserved among all 320 sequences as revealed during this study ( supplementary fig. 3 ). this unique signature is thought to make the sars-cov-2 more virulent than sars-cov and regarded as novel features of the viral pathogenesis [9] .according to previous reports the more the host cell protease can process the coronavirus s can accelerate viral tropism accordingly in influenza virus [[9] , [47] , [48] , [49] ]. apart from that, this could also promote viruses to escape antiviral therapies targeting transmembrane protease j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f tmprss2 (clinicaltrials.gov, nct04321096) which is well reported protease to cleave at s1/s2 of s glycoprotein [50] . comparative analyses between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein showed 77% similarity between them where the most diverse region was the recent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) outbreak has posed a great challenge to human health. during the past 2 decades, we have encountered the outbreak of many deadly viruses, such as ebola [1] , zika [2] and nipah [3, 4] , as well as the evolution of various strains of coronaviruses (cov), mainly sars-cov [5] and mers-cov [6] , which resulted in high morbidity and mortality. after almost 100 years of the deadly influenza virus (h1n1, or spanish flu) pandemic, with millions of deaths worldwide (approximately 40 million) [7, 8] , the recent outbreak of a novel cov, or sars-cov-2, has left the entire world in helplessness and misery. the clinical spectrum of covid-19 ranges from mild fever, cough and shortness of breath, to severe clinical conditions characterized by respiratory failure [9, 10] . old age, together with pre-existing conditions such as lung or heart disease, diabetes, or a compromised immune system, expedite the infection time and severity [11, 12] . multiple recent reviews [13, 14] could brief-up the statistical dynamics of covid-19 cases worldwide.structurally, the cov has the largest known rna genome (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) kb) among other known viruses, characterized by non-segmented, positive-sense, single-stranded rna. this genome encodes four major structural proteins of the virus, including the nucleocapsid (n), envelope (e), membrane (m), and spike (s) proteins [15, 16] . the membrane and envelope proteins are associated with virus assembly, while the spike protein plays the main role in facilitating virus entry via mediating its interaction with the transmembrane surface receptor on the host cells [15, 17] . the spike protein directly interacts with the peptidase domain (pd) of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor [18, 19] , which technically marks the virus entry inside the cells [20] . the sars-cov-2 shares around 80% sequence identity with the sars-cov genome, suggesting similarity in their host interacting functions [21, 22] . like sars-cov, the spike protein of sars-cov-2 contains s1 and s2 subunits, which are jointly responsible for fusion and entry of the virus [23] [24] [25] inside the host cells. the receptor-binding domain (rbd) in the s1 subunit initiates direct binding with the ace2 pd, whereas the s2 subunit contains basic elements needed for the membrane fusion [19, 20, 23, 24] .ace2, a single-pass type i transmembrane metallocarboxypeptidase enzyme is primarily involved in the maturation of peptide hormone angiotensin (ang), which in turn regulates the vasoconstriction and blood pressure [19, 26, 27] . ace2 is primarily expressed in alveolar epithelial type ii cells and serves as a viral receptor [28, 29] . besides alveolar epithelial type ii cells, it is also expressed in several extrapulmonary tissues, including the heart, kidney and intestine [26, 30] . the full-length structure of ace2 consists of two main domains-the n-terminal pd and the collectrinlike domain (cld) at the c-terminal end [19, [30] [31] [32] . in fact, the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 binds to the homodimer of ace2, which facilitates virus entry into the host cells [19, 33] . in addition to this, studies have been conducted in association with ace2 and the amino acid transporter b0at1 (or slc6a19), and how sars-cov-2 may bind to the ace2-b0at1 complex [19, 34] . ace2 interaction with b0at1 could aid in producing antivirals or a vaccine that can block cov infection by targeting ace2 [35] [36] [37] [38] .with the current epidemiology of sars-cov-2, a vaccine might be considered a highly anticipated therapy. however, given that vaccine development and production is a highly challenging and time-consuming task, the need of the hour is to develop potent therapeutic agents that could effectively curb the infection in the early stages. several approaches, such as decoy-soluble ace2 proteins, antibodies from the serum of infected patients, epitope-based vaccines, repurposing of drugs, and designing blocking peptides are underway [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] . peptides possess several attractive features when compared with small molecules and protein therapeutics, including high structural compatibility with target proteins, the ability to disrupt protein-protein interfaces, etc.computational tools ease the way to reach a therapeutic solution for covid-19. currently, the computational analysis of structural differences in human ace2 impact its binding to the sars-cov-2 spike protein, which thereby lays a foundation for the design and development of ace2-based peptide inhibitors of sars-cov-2 [47] [48] [49] . in the current study, we used computational biology tools to develop a therapeutic strategy utilizing a novel peptide by exploiting the sars-cov-2/ace2 interaction.the protein sequence of sars-cov-2 was retrieved from the rcsb protein data bank (pdb id: 6m17) for peptide design and development. initially, a stretch of 23 amino acid residues (glu23 to leu45) was taken from ace pd (pdb 6m17) and saved as pdb using the 'build structure' module in discovery studio visualizer (biovia, ds, 2019) [50] . this sequence was further optimized for geometry using the 'minimize' functionality in the ucsf chimera software [51] .we performed alanine scanning to better understand the individual roles of the residues within the 23-amino acid peptide in binding with sars-cov-2. alanine substitution of each residue was performed using biovia discovery studio 2020 software [50] . each peptide was then modeled and energy minimized using ucsf chimera software [51] . we also truncated five residues from the n-terminal end of the 23-amino acid (23aa) peptide to get a shorter 18-amino acids peptide (phe28 to leu45). this peptide was further energy minimized using the method described above.the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein-ace2 (pdb id: 6m17) complex was retrieved from the protein data bank (https ://www.rcsb.org/) and used as the starting point for the docking studies. molecular docking was performed using pydock (https ://life.bsc.es/pid/pydoc kweb) [52] , haddock 2.4 [53] , and zdock [54] servers, to validate the results for each program, which in turn should be mutually correlated. the docking results were analyzed using the chimera [51] and ds visualizer programs [50] .the results obtained were analyzed for binding energies and peptide conformations in the sars-cov-2 spike protein binding interface. molecular dynamics (md) simulations were performed at 50 ns for the modeled protein. the coordinates of the structure were stored and examined utilizing the analytical tool in the gromacs 4.5.5 package [55] .the toxicity and other relevant molecular mechanistic values of the peptides, such as electrostatics, desolation, and van der waals (vdw) force, were predicted using the 'toxinpred' server (https ://crdd.osdd.net/ragha va/toxin pred/) [56] . toxin-pred is an in-silico method that has been developed to predict and design toxic/non-toxic peptides. the main dataset used in this method consists of 1805 toxic peptides (≤ 35 residues). the physiochemical characteristics of the peptide sequences were determined using the protparam tool (https ://web.expas y.org/protp aram/) of the expasy database server [57] (fig. 1 ).the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with the ace2 pd domain (pdb id: 6m17) was retrieved from the protein data bank (https ://www.rcsb.org/). the interface residues between the sars-cov-2 spike protein and the ace2 pd domain were visualized and interpreted using ucsf chimera software [51] . after a detailed analysis of interface residues, a small stretch of the ace2 pd n-terminal region (23-amino acids: glu23 to leu45) was found to be interacting majorly with the sars-cov-2 spike protein ( fig. 2 and table 1 ). furthermore, we evaluated whether the 23-amino acid chain alone and without the remainder of the ace2 pd domain could bind to the sars-cov-2 spike protein. hence, the 23aa sequence was taken from the ace2 pd domain and docked to the sars-cov-2 spike protein (6m17) using the pydock program [52] . to perform a non-biased analysis, we performed a blind docking run whereby we did not specify the binding site during the docking simulations. the obtained results were clustered and analyzed by comparing the binding energies and docked conformations of the peptide within the sars-cov-2 spike protein (table 2) . interestingly, we found that the peptide binds to the sars-cov-2 spike protein at exactly the same place where the original ace2 pd domain interacts, which shows that the 23-amino acid sequence independently has the potential to inhibit the interaction of the sars-cov-2 spike protein and ace2 complex. after the docking analysis, the sars-cov-2/ace2 peptide interface was determined and the critical interacting amino acids were identified in the ace2 pd domain-derived peptide involved in binding to the sars-cov-2 spike protein ( table 2) . computational alanine (a) scanning was performed to identify the critically important amino acids of the 23aa peptide inhibitor involved in binding to the sars-cov-2 spike protein. the approach of alanine scanning contributes to estimating the binding energy of each residue to the total binding energy of the original peptide [58] . the process involves the substitution of the amino acid with alanine and records the resulting binding energy changes by molecular docking of the substituted three-dimensional structure of the peptide. if substitution by alanine results in a significant drop in overall free binding energy, those residue(s) are considered the critically important residues for binding [59] . hence, we performed alanine scanning of the 23aa peptide to determine the significance of each residue having the inhibitory potential of independently interacting with the ace2 binding region of the sras-cov-2 spike protein. all amino acids in the peptide were independently mutated to alanine using biovia discovery studio 2020 software [50] . alanine-substituted peptides were then modeled and minimized using the ucsf chimera program [51] . (fig. 3) . however, the mutated residues f28a, f32a, h34a, f40a, y41a, and l45a were found to be critically important for binding and stabilizing the peptide-sars-cov-2 spike protein complex (fig. 3) . we observed the change from − 55.873 kcal/mol to − 42.996 drop in the total binding score (fig. 3) . furthermore, we deleted the non-significant (identified through alanine scanning) residues and found the deletion of any residue from f28 to l45 would make an unstable structure. hence, we removed five residues (e23, q24, a25, k26, t27) from the n-terminal region of the peptide and retained residues from f28 to l45, resulting in the final 18aa peptide. in addition to the molecular mechanistic values such as electrostatics and table 1 ). vdw is usually a weak force, a type of intermolecular force enhancing the attraction and binding of a ligand to its receptor. vdw forces are involved in the maintenance and stabilization of a drug-receptor complex.replacing the respective amino acids (f28, f32, h34, f40, y41, l45) with alanine significantly reduces the binding score, either by directly losing the interaction or by changing the peptide conformation, which becomes less compatible with the sars-cov-2 spike protein. hence, based on the results of alanine scanning, the peptide was shortened from the extreme n-terminus due to its dispensability in sars-cov-2 binding. the final peptide derivative (f28, l29, d30, k31, f32, n33, h34, e35, a36, e37, d38, l39, f40, y41, q42, s43, s44, l45) was further docked and analyzed to validate its binding efficiency. we utilized three state-of-the-art programs (pydock [37] , zdock [39] and haddock 2.4 [38] ) to validate our docking studies. the top poses retrieved from each software package resulted in conformations very close to the original 23-amino acid peptide, thereby validating its efficacy as a potent sars-cov-2 inhibitor (fig. 4 ).the final 18aa peptide, with a molecular weight of 2203.39, has an amino acid composition of ala (a) 5.6%, asn (n) 5.6%, asp (d) 11.1%, gln (q) 5.6%, glu (e) 11.1%, his (h) 5.6%, leu (l) 16.7%, lys (k) 5.6%, phe (f) 16.7%, ser (s) 11.1% and tyr (y) 5.6%. the total number of negatively charged residues was four (asp and glu) and the table 2 interacting residues (1) at the interface of sars-cov-2 and the docked 18 aa peptide; and (2) at the interface of sars-cov-2 and the docked 23 aa peptide 1) at the interface of sars-cov-2 (blue) and the docked 18 aa peptide (red). the underlined and bold residues are making strong interactions between the peptides and sars-cov-2 spike protein sars-cov-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, ace2 angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, pd peptidase domain total number of positively charged residues was two (lys and his). the extinction coefficient calculated in units of m −1 cm −1 , at 280 nm measured in water, was found to be 1490 ± 10. it is useful to have an estimation of this coefficient for spectrophotometrically following a protein when purifying it. the half-life is a prediction of the time it takes for half of the amount of protein in a cell to disappear after its synthesis in the cell. the presently used expasy tool, protparam, relies on the 'n-end rule', which relates the halflife of a protein to the identity of its n-terminal residue; the prediction is given for three model organisms (human, yeast and escherichia coli). considering the n-terminal of the sequence considered is f (phe), the estimated half-life is 1 .1 h (mammalian reticulocytes, in vitro) . the instability index (ii) is computed to be 68.65, which classifies the protein as unstable. the physical stability of peptides is influenced by both intrinsic and external factors. prediction of peptide stability suggests precautionary steps be taken to make the therapeutically potent unstable peptides stable through certain biochemical analysis. the predicted aliphatic index of the peptide was found to be 70.56, with a grand average of hydropathicity (gravy) of − 0.522. toxinpred was used to predict the toxicity of the 18aa peptide with desired toxicity by mutating the minimum number of amino acids [40] . the 'toxinpred' tool allows us to submit query peptide in the fasta format and to optimize the peptide sequence to obtain the maximum/minimum/desired toxicity based on the quantitative matrix-based position-specific scores by comparing them with the toxic/non-toxic data set. the in-silico predicted 'toxinpred' toxicity results of the 18aa peptide indicate that it is non-toxic compared with the mutated peptides. a25 f28 l29 f32 e33 a36 l39 f40 y41 q42 s43 s44 l45 sars-cov-2: r403 d405 e406 r408 q409 g416 k417 i418 y453 r454 l455 f456 v483 e484 g485 f486 n487 c488 y489 q493 y495 g504the respective docked complexes of the 23aa and 18aa peptides with target protein were subjected to md simulation studies for analysing their stability in terms of root mean square deviation (rsmd) and potential interactions at 50 ns. the stability of these two protein-peptide complexes was analyzed using the rmsd of backbone atoms. the calculated average rmsd of these complexes was in the range of 0.94-1.48 nm and 0.24-0.8 nm for the 23aa and 18aa peptide complexes, respectively (fig. 5) .by the end of the 50 ns time-scale simulation, both of the protein-peptide complexes attained their stable conformations (fig. 5) . the lower rmsd values obtained after comparing the initial and final peptide complex conformations (fig. 5b) revealed that the docked complexes were stable and hence there was not much difference in their conformations during the course of dynamics simulation.several advantages of peptides, including ease of synthesis and modifications, low toxicity, and high target specificity and selectivity, led us to design a potential therapeutic candidate against covid-19. the present in-silico study is the first step towards designing inhibitory peptides to block sars-cov-2 entry into the host cell. the peptide could inhibit binding of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with the ace2 pd domain, which is the earliest stage of sars-cov-2 infection. the findings of this study suggest that a peptide of 18-amino acids could be considered as a selective therapeutic candidate for covid-19. the study conducted by han and kral shows similar aspects towards designing a peptide inhibitor [49] . the identification of 15 interacting residues of an ace2 pd with an rbd of the sars-cov-2 spike protein at a 3 å region in the crystal structure (pdb 6m17) is in agreement with the findings of han and kral [49] . however, in comparison with our structurally stable 18aa peptide inhibitor comprising the ace2 pd residues ranging from positions 28-45, their inhibitor 1 peptide comprising residues 21-55 is structurally unstable and non-specific; hence, they made multiple modifications to it, which thereby changes its properties as well as its similarity to our peptide. out of a total of 15 interacting residues of ace2 pd, 10 residues are in the stretch of q24 to l45. utilizing this fact in our study, each residue in the 23-45 stretch (23aa peptide) of the ace2 pd was estimated for functional significance and structural stability based on their binding energy and conformational stability. in contrast to inhibitor 1, we obtained a stable 18aa peptide inhibitor where non-significant residues were truncated and the non-interacting residues within the 18aa peptide at the interfacial site were found important, both for binding and stability of the peptide. hence, inhibitor 1 from han and kral differs in structural stability, composition and specificity due to the presence of non-significant residues leading to deformity in its helical structure. provision of experimental investigations of the desired synthesized peptide in combination with our computational studies will be needed to confirm and complete this study. it is recommended to compare our computational results with the designed peptides in vitro and in vivo, and eventually to clinical studies.at the time of writing, the new coronavirus, also known as sars-cov-2, which causes severe acute respiratory syndrome [1, 2] , has caused approximately the death of approximately 17000 and the infection of 390000 people. the covid-19 outbreak represents a serious threat to public health [3] , and the world health organization officially declared it a pandemic.to date 7 coronavirus strains are known to infect humans and no approved therapies or vaccine against them are available [3] .in the past two decades, in addition to sars-cov-2, two other β-coronavirus have caused three of the most severe epidemics worldwide: sars-cov [4, 5] and mers-cov [6] which respectively cause the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), and the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers).the characteristics of the interactions between these viruses and the human cell receptors are being carefully studied to shed light on both diffusion speed and mortality rate differences between sars-cov-2 and the others, with special regard to sars-cov.indeed, sars-cov spread across 26 countries in six continents and caused a total of 8,096 cases and 774 deaths (9.6%) [7] , with an incubation period of 1 to 4 days [8] . on the other side, it has been demonstrated that the latency of sars-cov-2 varies from 3-7 days on average, up to 14 days [2] . thus, the average latency of sars-cov-2 is slightly longer than that of sars-cov [7] . moreover, it is estimated from epidemiological data that individuals infected with sars-cov-2 are conta- * the authors contributed equally to the present work. † corresponding author: edoardo.milanetti@uniroma1.it gious from the beginning of the incubation period and that between the incubation period and the end of the infection each infected individual transmits the infection to about 3.77 other people [9] . sars-cov-2, similarly to sars-cov and mers-cov, attacks the lower respiratory system, thus causing viral pneumonia. however, this infection can also affect the gastrointestinal system, heart, kidney, liver, and central nervous system [2, 10, 11] .to face the emergency of this epidemic it is essential to shed light on the interaction mechanisms between the virus and the human cell receptors.it is well characterized how sars-cov infection is mediated by the high-affinity interactions between the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the spike (s) glycoprotein and the human-host angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor [12] [13] [14] . the spike protein is located on the virus envelope and promotes the attachment to the host cell and the fusion between the virus and the cellular membrane. [15, 16] .recently, it has also been proven that several critical residues in sars-cov-2's rbd provide favorable interactions with human ace2, consistent with sars-cov-2's capability to infect the cell [17, 18] . on the experimental side, it has also been confirmed by in vivo experiments that sars-cov-2's entry is mediated by lung cell ace2 receptors [19] . more importantly, the structure of the spike-ace2 receptor complex has been recently determined by crio-em [20] . in conclusion, it is now understood that sars-cov-2 binds to the ace2 receptor to infect the host cell using its spike protein's rbd, even if it had most likely evolved from sars-cov independently [21] .since the ace2 molecule is known to be a human entry receptor, the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of interaction between the ace2 receptor and the spike protein of the virus can be a key factor designing new drug compounds. with this aim, computational methods based on both sequence and structure studies of proteins represent a powerful tool [22] .indeed, the development of effective computational methods for predicting the binding sites of proteins can improve the understanding of many molecular mechanisms [23] [24] [25] . several methods to analyze protein interaction have used protein surface information [26] [27] [28] [29] .a very promising strategy to study molecular interaction is to determine, using deep learning methods, chemico-physical features of the molecular surface [25] . this method allows to efficiently detect binding sites but it, unfortunately, has the drawbacks of any other deep learning approach: it requires the definition and training of several parameters and the creation of a sufficiently large training and test database. this method also requires the analysis of all possible orientations and relative positions of the binding sites.in this work, we present a new and general method to efficiently describe the shape of molecular surfaces and apply it to study the interactions between spike proteins and the corresponding receptors involved in the sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 infection mechanisms.the method proposed here, for the first time, describes regions of a molecular surface with the 2d zernike formalism. indeed, each local patch of a 3d protein molecule can be represented as a surface on a 2d square grid, while retaining both distance and angular information with respect to a specific reference system. applying the zernike expansion we compute -completely unsupervised -numerical descriptors that summarize the patch geometry and we use them to compute the structural similarity between any two patches. the zernike descriptors are rotationally invariant, ensuring to the method an high efficiency and a low computational cost since it avoids the necessity of any preliminary structure orientation. overall, these operations substantially reduce the search space dimensionality, thus allowing our method to be able to explore several more protein regions compared to previous methods.we first apply the method to a large dataset of proteinprotein complexes (protein-protein dataset), where we test the ability of our method to detect interacting regions from non-interacting regions with the use of our definition of complementarity. our method recognizes interactions in the large protein-protein database with good precision. furthermore, thanks to the low computational cost of building an invariant description, we can blindly sample the entire surfaces of 2 interacting proteins, and retrieve their binding sites.then, we use our formalism to study the interaction between the spike protein and its membrane receptors, comparing sars-cov-2 with both sars-cov and mers. we demonstrate that the actual region of binding between spike protein and ace2 human -both in sars-cov and sars-cov-2 -have a higher complementarity with respect to other randomly sampled exposed receptor regions.furthermore, we also analyze in detail the structural properties of the mers spike protein which, like several other proteins belonging to coronaviruses family, can interact with sialic acids [30] . among other coronaviruses, the bovine coronavirus (bcov), and the two human coronaviruses oc43 and hku1 employ sialoglycanbased receptors with 9-o-acetylated sialic acid (9-o-ac-sia) as key component [31] . these viruses bind to cell surface components containing n-acetyl-9-oacetylneuraminic acid and this interaction is essential for the initiation of an infection [32] . in particular, we propose here a possible alternative mechanism of sars-cov-2 cellular infection, through spike protein interaction with sialic acid receptors of the upper airways, similarly to what has been shown for the mers spike protein [33] . we indeed highlight that a surface region in the nterminal domain of sars-cov-2 spike is very similar to the mers spike sialic acid-binding region, and present a compatible charge. these observations suggest that these two pockets potentially share an analogous function. this second infection mechanism for sars-cov-2 could explain its high diffusion speed.in the last decade, the 3d zernike formalism has been widely applied for the characterization of molecular interactions [29, [34] [35] [36] : in this work, we adopted a new representation, based on the 2d zernike polynomials, which allows the quantitative characterization of protein surface regions. as shown in fig.1 , our computational protocol associates to each molecular patch an ordered set of numbers (the expansion coefficients) that describes its shapes.through this compact description, it is possible to both analyze the similarity between 2 different regions -suggesting, for example, a similar ligand for 2 binding regions -and to study the complementarity between 2 interacting surfaces.to validate this method, we firstly collected a large structural dataset of protein-protein complexes and we characterize their binding sites through 2d zernike. we test the method ability to recognize the higher complementarity observed between pairs of interacting surfaces compared to the lower complementarity found when the 2 surfaces are non-interacting.we thus analyze in detail the interactions of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with its membrane receptors, comparing sars-cov-2 properties with sars-cov and mers-cov.we selected a structural dataset, composed of about 4500 experimentally determined protein-protein com- b) the selected patch points are fitted with a plane and reoriented in such a way that the z-axis passes through the centroid of the points and is orthogonal to the plane. a point c along the z-axis is defined, such as that the largest angle between the perpendicular axis and the secant connecting c to a surface point is equal to 45 o . finally, to each point, its distance, r with point c is evaluated. c) each point of the surface is projected on the fit plane, which is binned with a square grid. to each pixel, the average of the r values of the points inside the pixel is associated. d) the resulting 2d projection of the patch can be represented by a set of 2d zernike invariant descriptors. e-f ) given a protein-protein complex (pdb code: 3b0f, in this example), for each surface vertex we select a patch centered on it and compute its zernike descriptors. to blindly identify the two binding sites, each sampled patch is compared with all the patches of the molecular partner and each vertex is associated with the minimum distance between its patch and all the patches of the molecular partner is associated with. g) a smoothing process of the surface point values is applied to highlight the signal in the regions characterized mostly by low distance values (high shape complementarity).plexes, from a recent paper that presented a state of the art patch recognition computational method [25] .for each complex, we have selected the interacting regions and we have characterized them with the 2d zernike invariant descriptors. therefore, each binding site is associated with a one-dimensional vector, allowing us to easily compare the shape of protein regions with the euclidean distance between their zernike descriptors. two regions are complementary when they are characterized by a low distance between their corresponding zernike vectors [34] .to test the ability of the method to recognize two interacting regions, we have compared how much the distance between the zernike descriptors (see methods) of a pair of interacting binding sites is smaller than the distances between random patches. in particular, we define the random patch set as the set of 2000 patches randomly extracted from the 20 biggest protein of the dataset (100 patches for each protein). for each protein-protein complex, we define the real distance as the distance between the interacting surfaces, while the random ones are the values observed in the comparisons between the binding site of one protein and the random patch set.our unsupervised method has an excellent ability in recognizing the binding regions with respect to random patches with an area under the roc curve of 0.76. note that the state of art supervised method described in [25] , when only shape descriptors are considered, achieves an auc of 0.68 with patches of comparable sizes, meaning that our approach clearly overcome such performances in shape complementarity recognition.furthermore, the much lower computational time needed for the calculation of the 2d zernike descriptors allows an extensive sampling of the surfaces of a pair of proteins in complex. centering on each surface point a molecular patch, we generate for each protein a very high number of zernike descriptors. comparing all the patches of the two proteins, we label each surface point with the binding propensity, which is the maximum complementarity recorded between the zernike descriptors of the patch and all the others belonging to the molecular partner surface. the real binding region is expected to be demarcated and mostly composed of elements with high complementarity. to make the binding region high complementarity more evident, we smooth the signal by attributing to each vertex of the surface the average value of the vertices closer than 6å to it (see method).as an example in fig.1 we report the result of this method for a specific case (pdb code: 3b0f), where this procedure clearly identifies the binding regions of the two proteins. for a subset of 20 protein-protein complexesthe smallest in terms of the number of surface vertices -, we perform a blind search of the interacting regions. the results are very promising, since the average value of the auc of the corresponding roc is 0.65, with fourteen out of forty proteins having an auc higher than 0.70.comparison between the complementarity of the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike protein with the human ace2 receptorthe excellent and very promising results found in the large dataset encouraged us to investigate the pressing problem of the coronavirus interaction with the host cell. we first analyzed the shape complementarity between the spike proteins of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 in complex with human ace2 receptor [12, 20] . it is interesting to notice that the contact between spike and ace2 receptor both for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 occurs in two separate interacting regions (see fig. 2 ), meaning that we need to investigate the two interacting regions separately. when comparing the two raw distances, we found that ace2-sars-cov distance is smaller than the ace2-sars-cov-2 one, even if for both complexes the complementarity is much higher than the one would find in other random regions of the complexes (see figure 2 ). note that for an appropriate comparison, we need to de-fine a suitable ensemble of random patches. indeed, the random regions are sampled from the molecular surface of the spike protein imposing that the center of the two patches has the same distance as the binding region observed in the experimental complex. then, both the real spike binding region and the ensemble of 1000 sampled regions are compared with the receptor binding sites.the results of this analysis are shown in fig. 2 . we show the distance distribution of the random regions and we report the distance between the real binding regions, both for the ace2-sars-cov and ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. as the method works in recognizing interacting patches, real binding regions show a higher complementarity (lower distance) than the randomly sampled regions.furthermore, this analysis shows that the ace2 receptor has a slightly higher shape complementarity with sars-cov than with sars-cov-2 spike protein. however, the results are quite comparable among them, in accordance with experimental data [3] .although it is currently known that the spike protein of sars-cov-2 binds to the ace2 receptor of host cells [18, 37] , the investigation of possible other infection mechanism is a key factor in the study of this disease. specifically, in this work [19] the authors underline the necessity to elucidate whether sars-cov-2 spike protein could have acquired the ability to bind with sialic acid as mers-cov does. it has been recently shown that besides the usual receptor (dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 receptor), mers-cov spike protein interacts with sialic acid molecules [33] using a well-identified pocket in the nterminal region of the protein. this makes the virus able to interact with high airways and then reach the low airway cells [38] .the recognition between spike and sialic acids occurs via a conserved groove which plays a key role for s mers-cov-mediated attachment to sialosides and entry into human airway epithelial cells [33] .since the interaction of mers-cov spike and the sialic acids is caused mainly by hydrogen bonds and shape complementarity [39] , our method is particularly suitable to find on the sars-cov-2 spike surface a region similar to the one involved in binding of the sialic acid in mers-cov spike.using the experimental structure of mers-cov spike and sialic acid molecules complexes [33] , we extract its binding region and we describe it through zernike descriptors. then we sample the corresponding domains of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike, building a molecular patch on each surface point and characterizing it with its corresponding zernike descriptors. each region sampled from the spike proteins of these 2 viruses is then compared with the mers-cov spike binding re- gion, looking for a similar region that can mediate interaction with a similar ligand. in fig. 3 , we show the results of this analysis. in particular, selecting the region most similar to the mers-cov binding site we identified one region for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike protein.interestingly the best region of sars-cov-2 spike exhibits a higher similarity than the pocket selected by the sars-cov spike. we moreover calculate the electrostatic potential of the involved surfaces with ef-surf webserver [40] . as shown in fig. 3 , in cartoon representation, the region found in the molecular surface of the sars-cov-2 spike is very similar to the mers spike region interacting with sialic acid, both in terms of shape and electrostatic similarity. differently, the region identified in the sars-cov spike exhibit an electrostatic clearly dissimilar from the sialic binding site in the mers-cov spike, making very unlikely the interaction with sialic acid in that region.in addition, in fig.4 , we propose a multiple sequence alignment -with software clustal omega [41] -between the three spike proteins.importantly the proposed sars-cov-2 binding site, besides being structurally in a surface region bordering the corresponding mers pocket, is composed of a set of consecutive residues (sequence number 73-76) constituting an insertion in respect to sars-cov spike sequence. thus, this insertion in the a-domain of the spike protein could confer to sars-cov-2 the capability of infecting human cells in a dual strategy, making possible the high diffusion speed of this virus.a blind prediction of the interaction regions between molecules is still an open challenge, despite the great steps that have been made. however, the need for fast and reliable theoretical and computational tools, capable to guide and speed-up experiments, becomes especially important when we face emergencies like the present one. emergency caused by the novel sars-cov-2 human infection is spreading with an impressive rate, such that the world health organization officially declared it a pandemic.indeed, the last few months have seen extensive studies about the virus-host interactions focusing in particular on the various stages of the cell internalization mechanism. recent works found that, in analogy with the case of sars-cov, sars-cov-2 uses too its spike protein to bind to ace2 receptors, mostly associated in the lower respiratory ways. further experimental investigations highlighted a comparable receptor binding affinity between the novel coronavirus and the older sars-cov, even if the binding regions display a certain degree of variability [21] . the modest difference in binding affinity seems insufficient to explain the higher human-human transmission rate with respect to sars-cov and the overall sequence variability suggest that sars-cov-2 may have optimized in other directions, such as in acquiring the ability of binding to other receptors [19] .in this work, we present a new fast computational method that compactly summarizes the morphological properties of a surface region of a protein. testing the unsupervised method on a large dataset of protein-protein interactions, we proved its excellent ability to correctly recognize the high shape complementarity occurring between interacting surfaces. analyzing the newly available experimental structures of sars-cov-2 spike protein in complex with human ace2, we found that the binding region presents indeed a comparable (slightly slower) shape complementarity with the analogous complex of sars-cov. such a minimal difference enforces the hypothesis that the apparent higher fitness of sars-cov-2 should lie elsewhere.in particular, looking at other members of the large coronavirus family, one finds that many members developed the ability to bind to two distinct receptors, with one binding site in the c-terminal domain of the s-protein that generally binds protein-like receptors (like ace2 for sars-cov and sars-cov-2) and the other situated in the n-terminal region, usually able to bind to sugar-like receptors. in particular, mers-cov has been found able to bind to sialic acid receptors both in camel, human and bat cells. applying our method to the sialic acid-binding region, which has been recently determined experimentally in mers-cov, we have found an exceptionally similar region in the corresponding region of the sars-cov-2 spike. this region, similar in structure to the mers-cov correspondent one and absent in sars-cov (see figure 4) , could be able to mediate a low-affinity but high-avidity interaction with sialic acid. interestingly, the sequence variability of the spike protein, recently studied considering sars-cov-2 sequences belonging to 62 different strains [42] , shows a high conservation level of the ace2 binding site while the highest variability is located in the region that we indicate here to be potentially involved in sialic acid biding: this evidence confirm the importance of this region in regulating host-cell infection [43] .in conclusion, we propose that this dual cell entry mechanism can explain the high diffusion speed this virus exhibits and we strongly encourage a more accurate investigation of this observation.a dataset of protein-protein complexes experimentally solved in x-ray crystallography is taken from [25] .we only selected pair interactions regarding chains with more than 50 residues. the protein-protein dataset is therefore composed of 4634 complexes.• complex between sars-cov spike protein and human ace receptor: pdb code 6acj.• complex between sars-cov-2 spike protein and human ace receptor: pdb code 6m17.• complex between mers spike protein and sialic acid: pdb code 6q07.• unbound sars-cov spike protein: pdb code 6crv.• unbound sars-cov-2 spike protein: modeled by i-tasser server [44] .we use dms [45] to compute the solvent accessible surface for all proteins structure, given their x-ray structure in pdb format [46] , using a density of 5 points per a 2 and a water probe radius of 1.4å. the unit normals vector, for each point of the surface, was calculated using the flag −n. putative sialic acid-binding region on sars-cov-2 as predicted by our zernike-based method. from left to right, the projected region of putative interaction between sars-cov and sialic acid, electrostatic potential surface, and cartoon representation of the sars-cov spike protein with highlighted the binding site. c) same as b) but for sars-cov spike protein.given a molecular surface described as a set of point in a three-dimensional cartesian space, and a region of interest on this surface, we define a surface patch, σ as the intersection of the region of interest and the surface. in principle, the region of interest can have an arbitrary shape, in this work we chose to use a spherical region having radius r s = 6å and one point of the surface as the center (see figure 1a ). once the patch is selected, we fit a plane that passes through the points in σ, and we reorient the patch in such a way to have the z-axis perpendicular to the plane and going through the center of the plane. then given a point c on the z-axis we define the angle θ as the largest angle between the perpendicular axis and a secant connecting c to any point of the surface σ. c is then set in order that θ = 45 • . r is the distance between c and a surface point. we then build a square grid, and we associate each pixel with the mean r of the points inside it. this 2d function can be zernike invariant descriptors, which are invariant under rotation in the space. in the next section, we provide a brief summary of the main features of the zernike basis. there are several good reviews, like [47] that offer more detailed discussions. a schematic representation of the procedure is shown in figure 1b -d.given a function f (r, φ) (polar coordinates) defined inside the region r < 1 (unitary circle), it is possible to represent the function in the zernike basis aswithbeing the expansion coefficients. the zernike polynomials are complex functions, composed by a radial and an angular part,where the radial part for a certain couple of indexes, n and m, is given byin general, for each couple of polynomials, one finds that z nm |z n m = π (n + 1) δ nn δ mm (5) which ensures that the polynomials can form a basis and knowing the set of complex coefficients, {c nm } allows for a univocal reconstruction of the original image (with a resolution that depends on the order of expansion, n = max(n)). we found that n = 20, which corresponds to a number of coefficients of 121, allows for a good visual reconstruction of the original image.by taking the modulus of each coefficient (z nm = |c nm |), a set of descriptors can be obtained which have the remarkable feature of being invariant for rotations around the origin of the unitary circle.the shape similarity between two patches can then be assessed by comparing the zernike invariants of their associated 2d projections. in particular, the similarity between patch i and j is measured as the euclidean dis-tance between the invariant vectors, i.e.when comparing patches, the relative orientation of the patches before the projection in the unitary circle must be evaluated. intuitively, if we search for similar regions we must compare patches that have the same orientation once projected in the 2d plane, i.e. the solventexposed part of the surface must be oriented in the same direction for both patches, for example as the positive z-axis. if instead, we want to assess the complementarity between two patches, we must orient the patches contrariwise, i.e. one patch with the solvent-exposed part toward the positive z-axis ('up') and the other toward the negative z-axis ('down').the velocity of the procedure that from a patch in the 3d surface produces the set of invariant descriptors, al-lows for a vast screening of couples of surfaces to look for both similar and also complementary regions. in order to identify the binding region given a couple of proteins, we can associate to each point of one surface a vector of zernike invariants associate to the 'up' patch having that point as center and another set of invariants to each point of the other surface ( with 'down' orientation). then for each point i of say, protein 1, we can compute the euclidean distance with all the points of the other surface associated with protein 2 and associate to point i the minimum found distance and vice-versa for protein 2 (see figure 1e -f). a smoothing process of the surface point values is applied in order to highlight the signal in the regions characterized mostly by low distance values (high shape complementarity).at the time of writing, the new coronavirus, also known as sars-cov-2, which causes the severe acute respiratory syndrome [1, 2] , has caused approximately the death of approximately 17000 and the infection of 390000 people. the covid-19 outbreak represents a serious threat to public health [3] , and the world health organization officially declared it a pandemic.to date 7 coronavirus strains are known to infect humans and no approved therapies or vaccine against them are available [3] .in the past two decades, in addition to sars-cov-2, two other β-coronavirus have caused three of the most severe epidemics worldwide: sars-cov [4, 5] and mers-cov [6] which respectively cause the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), and the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers).the characteristics of the interactions between these viruses and the human cell receptors are being carefully studied in order to shed light on both diffusion speed and mortality rate differences between sars-cov-2 and the others, with a special regard to sars-cov.indeed, sars-cov spread across 26 countries in six continents and caused a total of 8,096 cases and 774 deaths (9.6%) [7] , with an incubation period of 1 to 4 days [8] . on the other side, it has been demonstrated that the latency of sars-cov-2 varies from 3-7 days on average, up to 14 days [2] . thus, the average latency of sars-cov-2 is slightly longer than that of sars-cov [7] . moreover, it is estimated from epidemiological data that individuals infected with sars-cov-2 are conta-gious from the beginning of the incubation period, and that between the incubation period and the end of the infection each infected individual transmits the infection to about 3.77 other people [9] .sars-cov-2, similarly to sars-cov and mers-cov, attacks the lower respiratory system, thus causing viral pneumonia. however, this infection can also affect the gastrointestinal system, heart, kidney, liver, and central nervous system [2, 10, 11] .to face the emergency of this epidemic it is essential to shed light on the interaction mechanisms between the virus and the human cell receptors.it is well characterised how sars-cov infection is mediated by the high-affinity interactions between the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the spike (s) glycoprotein and the human-host angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor [12] [13] [14] . the spike protein is located on the virus envelope and promotes the attachment to the host cell and the fusion between the viral and cellular membrane. [15, 16] .recently, it has also been proven that several critical residues in sars-cov-2's rbd provide favorable interactions with human ace2, consistent with sars-cov-2's capability to infect the cell [17, 18] . on the experimental side, it has also been confirmed by in vivo experiments that sars-cov-2's entry is mediated by lung cell ace2 receptors [19] . more importantly the structure of the spike-ace2 receptor complex has been recentely determined by crio-em [20] . in conclusion, it is now understood that sars-cov-2 binds to the ace2 receptor to infect the host cell using its spike protein's rbd, even if it had most likely evolved from sars-cov independently [21] .since the ace2 molecule is known to be a human entry receptor, the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of interaction between the ace2 receptor and the spike protein of the virus can be a key factor designing new drug compounds. with this aim, computational methods based on both sequence and structure studies of proteins represent a powerful tool [22] .indeed, the development of effective computational methods for predicting the binding sites of proteins can improve the understanding of many molecular mechanisms [23] [24] [25] . several methods to analyze protein interaction have used protein surface information [26] [27] [28] [29] .a very promising strategy to study molecular interaction is to determine, using deep learning methods, chemico-physical features of the molecular surface [25] . this method allows to efficiently detect binding sites but it unfortunately has the drawbacks of any other deep learning approach: it requires the definition and training of several parameters and the creation of a sufficiently large training and test database. these method also requires the analysis of all possible orientations and relative position of the binding sites.in this work we present a new and general method to efficiently describe the shape of molecular surfaces and apply it to study the interactions between spike proteins and the corresponding receptors involved in the sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 infection mechanisms.the method proposed here, for the first time, describes regions of molecular surface with the 2d zernike formalism. indeed, each local patch of a 3d protein molecule can be represented as a surface on a 2d square grid, while retaining both distance and angular information with respect to a specific reference system. applying the zernike expansion we compute -completely unsupervised -numerical descriptors that summarize the patch geometry and we use them to compute the structural similarity between any two patches. the zernike descriptors are rotationally invariant, ensuring to the method an high efficiency and a low computational cost since it avoids the necessity of any preliminary structure orientation. overall, these operation substantially reduces the search space dimensionality, thus allowing our method to be able to explore several more protein regions compered to previous methods.we firstly apply the method to a large dataset of protein-protein complexes (protein-protein dataset), where we test the ability of our method to detect interacting regions from non-interacting regions with the use of our definition of complementarity. our method recognize interactions in the large protein-protein database with a good precision. furthermore, thanks to the low computational cost of building an invariant description, we can blindly sample the entire surfaces of 2 interacting proteins, and retrieve their binding sites.then, we use our formalism to study the interaction between the spike protein and its membrane receptors, comparing sars-cov-2 with both sars-cov and mers. we demonstrate that the actual region of binding between spike protein and ace2 human -both in sars-cov an sars-cov-2 -have an higher complementarity with respect to other randomly sampled exposed receptor region.furthermore, we also analize in detail the structural properties of the mers spike protein which, like several other proteins belonging to coronaviruses family, is able to interact with sialic acids [30] . among other coronaviruses, the bovine coronavirus (bcov), and the two human coronaviruses oc43 and hku1 employ sialoglycan-based receptors with 9-o-acetylated sialic acid (9-o-ac-sia) as key component [31] . these viruses bind to cell surface components containing n-acetyl-9-oacetylneuraminic acid and this interaction is essential for initiation of an infection [32] . in particular, we propose here a possible alternative mechanism of sars-cov-2 cellular infection, through spike protein interaction with sialic acid receptors of the upper airways, similarly to what has been shown for the mers spike protein [33] . we indeed highlights that a surface region in the nterminal domain of sars-cov-2 spike is very similar to the mers spike sialic acid binding region, and present a compatible charge. these observations suggest that these two pockets potentially share a analogous function. this second infection mechanism for sars-cov-2 could explain its high diffusion speed.in the last decade the 3d zernike formalism has been widely applied for the characterization of molecular interactions [29, [34] [35] [36] : in this work we adopted a new representation, based on the 2d zernike polynomials, which allows the quantitative characterization of protein surface regions. as shown in fig.1 , our computational protocol associates to each molecular patch an ordered set of numbers (the expansion coefficients) that describes its shapes.through this compact description it is possible to both analyze the similarity between 2 different regions -suggesting for example a similar ligand for 2 binding regions -and to study the complementarity between 2 interacting surfaces.to validate this method, we firstly collected a large structural dataset of protein-protein complexes and we characterize their binding sites through 2d zernike. we test the method ability to recognize the higher complementarity observed between pairs of interacting surfaces compared to the lower complementarity found when the 2 surfaces are non-interacting.we thus analyze in detail the interactions of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with its membrane receptors, comparing sars-cov-2 properties with sars-cov and mers-cov.we selected a structural dataset, composed of about 4500 experimentally determined protein-protein com- b) the selected patch points are fitted with a plane and reoriented in such a way that the z-axis passes through the centroid of the points and is orthogonal to the plane. a point c along the z-axis is defined, such as that the largest angle between the perpendicular axis and the secant connecting c to a surface point is equal to 45 o . finally, to each point, its distance, r with the point c is evaluated. c) each point of the surface is projected on the fit plane, which is binned with a square grid. to each pixel, the average of the r values of the points inside the pixel is associated. d) the resulting 2d projection of the patch can be represented by a set of 2d zernike invariant descriptors. e-f ) given a protein-protein complex (pdb code: 3b0f, in this example), for each surface vertex we select a patch centered on it and compute its zernike descriptors. to blindly identify the two binding sites, each sampled patch is compared with all the patches of the molecular partner and each vertex is associated with the minimum distance between its patch and all the patches of the molecular partner is associated with. g) a smoothing process of the surface point values is applied in order to highlight the signal in the regions characterized mostly by low distance values (high shape complementarity).plexes, from a recent paper that presented a state of the art patch recognition computational method [25] .for each complex, we have selected the interacting regions and we have characterized them with the 2d zernike invariant descriptors. therefore, each binding site is associated with a one dimensional vector, allowing us to easily compare the shape of protein regions with the euclidean distance between their zernike descriptors. two regions are complementary when they are characterized by a low distance between their corresponding zernike vectors [34] .to test the ability of the method to recognize two interacting regions, we have compared how much the distances between the zernike descriptors (see methods) of a pair of interacting binding sites is smaller than the distances between 2 random patches. in particular, for each protein-protein complex we define the real distance as the distance between the interacting surfaces, while the random set is formed by the comparison between the binding site of one protein and the binding sites extracted from the other complexes of the dataset.our unsupervised method has a good ability to recognize the true pair of binding regions with respect to random patches with an auc of the roc of 0.69 comparing patches of r s = 9å . note that the state of art supervised method described in [25] achieves an auc of 0.68, when are considered only shape descriptors with similar patches of 9 − 12å of geodedic lenght.furthermore, the much lower computational time needed for the calculation of the 2d zernike descriptors allows an extensive sampling of the surfaces of a pair of proteins in complex. centering on each surface point a molecular patch, we generate for each protein a very high number of zernike descriptors. comparing all the patches of the two proteins, we label each surface point with the binding propensity, that is the maximum complementarity recorded between the zernike descriptors of the patch and all the others belonging to the molecular partner surface. the real binding region is expected to be demarcated and mostly composed of elements with high complementarity. to make the binding region high complementarity more evident, we smooth the signal by attributing to each vertex of the surface the average value of the vertices closer than 6å to it (see method).as an example in fig.1 we report the result of this method for a specific case (pdb code: 3b0f), where this procedure clearly identify the binding regions of the two proteins. for a subset of 20 protein-protein complexesthe smallest in terms of number of surface vertices -, we perform a blind search of the interacting regions. the results are very promising, since the average value of the auc of the corresponding roc is 0.65, with fourteen out of forty proteins having an auc higher than 0.70.comparison between the complementarity of the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike protein with the human ace2 receptorthe excellent and very promising results found in the large dataset encouraged us to investigate the pressing problem of the coronavirus interaction with the host cell. we first analyzed the shape complementarity between the spike proteins of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 in complex with human ace2 receptor [12, 20] . it is interesting to notice that the contact between spike and ace2 receptor both for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 occurs in two separate interacting regions (see fig. 2 ), meaning that we need to investigate the two interacting regions separately. when comparing the two raw distances, we found that ace2-sars-cov distance is smaller than the ace2-sars-cov-2 one, even if for both complexes the complementarity is much higher than the one would find in other random regions of the complexes (see figure 2 ). note that for an appropriate comparison, we need to define a suitable ensemble of random patches. indeed, the random regions are sampled from the molecular surface of the spike protein imposing that the center of the two patches have the same distance as the binding region observed in the experimental complex. then, both the real spike binding region and the ensemble of 1000 sampled regions are compared with the receptor binding sites.the results of this analysis are shown in fig. 2 . we show the distances distribution of the random regions and we report the distance between the real binding regions, both for the ace2-sars-cov and ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. as the method works in recognizing interacting patches, real binding regions show an higher complementarity (lower distance) than the randomly sampled regions.furthermore, this analysis shows that ace2 receptor has a slightly higher shape complementarity with sars-cov than with sars-cov-2 spike protein. however, the results are quite comparable among them, in accordance with experimental data [3] .although it is currently known that the spike protein of sars-cov-2 binds to the ace2 receptor of host cells [18, 37] , the investigation of possible other infection mechanism is a key factor in the study of this disease. specifically, in this work [19] the authors underline the necessity to elucidate whether sars-cov-2 spike protein could have acquired the ability to bind with sialic acid as mers-cov does. in fact, it has been recently shown that besides the usual receptor (dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 receptor), mers-cov spike protein interacts with sialic acid molecules [33] using a well identified pocket in the n-terminal region of the protein. this makes the virus able to interact with high airways and then reach the low airway cells [38] .the recognition between spike and sialic acids occurs via a conserved groove which plays a key role for s mers-cov-mediated attachment to sialosides and entry into human airway epithelial cells [33] .since the interaction of mers-cov spike and the sialic acids is caused mainly by hydrogen bonds and shape complementarity [39] , our method is particularly suitable to find on the sars-cov-2 spike surface a region similar to the one involved in binding of the sialic acid in mers-cov spike.using the experimental structure of mers-cov spike and sialic acid molecules complexes [33] , we extract its binding region and we describe it through zernike descriptors. then we sample the corresponding domains of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike, building a molecular patch on each surface point and characterizing it with its corresponding zernike descriptors. each region sampled from the spike proteins of these 2 viruses are then compared with the mers-cov spike binding region, looking for a similar regions that can mediate an interaction with a similar ligand.in fig. 3 , we show the results of this analysis. in partic- ular, selecting the region most similar to the mers-cov binding site we identified one region for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike protein.interestingly the best region of sars-cov-2 spike exhibits an higher similarity than the pocket selected by the sars-cov spike. we moreover calculate the electrostatic potential of the involved surfaces with ef-surf webserver [40] . as shown in fig. 3 , in cartoon representation, the region found in the molecular surface of sars-cov-2 spike is very similar to the mers spike region interacting with sialic acid, both in terms of shape and electrostatic similarity. differently, the region identified in sars-cov spike exhibit an electrostatic clearly dissimilar from the sialic binding site in mers-cov spike, making very unlikely the interaction with sialic acid in that region.in addition, in fig.4 , we propose a multiple sequence alignment -with software clustal omega [41] -between the three spike proteins.importantly the proposed sars-cov-2 binding site, besides being structurally in a surface region bordering the corresponding mers pocket, is composed by a set of consecutive residues (sequence number 73-76) constituting an insertion in respect to sars-cov spike sequence. thus, this insertion in the a-domain of the spike protein could confer to sars-cov-2 the capability of infecting human cells in a dual strategy, making possible the high diffusion speed of this virus. putative sialic acid binding region on sars-cov-2 as predicted by our zernike-based method. from left to right, projected region of putative interaction between sars-cov and sialic acid, electrostatic potential surface and cartoon representation of the sars-cov spike protein with highlighted the binding site. c) same as b) but for sars-cov spike protein.a blind prediction of the interaction regions between molecules is still an open challenge, despite the great steps that have been made. however, the need for fast and reliable theoretical and computational tools, capable to guide and speed-up experiments, becomes especially important when we face emergencies like the present one. emergency caused by the novel sars-cov-2 human infection, which is spreading with an impressive rate, such that the world health organization officially declared it a pandemic. indeed, the last few months have seen extensive studies about the virus-host interactions focusing in particular on the various stages of the cell internalization mechanism. recent works found that, in analogy with the case of sars-cov, sars-cov-2 uses too its spike protein to bind to ace2 receptors, mostly associated in the lower respiratory ways. further experimental investigations highlighted a comparable receptor binding affinity between the novel coronavirus and the older sars-cov, even if the binding regions display a certain degree of variability [21] . binding affinity seems insufficient to explain the higher human-human transmission rate in respect to sars-cov and the overall sequence variability suggest that sars-cov-2 may have optimized in other directions, such as in acquiring the ability of binding to other receptors [19] .in this work, we present a new fast computational method that compactly summarizes the morphological properties of a surface region of a protein. testing the unsupervised method on a large dataset of protein-protein interactions, we proved its ability to correctly recognize the high shape complementarity occurring between interacting surfaces. analizing the newly available experimental structures of sars-cov-2 spike protein in complex with human ace2, we found that the binding region presents indeed a comparable (slightly slower) shape complementarity with the analogous complex of sars-cov. such a minimal difference enforces the hypothesis that the apparent higher fitness of sars-cov-2 should lie elsewhere. in particular, looking at other members of the large coronavirus family, one finds that many members developed the ability to bind to two distinct receptors, with one binding site in the c-terminal domain of the s-protein (like ace2 for sars-cov and sars-cov-2) and the other situated in the n-terminal region, usually able to bind to sugar-like molecules. in particular, mers-cov has been found able to bind to sialic acid receptors both in camel, human and bat cells. applying our method to the sialic acid binding region, which has been recently determined experimentally in mers-cov, we have found an exceptionally similar region in the cor-responding region of sars-cov-2 spike. we speculate that this region, similar in structure to the mers-cov one and absent in sars-cov (see figure 4 ), could be able to mediate a low-affinity but high-avidity interaction with sialic acid. in conclusion, we propose that this dual cell entry mechanism can explain the high diffusion speed this virus exhibits and we strongly encourage a more accurate investigation of this observation.a dataset of protein-protein complexes experimentally solved in x-ray crystallography is taken from [25] .we only selected pair interactions regarding chains with more than 50 residues. the protein-protein dataset is therefore composed by 4634 complexes.• complex between sars-cov spike protein and human ace receptor: pdb code 6acj.• complex between sars-cov-2 spike protein and human ace receptor: pdb code 6m17.• complex between mers spike protein and sialic acid: pdb code 6q07.• unbound sars-cov spike protein: pdb code 6crv.• unbound sars-cov-2 spike protein: modeled by i-tasser server [42] .we use dms [43] to compute the solvent accessible surface for all proteins structure, given their x-ray structure in pdb format [44] , using a density of 5 points per a 2 and a water probe radius of 1.4å. the unit normals vector, for eac point of the surface was calculated using the flag −n.given a molecular surface described as a set of point in a three dimensional cartesian space, and a region of interest on this surface, we define a surface patch, σ as the intersection of the region of interest and the surface. in principle, the region of interest can have an arbitrary shape, in this work we chose to use a spherical region having radius r s and one point of the surface as center (see figure 1a ). once the patch is selected, we fit a plane that passes though the points in σ, and we reorient the patch in such a way to have the z-axis perpendicular to the plane and going through the center of the plane. then given a point c on the z-axis we define the angle θ as the largest angle between the perpendicular axis and a secant connecting c to any point of the surface σ. c is then set in order that θ = 45 • . r is the distance between c and a surface point. we then build a square grid, and we associate each pixel with the mean r of the points inside it. this 2d function can be expanded in the basis of the zernike polynomials: the norm of the coefficients of this expansion constitute the zernike invariant descriptors, which are invariant under rotation in the space. in the next section we provide a brief summary of the main features of the zernike basis. there are several good reviews, like [45] that offer more detailed discussions. a schematic representation of the procedure is shown in figure 1b -d.given a function f (r, φ) (polar coordinates) defined inside the region r < 1 (unitary circle), it is possible to represent the function in the zernike basis aswith c nm = (n + 1) π z nm |f = = (n + 1) π 1 0 drr 2π 0 dφz * nm (r, φ)f (r, φ). (2) being the expansion coefficients. the zernike polynomials are complex functions, composed by a radial and an angular part,where the radial part for a certain couple of indexes, n and m, is given byin general, for each couple of polynomials, one finds that z nm |z n m = π (n + 1) δ nn δ mm (5) which ensures that the polynomials can form a basis and knowing the set of complex coefficients, {c nm } allows for a univocal reconstruction of the original image (with a resolution that depends on the order of expansion, n = max(n)). we found that n = 20, which corresponds to a number of coefficient of 121, allows for a good visual reconstruction of the original image.by taking the modulus of each coefficient (z nm = |c nm |), a set of descriptors can be obtained which have the remarkable feature of being invariant for rotations around the origin of the unitary circle.the shape similarity between two patches can then be assessed by comparing the zernike invariants of their associated 2d projections. in particular, the similarity between patch i and j is measured as the euclidean distance between the invariant vectors, i.e.when comparing patches, the relative orientation of the patches before the projection in the unitary circle must be evaluated. intuitively, if we search for similar regions we must compare patches that have the same orientation once projected in the 2d plane, i.e. the solvent exposed part of the surface must be oriented in the same direction for both patches, for example as the positive z-axis. if instead we want to assess the complementarity between two patches, we must orient the patches contrariwise, i.e. one patch with the solvent-exposed part toward the positive z-axis ('up') and the other toward the negative z-axis ('down').the velocity of the procedure that from a patch in the 3d surface produces the set of invariant descriptors, allows for a vast screening of couples of surfaces in order to look for both similar and also complementary regions. in order to identify the binding region given a couple of proteins, we can associate to each point of one surface a vector of zernike invariants associate to the 'up' patch having that point as center and another set of invariants to each point of the other surface ( with 'down' orientation). then for each point i of say, protein 1, we can compute the euclidean distance with all the points of the other surface associated to protein 2 and associate to point i the minimum found distance and viceversa for protein 2 (see figure 1e -f). a smoothing process of the surface point values is applied in order to highlight the signal in the regions characterized mostly by low distance values (high shape complementarity).conformations, which is also observed in the other coronaviruses 4 . in the closed conformation, all three rbds are buried at the interface between three protomers, whereas in the open conformation one of rbds rotates up and therefore is primed for binding to ace2. in addition, wrapp et al. demonstrate that the open conformation represents a predominant state of the spike protein trimer 2 .how does rbd of the sars-cov-2 spike protein binds to the human receptor ace2? the studies by shang et al., lan et al., and yan et al. illuminate the atomic-resolution details of this interaction [5] [6] [7] (fig. 1c) . of note, ace2 normally functions to promote the maturation of angiotensin hormone which controls blood pressure. aberrant ace2 levels have been linked to cardiovascular diseases 8 and may play a role in disease severity observed in covid-19 patients with comorbid conditions, such as heart, blood, and lung diseases and diabetes. yan et al. describe a cryo-em structure of the complex of full length human ace2 with rbd from the sars-cov-2 spike protein and suggest that two spike protein trimers can simultaneously bind to an ace2 dimer 7 .the precise binding interface of the sars-cov-2 spike rbd and ace2 can be dissected from the crystal structures of the complex determined by shang et al. and lan et al 5, 6 (fig. 1d) . analyzing the structure, shang et al. uncovered several hotspots that distinguish binding of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov 5 . the authors found that overall, the rbd-ace2 interface in the sars-cov-2 complex is larger than the binding interface in the sars-cov complex. rbd of sars-cov-2 forms more contacts with ace2, including three additional intermolecular salt bridges, involving q493 and g496 of rbd and k31, e35, and k353 of ace2 (dashed lines in fig. 1d ). the receptor-binding ridge of rbd in the sars-cov-2 complex adopts a more compact conformation, allowing an adjacent loop to move closer to ace2 and f486 of rbd to insert in the hydrophobic pocket of ace2. these structural differences could account for the 4-to 20-fold increase in binding affinity of the sars-cov-2 spike rbd toward ace2 compared to that of sars-cov, which was observed independently by several groups 2,4-6 .analysis of the crystal structures of rbd from the sars-cov spike protein in complex with established sars-cov neutralizing human m396 and 80r antibodies reveals that the antibodies are bound in the same binding site as ace2 9,10 , implying that their neutralizing mechanism is a direct blockage of receptor binding. lan et al. estimate that 7 out of 21 epitope residues for m396 and 16 out of 25 epitope residues for 80r are not conserved in rbd sequences of sars-cov and sars-cov-2, which may explain the lack of appreciable cross-reactivity for these antibodies 6 . interestingly, a recent structure of rbd from the sars-cov-2 spike protein bound to another antibody isolated from a sars patient, cr3022, determined by yuan et al. shows that cr3022 targets an epitope distal from the ace2-binding site, which may provide some cross-reactivity that needs to be thoroughly evaluated 11 .what are other therapeutic targets beyond the receptorbinding domain of the sars-cov-2 spike protein? proteolytic cleavage of the sars-cov-2 spike protein by the human serine protease tmprss2 is a critical step in the virus entry through the plasma membrane fusion mechanism (fig. 2) , as shown by hoffmann et al. 12 . the authors demonstrate that camostat mesylate, a clinically proven serine protease inhibitor that halts tmprss2 activity, blocks sars-cov-2 infection of lung cells 12 . following binding to ace2 and disassociation of the ace2bound s 1 subunit, the s 2 subunit of the spike protein-still attached to the virus envelope through its c-terminal transmembrane domain and additionally cleaved at the s 2 ′ siteinserts the cleaved terminus into the host cell plasma membrane and thus physically links both viral and cell membranes. this allows the heptad repeats (hr1 and hr2) of the s 2 subunit to interact and assemble into a six-helix bundle, which is needed to bring the membranes closer to each other for final fusion. xia et al. now show that ek1c4, a lipopeptide that targets heptad repeats, is a potent inhibitor of sars-cov-2 fusion in cellular assays and in a mouse model 13 . by using human clinical-grade recombinant soluble ace2, monteil et al. reduced sars-cov-2 viral growth by over 10 3fold in vero cells and suppressed infection in engineered human blood vessel organoids and kidney organoids 14 .in addition to targeting components of the viral attachment and the membrane fusion machinery, other strategies to eliminate sars-cov-2 include impeding virus entry into the host cell through the endosomal pathway and disrupting activities of viral proteins. ou or cathepsin l by apilimod, tetrandrine, or sid 26681509, respectively, reduces host cell entry 3 . once inside the host cell, viral rna uses the host ribosomal machinery to produce important for its own life cycle proteins that also serve as attractive targets for the development of anti-sars-cov-2 therapeutics. one of such proteins is the sars-cov-2 main protease m pro , which is required for processing the polyproteins translated from the viral rna. inhibition of the m pro activity impedes viral replication, and the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 m pro in complex with the α-ketoamide inhibitor provides the mechanistic details necessary to advance in this direction 15 .the speed by which structural information on the sars-cov-2 virus has been collected is astonishing. structural approaches will likely contribute to drug discoveries and validation and aid in the development of vaccines to reduce and eventually eliminate the ongoing public health emergency. an outbreak of a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome cov-2 (or sars cov-2 or covid- 19) infection is threatening the humanity, globally occurring from last week of december 2019. as a result, a massive loss of human health status and global economy are becoming unaccountable. as of current situation, sars cov-2 claimed more than 40,000 lives from more than 800,000 infected persons globally [1] . the outbreak started from the wuhan province of china and spread more than 195 countries with most adverse effects in china, italy, iran, spain, the united states, france, germany, britain and several other countries.any type of therapeutic strategies starting from the blocking of viral entry, inhibition of spike proteins association with host ace-2 (angiotensin converting enzyme type 2), modulations of interfering kinase activity, inactivation of viral genome expression-packaging and vaccination against this virus is the demand of the present situation. regarding the vaccination strategies, it is assumed that frequent mutation results in anomalies in its surface/ spike proteins [2, 3] . mostly resembling the features of sars cov global outbreak (2003, https://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/) , this virus unlikely manifested it's extremely high grade of virulence, spreading capability and stability across the geographical barrier (or specifically colder place, aged persons or specific genders; yet to be clarified) [4] .the positive selective pressure could account for the stability and some clinical features of this virus compared with sars and bat sars-like cov [5] . stabilizing mutation falling in the endosome-associated-protein-like domain of the nsp2 protein could account for covid-2019 high ability of contagious, while the destabilizing mutation in nsp3 proteins could suggest a potential mechanism differentiating covid-2019 from sars cov [5] . nevertheless, nutritional and immunological statuses are also important factors for the screening of the therapeutic strategies for the affected and sensitive persons. possible medications or immunizations from the existing drugs or infusion of convalescent plasma should be conducted with utmost care to the covid 19 patients [6] . advanced precautionary steps and therapeutic interventions should be formulated taking into account of several personal and community factors [7] . development of a successful and reproducible vaccination protocol and its human trial may take longer time for the issues of mutation and large number glycan shield and epitope masking on the sars cov 2 proteins [8] .in a series of medication regimen, 1 (at1r) blockers is used for reducing the severity and mortality from sars-cov-2 virus infections [9] . chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are now being prescribed somewhere to fight covid-19 for the time being [10, 11] . human coronaviruses and other influenza viruses resulted in epidemic in last 2 decade in different parts of the world. the anomalies between severity and spreading between the origin site, china and the other parts of the world (european and north america countries) might have some indication. common human covs may have annual peaks of circulation in winter months in the us, and individual human covs may show variable circulation from year to year. [12] colder climate and prior exposure to other human coronaviruses, or influenza or flu viruses or possible vaccination against those might develop antibody dependent enhancement (ade) of immunological responses during recent sars cov-2 exposure. ade might have modulated immune response and could elicit sustained inflammation, lymphopenia, and/or cytokine storm [13, 14] . possibly, that could be one of the reasons (more history of exposure with covs beside weaker immune system) for older people being more affected by the present sars cov-2. moreover, both helper t cells and suppressor t cells in patients with covid-19 were below normal levels. the novel coronavirus might mainly act on lymphocytes, especially t lymphocytes [15] . strong inflammatory events could be the initiator of the collapsing environment during covid-19 infection. in most of the death cases in covid-19 infections, acute respiratory failure is followed by other organs like kidney anomalies. in these cases inflammatory outburst might have worsened the infection and post viral-incubation situations [16, 17] . recent studies in experimentally infected animal strongly suggest a crucial role for virus-induced immunopathological events in causing fatal pneumonia after human cov infections [18] . so, combined anti-viral and anti-inflammatory treatment might be beneficial in these cases [19] . sars-based available immune-therapeutic and prophylactic modalities revealed poor efficacy to neutralize and protect from infection by targeting the novel spike protein. [20] .in this background, critical screening of the spike sequence and structure from sars cov-2 by energetic and ic50 based immunoinfrmatics analysis may help to develop a suitable vaccine. so, in the current study we were intended to analyze the spike proteins of sars cov, mers cov and sars cov 2 and four other earlier out-breaking human corona virus strains.we critically compared sars cov and sars cov 2 spike-proteins, domains, motifs and screened several epitopes based on their energetics, ic50 and antigenicity employing several bio/immuuno -informatics software with regard to their possible glycosylation and mhc/paratopic binding effects. the present work might be helpful for the urgent development of a suitable vaccination regimen. tertiary structures of selected coronavirus (cov) spike proteins were predicted/ validated using phyre2, protein homology/analogy recognition engine v 2.0 [22] and swiss-model [23] . in phyre2 structures were predicted against 100,000 experimentally designed protein folds.predicted structures were subjected to analysis in swiss-model for qmean z-score calculation which includes cumulative z-score of cβ, all atoms, solvation and torsion values prediction. rampage: ramachandran plot analysis server [24] was used for protein 3d structures quality assessment. the summation of number of residues in favored regions and in additionally allowed regions was considered for percent (%) quality assessment.predicted tertiary structures were visualized and aligned using pymol molecular visualization system. pymol assigns the secondary structure using a secondary structure alignment algorithm called "dss", where the sequences of two structures were aligned first then the structures were aligned. for the visualization of molecules a high-speed ray-tracer molecular graphics system was used.secondary structural analysis and their 3d folding patterns were analyzed in the form of topology using profunc; a protein function predicting server using protein 3d structures [25] . in protein classification, topology analysis plays an independent and effective alternative to traditional structural prediction. topological differences between two structures indicated differences in protein folding and flexibility.sequence comparisons among selected cov spike glycoproteins were conducted through multiple sequence alignment using clustal x2 [26] . conserved motifs were identified using meme suite (http://meme.sdsc.edu/meme/cgi-bin/mast.cgi) server. meme suite represents the ungapped conserved sequences which are frequently present in a group of related sequences. the 7 motif number has been defined in the current study for motif finding. whereas, glam2scan tools was used for the identification of gapped motifs within the related sequences. conserved motifs were represented through logo using glam2scan tools of meme suite server.identified motifs were subjected to annotation using protein blast (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast.cgi?program=blastp&page_type=blastsearch&link_loc= blasthome) and finally functional gene ontology based conserved domain identification was conducted using interpro: classification of protein families interactive database [27] .conserved epitopes of sars cov-2 spike glycoprotein were identified using svmtrip:a tool which predicts linear antigenic epitopes [28] . svmtrip predicts the linier antigenic epitopes by feeding support vector machine with the tri-peptide similarity and propensity scores of different pre-analyzed epitope data. annotation of predicted epitopes was performed through protein blast. svmtrip have gained 80.1% sensitivity and 55.2% precision value with five fold cross-validation. for epitope prediction 20 amino acid lengths was selected.the major histocompatibility complex (mhc) binding efficiency of predicted epitops was performed using immune epitope database (iedb) and analysis resource [29] . a total of 5 dpa, 6 dqa and 662 drb alleles from mhc class ii were screened for the detection of best interactive alleles on the basis of highest consensus percentile rank and lowest ic50 value. all the analyses were performed on human class ii allele, using frequently occurring alleles (frequency > 1%), peptide length of 9mers was selected; consensus percentile rank ≤ 1 was used for the selection of peptides.antigenecity of predicted epitopes were determined using vaxigen v2.0 protective antigen, tumour antigens and subunit vaccines prediction server [30] . vaxigen v2.0 uses auto cross covariance (acc) transformation of selected protein sequences based on unique amino acid properties. each sequence was used to find out 100 known antigen and 100 non-antigens.the identified sequences were tested for antigenecity by leave-one-out cross-validation and overall external validation. the prediction accuracy was up to 89%.the structure of mhc class ii hla-dra, drb molecule (pdb id: 2q6w, 5jlz) and fully glycosylated covid 19 spike protein structure (pdb id: 6svb) was retrieved from protein data bank (pdb) and docking was performed using hawkdock [31] and zdock [32] server generating 100 docking solutions. among them best 10 were analyzed based on docking scores and binding free energy value calculation.the higher degree of similarity between sars cov and sars cov-2 might indicate and help in the therapeutic and vaccination strategies with reference to the current global situation.however, an absolute higher degree of virulence and spreading nature of sars cov-2 is of great concern in the present scenario. based on the alignment pattern, selected sequences were subjected to analysis different conserved motifs in the protein sequences. a total of 7 conserved motifs were analyzed ( the epitope designing was conducted only with the covid 19 spike glycoprotein sequence and structure. from the sequence analysis, 10 different locations were found which also showed similarity with sars cov and sars covid 2 spike glycoprotein in protein blast (figure 4) . also the motif positions within the spike glycoprotein monomer were represented in figure 4 . epitopes 1, 4 and 5 were not represented in covid 19 spike glycoproteins, as they were found to be embedded within the virus envelop. among the others, motifs 2, 3, 6 and 7 were found at the interior location of spike glycoprotein monomer but motifs 8, 9 and 10 were found at the surface of the structure, which could be used as the immunological targets for the proper diagnosis and treatment of covid 19. the important issue of epitope finalization could be confronted by the factor of possible transition between pre-fusion and postfusion spike structural distortion. specific mutant structure has been designed and tested to be resistant to conformational change after ace2 binding and protease cleavage at the s1/s2 site [34] . this may be indicative to searching suitable epitope which may remain unhindered from pre-to post-fusion state transition.the proper type of major histocompatibility complex (mhc) selection for identified covid 19 epitope was performed and enlisted in table 3 ). the threshold value of highest consensus percentile rank was selected as 10 for all. as a whole, highest consensus percentile rank value of 10 was observed for sequence qqliraaeirasanl (epitope 3a) and lowest ic50 value of 7.11 was observed for sequence iiaytmslgaensva (epitope 8b).the antigenic property of identified target sequences from epitopes was also predicted on the basis of threshold value of 0.4. below the threshold value, the sequence has been considered as non-antigenic and sequences with above value were antigenic in nature. a total of 9 antigenic sequences were detected (table 3) , among them two sequences aaeirasanlaatkm (epitope 3b) and itpgtntsnqvavly (epitope 10b) were found with higher threshold value of 0.7125 and 0.7193 respectively. as the location of 3b was more interior 10b could be used as potent antigen. according to epitope locations ( figure 4 ) and antigenic nature, other sequences like 8a&b, 9a&b could be the target also.coronavirus spike proteins are glycosylated in nature where n-acetyl glucosamine (nag) is the main component. glycan shielding and possible epitope masking of an hcov-nl63 has been observed which may be the barrier for proper immunogenic responses [8] .comparative analysis between glycosylated and non-glycosylated protein revealed some structural modification at the epitope locations. among the identified epitopes 10b with sequence itpgtntsnqvavly (598-612) was found with n linked glycosylation at 603 position. the structural modification of this epitope was analyzed using non-glycosylated protein structure of covid 19 (acc. no.: nc_045512.2:21563-25384) and gltcosylated covid 19protein (pdb id: 6vsb). effect of glycosylation on protein structures revealed that glycosylated conformation was more organised (figure 5a ) than non-glycosylated one (figure 5b ). secondary structural comparison between two epitopes showed more organised structure with attached nag residue (figure 5d ) whereas a shorter β-sheet structure was observed when nag is removed from the structure (figure 5c ). the peptide interactive site of 10b epitope was blocked due to nag attachment. as a result of which antibody binding to the antigen may hamper. the nag residue directly binds with n or asn amino acid residue (figure 5e ). so the removal of nag from the spike glycoprotein structure is difficult. structural distortion between glycosylated and non-glycosylated epitope 10b at tertiary level indicated that removal of nag may distort the structure of epitope (figure 5f ). again that may hamper the proper antigenantibody binding.in this section energetics of epitope attachment with mhc class ii hla-dra, drb was determined in presence and absence of nag at the 10b epitope structure through molecular docking ( figure 6 ). docking results showed that without nag, the binding efficiency of 10b though, epitope 8 a & b were also present at the surface of the spike glycoprotein but was found to wrapped with a short segment igaehvnnsyecd (651-663) carrying a glycosylation at n residue position 657 (figure 7a ). as a result of which antibody accessibility to this epitope may also be difficult. whereas, surface epitope 9 with sequence vrdpqtleilditpc (576-590) showed highest antigenecity of 1.1285 (table 3) can recombine to gain entry into human cells are the points also to be noted [35] . sars cov-2 induced severe and often lethal lung failure is caused due to its inhibition of ace-2 expression [36] . so, keeping the ace-2 normal functioning but blocking viral entry is the most challenging issue right now. possible suitable epitope as screened in the current study may be helpful in this global pandemic situation. the history of last two decades' outbreak of these types of virus is very much evident. the present situation justifies further advanced studies with proper infrastructure and fund-resources facilities at a global scale to eradicate current or any possible future outbreak. position of epitope 9 in covid 19 spike protein with no direct or indirect nag attachment, pdb id: 6svb (b). among 10 best docking positions, 8 were found in epitope presenting site of mhc ii hla-drb1, pdb id: 5jlz (c). the best docking posture of epitope 9 with mhc ii hla-drb1 (d) and its specific interaction pattern (e).in early december 2019, a sudden and dramatic outbreak of a new coronavirus strain, named sars-cov-2, emerged in the continental chinese area of wuhan and quickly diffused throughout the country. to date, several cases of viruses were reported in europe and in the us. the sars-cov-2 is strongly infectious, with more than 81,000 infected people and around 3000 deaths reported within three months from the virus appearance (update on 14th of april: more than 1.9 milion of confirmed cases and about 120 thousands deaths reported). the rapid spread of the new virus reveals that the mechanism of diffusion is somehow different from that of filoviridae, (i.e., ebolavirus) [1] . the viral pathogenesis results in symptoms like fever, acute pneumonia, and, eventually, respiratory failure. the death rate, the long time needed for a full recovery, and the co-morbidity associated with viral infection (i.e., in advanced age or particular life stages, such as pregnancy) result in a major threat to global health [2] .in this scenario, the need for a cure appears to be extremely urgent. the main strategy against the diffusion of viruses is represented by the development of specific vaccines. however, the complexity of viruses and their ability to mutate and adapt to new host organisms belonging to other species has also led to different therapeutic approaches aimed to interfere with the viral life cycle or with processes essential for membrane fusion or replication [3, 4] . furthermore, computational chemistry represents a fundamental tool in the screening of applicable drugs [5] . the computational approach can also represent a tool for physicians and healthcare professionals to operate a first decision on the best therapy to administrate at first instance.coronaviruses are single-stranded rna enveloped viruses [6, 7] , whose genes encode, among others, for a trimeric structural spike protein, a homodimeric cysteine proteinase [8] , an rna polymerase, and several nonstructural proteins (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/nc_045512) [9] .from a phylogenetic point of view, the genetic similarities shared by sars-cov-2 and the 2002 sars coronavirus strain (sars-cov; they both belong to the so-called beta cov group) and other bat-isolated coronaviruses strains have already been underlined, with more than 96% gene identity [7, 10, 11] . the alignment of spike protein and protease showed an analogy in primary sequences of more than 75% [6, 10] and 96%, respectively [6, 12] .proteases and spike proteins are targets of choice for inhibition of sars and mers [13] [14] [15] [16] , and several efforts have been made to develop inhibitors of their activities, by using both virtual screening or experimental methods [5, 15] .in this work, we present the results obtained for sars-cov-2 spike protein and 3c-like protease by molecular docking of several inhibitors originally developed for antiviral therapy against other viruses, such as the hepatitis c virus (hcv) and the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv). thirteen proteinase inhibitors from anti-hiv and anti-hcv drugs were investigated, along with three different compounds for spike protein inhibition. despite the different viral strains for which these drugs were originally developed, we aim to investigate whether they could also have an affinity for the sars-cov-2. the use of antivirals that are already available in the therapy against the new virus would be a huge advantage in the fight of this battle, and a first step can eventually arise from bioinformatic analysis, which could provide information about their potential effectiveness. indeed, our in silico data suggest that an effective interaction occurs for some of the tested molecules.these results represent a promising starting point for antiviral therapies that are alternative or coadjuvant to the vaccination strategy.protein sequences were obtained from the curated genomic sequence deposited at the gene database with id number nc_045512 and were verified against sars-cov (id: nc_004718.3) [17] : the 3c-like protease (id: yp_009725301.1), the envelope spike protein (id: yp_009724390.1), the rna-dependent rna-polymerase (id: yp_009725307.1), and the nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (id: yp_009724397.2) were selected.the set of antiviral drugs was taken from the influenza research database (fludb.org). potential inhibitors of sars-cov-2 protease were identified among all the anti-protease drugs in the mentioned database: asunaprevir (db11586), nelfinavir (db00220), simeprevir (db06290), faldaprevir (db11808), indinavir (db00224), ritonavir (db00503), amprenavir (db00701), tipranavir (db00932), atazanavir (db01072), saquinavir (db01232), darunavir (db01264), fosamprenavir (db01319), lopinavir (db01601). furthermore, three molecules were chosen for the spike protein: umifenovir (db13609), enfuvirtide (db00109), and pleconaril (db05105).the software openbabel [18] was used to convert the smiles code of each molecule into a 3d structural file. the three-dimensional structure of enfuvirtide was taken from the available crystallographic structure (pdb id 3h00, chain a).the homology model was performed with the itasser server giving as input the sequences obtained from the sars-cov-2 genomic sequence. model structures were energy minimized before the docking protocol by performing a short in vacuum 500 step steepest-descent optimization of the potential energy using gromacs tools [19] .autodock vina [20] was used to perform molecular docking of the antiviral drugs onto sars-cov-2 protease and envelope protein. regarding the protease, residues 41, 46, 140, 142, 145, 163, 166, 168, 189 were set as flexibles during the binding mode search [21] . about 3c-like protease, the binding box was centered on the coordinates of residue met165, and its volume fully encompassed the whole binding pocket. for the spike envelope glycoprotein, the box used for the search of binding modes was centered on the position of the center of mass of val503 side-chain and restrained to the area above the extracellular head of the trimeric protein in the pre-fusion conformation.in the following paragraphs, we will analyze and discuss the key properties of putative target proteins from sars-cov-2 in comparison with their homologs from sars-cov. we will focus in particular on four proteins: the main 3c-like protease, the spike envelope glycoprotein, the rna-dependent rna-polymerase (rdrp), the nucleocapsid protein.the 3c-like protein is the main protease of sars-cov-2. it plays a fundamental role in rna translation and, thus, as already underlined, is essential for viral replication [12] . in the mature form, it is found as a dimer. each monomer is formed by three structural pseudo-domains: domain i (residues 8-101), domain ii (residues 102-184), which share an antiparallel β-barrel structure, and domain iii (residues 201-303), which contains a five-fold antiparallel α-helix cluster [22, 23] . the binding site for substrates is located in a cleft region between domains i and ii, and the catalytic region is formed by the dyad his41-cys145 that is highly conserved among the coronavirus proteases and is also reminiscent of the trypsin-like serine proteases [22] .importantly, 3cpro-19 from sars-cov-2 shares a high similarity with its sars-cov homolog [24] , and only very few residues are substituted with respect to the sars counterpart: thr35val, ala46ser, ser94ala, lys180asn, ala267ser, thr285ala. most of these residues are distant from the protease active site and are unlikely related to selectivity against this protease ( figure 1a) . nonetheless, two of these mutations, lys180asn and ala46ser, are located in the deep hydrophobic pocket below the active site and in the loop region flanking the entrance of the active site. although in the available crystallographic structure, lys180asn results to be located too far to directly contribute to ligand binding, its presence extends the hydrophobic inner region. conversely, the ser46 seems to be relatively distant from the his41 active site (11 å) and may have a role in ligand recruitment ( figure 1b ).although a crystallographic structure of 3clike protease of sars-cov-2 in complex with a peptide-like inhibitor (pdb id: 6lu7) was made very recently available in the protein data bank, this structure clearly shows a closed binding pocket around the inhibitor. while very useful to identify the residues involved in the inhibitory action, this configuration is not very well suited for molecular docking as it may limit the effectiveness of the pose searching methods. for this reason, we preferred to model the three-dimensional structure of the protease using a homology modeling protocol, excluding the complexed covid-19 protease among the target structures. the structure obtained from the itasser server showed a very good alignment score (tm-score 0.993) against the apo structure of sars-cov main protease (pdb id: 5b6o). interestingly, the root-mean-squared deviation (rmsd) of the model structure from the available crystallographic structure sars-cov-2 protease is as low as 1.3 å, and it is mostly due to differences in the binding pocket and loop conformations. the main results obtained from the docking protocol are shown in table 1 . protease drug recognitions are usually driven by hydrophobic interactions [24, 25] , and figure 2 clearly shows how all the four best scoring ligands indeed thoroughly fill the hydrophobic pockets that flank the catalytic dyad. surprisingly, the well-known hcv ns3/4a protease inhibitor simeprevir [26] was identified as the best scoring drug with a significant difference with respect to some of the most promising inhibitors of sars-cov-2 protease identified, such as lopinavir [27] and nelfinavir [28] .simeprevir fully fills two hydrophobic pockets flanking the catalytic dyad his41-cys145: the macrocyclic compound fits in the pocket formed by residues in the range phe181-phe185, while the acyl sulfonamide cyclopropyl moiety points towards the region encompassing leu27, pro39, and val42. this pose induces the opening of the catalytic dyad. indeed, his41-cys145 changes from 3 å, in the apo configuration, to 7.3 å in the inhibited form. simeprevir binding to sars-cov-2 protease is also sustained by three hydrogen bonds that anchor the ligand to the binding pocket: two of them link the amide backbone of glu166 and gly143 to the carbonyl o in the macrocycle and to the acyl sulfonamide cyclopropyl moiety, respectively. a third hydrogen bond is formed between the n of the asn142 side chain and the ether group. a detailed structural representation of the interacting residues is shown in figure 3a . these findings may appear rather surprising, as the hcv main protease shares very low similarity with the sars-cov-2 homolog (7.5%). nonetheless, the two proteases share a very similar topology of the active site except for the hydrophobic loop phe181-phe185 which is structurally absent in the hcv protease (figure 3b) . the so-called spike protein (or s protein) of sars-cov-2 is present within the envelope as a homotrimer, like in the case of other enveloped viruses. each monomer features an ectodomain, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic tail. inhibitors are typically designed to interact with the upper part of the protein, to interfere with the host membrane binding, and with the fusogenic activity of the protein.several experimentally obtained structures for the multimeric conformation of sars-cov spike protein are available (pdb: 5wrg, 5 × 58, 5xlr). homology model structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein was obtained from the itasser server. global pairwise sequence alignment indicated that sars-cov-2 spike protein shares about 76% of its primary sequence with its sars-cov homolog with an overall similarity of 87%. these few differences project into a slightly different negative/positive residue ratio (115/99 in sars-cov and 110/103 in sars-cov-2) and a slightly less acidic pi (5.6 for sars-cov, 6.2 for sars-cov-2).interestingly, while this work was in progress, the electron microscopy structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein in its oligomeric pre-fusion inactive structure with a single receptor-binding domain up was made available by another group (pdb id: 6vsb) [29] . unfortunately, a thorough direct comparison of our model structure with these experimental data is impaired by the different global configuration of the two trimeric structures ("down"-inactive vs. "up"-active conformations). however, as the experimental structure shows only one monomer in the "up"-state, a comparison can be performed in a monomer-based manner. the rmsd between "down"-state monomers in the two structures is as low as 1.17 å for residues with the same secondary structure assignments and 6 å overall. it is worth noting here that in the pre-fusion state, the "down" inactive conformation is significantly more stable than the "up"-conformations [30] [31] [32] . these findings confirm the quality of the homology model and its suitability for docking studies.visual inspection of the electrostatic potential of the "down"-inactive conformation of sars-cov-2 spike protein (figure 4a,b) shows that while the inner part of the protein that is proximal to the viral envelope is negatively charged, the protein head is clearly characterized by a positive electrostatic potential. this picture is rather different from one from sars-cov (figure 4c,d) and, thus, it suggests an important property to which tailor future inhibitors.the docking of three different inhibitors was performed on the spike protein. as the inhibitors are expected to block the membrane binding, we limited the docking search region to the area around the protein head in its pre-fusion "down" configuration. moreover, due to the large size of the protein and to limit the computational cost, we performed a rigid docking of the inhibitors against the target multimeric protein.autodock vina was used to identify the best binding pose of three different drugs: umifenovir (db13609), enfuvirtide (db00109), and pleconaril (db05105). the results are shown in table 2 . interestingly, upon binding, enfuvirtide interacts with spike protein (whose cap is mainly positively charged) through its negatively charged amino acids (several glutamate residues).as opposed to enfuvirtide (figure 5a) , which inhibits the viral spike protein action upon host membrane by interposing itself and avoiding contact between the protein and the cellular membrane, the other two drugs docked at the entrance of the central channel pore formed by the trimeric structure (figure 5b,c) . viral polymerases share seven highly conserved motifs that are essentially involved in the nucleotide-binding and catalysis of rna replication. they are huge, complex structures, which act in association with several non-structural proteins [33] .global pairwise sequence between sars-cov-2 rdrp and its sars-cov counterpart shows a large sequence identity shared by the two proteins (94%) with also a very high similarity (96%). the analysis of rdrp and rna primer complex displays that the rna-interacting residues are conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (in red in figure 6a ). the viral nucleocapsid protein (n protein) interacts with the viral genome and forms the ribonucleoprotein core. it is now well-known that this protein plays different roles in the viral infection, as it is involved in the synthesis of viral rna, in the transcription of genomic rna, and in the translation of viral proteins [34] .coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins share a general structural pattern composed of three distinct domains: an n-terminal domain (~130 residues), which is suggested to bind rna, a central domain (~120 residues), which is also predicted to recognize rna, and finally the c-terminal domain, which drives the protein dimerization. although a complete structure of the nucleocapsid protein is not available for sars-cov, a local structural comparison can be performed by structure superposition of sars-cov-2 model structure with n-terminal and central domain in the sars counterparts ( figure 7) . sequence pairwise alignment of sars-cov-2 n protein against its sars-cov homolog shows a very high identity in primary structure (91%), with an overall similarity of 94%.the modeling and superimposition of protease structure with the homologous sars virus protease show very little differences, although pivotal for the function. the few residues different in sars-cov-2 protease assimilate the protein to a sort of site-directed mutant of sars protease (figure 1) . the spike protein structure shows an upper, trimeric cap supported by a stem domain, with remarkable differences in terms of charge, with a mainly positive ectodomain and a strongly negative stem domain (figure 4) .in this respect, stimulated by the important results in clinical trials of patients treated with antiretroviral agents [35, 36] , we extended the investigation by a computational inspection of many different drugs, and we chose a selection of most common antiviral drugs to display the probable molecular reasons of their efficacy in combined antiviral therapy. the drugs examined include the hiv-1 protease inhibitors, mostly used in combination with other antiviral drugs in the treatment of hiv in both adults and children. moreover, other antiviral drugs included in our screening show activity against the hepatitis c virus and good oral bioavailability. one of the antiviral drugs tested against sars-cov-2 envelope protein is enfuvirtide, an hiv fusion inhibitor used in combination therapy for the treatment of hiv-1 infection [37] . the second molecule tested is umifenovir, an antiviral agent with activity against influenza a-and b-viruses [38] . the last one is pleconaril [39] , used for prevention of asthma exacerbations and common cold symptoms in asthmatic subjects exposed to respiratory infections; pleconaril is orally bioavailable and active against picornaviridae viruses.the docking shows that 5 out of the 13 protease inhibitors are reported with a high-score in thermodynamic terms of a protein-drug complex [20] (table 1) , and may be selected as the future core of new antiviral drugs specific for sars-cov-2 protease.intriguingly, the docking of the spike protein shows interesting results for all the three drugs tested. notably, enfuvirtide is placed at the interface of two monomers; in this position, the molecule could impair the transition between closed and open state ( figure 4) .finally, it is worth mentioning that, currently, some of the drugs reported in table 1 are used with satisfying results in therapies for the treatment of sars-cov-2.the rna-dependent rna-polymerase (rdrp) is one of the most important proteins involved in the genetic information replication and transmission of the coronavirus family viruses. the function is accomplished by a multimeric complex of rdrp with non-structural proteins favoring a sort of "wrapping-and-scrolling" of the viral genome. the rdrp is very similar to the homologous of sars ( figure 6 ).the n-protein promotes the package of viral genome into a helical ribonucleocapsid and virion assembly, also interacting with membrane protein. consequently, n-protein plays an important role in viral rna transcription, as well as viral replication. the dimerization domains of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share a high similarity (figure 7) . the differences at protein structure level with the sars, the closest phylogenetic virus, are intriguing and contribute to characterize the peculiarity of sars-cov-2 from coronavirus and influenza virus belonging to an old-scenario of virology taxonomy.it is worth mentioning that several other groups are working on antiviral-based strategies to fight the new, big threat represented by sars-cov2; in some cases, patients were treated with some of the molecules chosen for our studies, i.e., ritonavir, lopinavir, umifenovir [27, [40] [41] [42] : these data strongly support and corroborate the results of our work.until now, the exacerbation of covid-19 diffusion has stimulated the researchers and medical personnel to find a solution for the treatment compatible with the arsenal of antiviral drugs currently available.at the same time in which we are closing the present manuscript, the numbers are more than 81,000 confirmed cases, around 3000 deaths, and a sensible increase of recovered people (30, 000) according to the coronavirus covid-19 global cases by johns hopkins csse interactive map (updated on 14th of april with more than 1.9 milion of confirmed cases and about 120 thousands deaths reported). the first line strategy of isolation, dramatic quarantine measurements, and clinical treatments may be a reasonable positive warrant to limit the spread of the virus.the four proteins taken into account are interesting molecular targets for the medicinal chemistry, mainly the protease and the envelope (or spike) protein.the antiviral drug therapy is an effective first-stage approach for treating covid-19 infections, and the present work could contribute to suggest to physicians the choice of the combination of antivirals to administer to patients alongside the hospitalization. obviously, our knowledge in terms of the general organization of the structure of the virus particle is limited now, but proteins like protease and spike are the primary molecular targets for drug discovery and development. in the near future, the availability of x-ray crystal structures of the majority of proteins will allow a more exhaustive docking calculation on different classes of drugs (e.g., antiparasitic drugs, peptides). the structural and computational studies and analysis are not subordinate but helpful for the comprehension of virus molecular elements and the right way to help the scientific community during the long process leading to developing a vaccine. coronaviruses (covs) are enveloped single-stranded positive sense rna viruses that belong to the family coronaviridae. on the basis of genomic organization and phylogenetic relationship, coronaviruses have been classified into the subfamily coronavirinae that consists of four genera alphacoronavirus (αcov), betacoronavirus (βcov), gammacoronavirus (γcov), and deltacoronavirus (δcov) (cui et al. 2019) . evolutionary trend analysis of coronaviruses has revealed that αcov and βcov originated from bats and rodents, while γcov and δcov were found to have originated from avian species (ge et al. 2017) . the ability of covs to cross the species barrier has resulted in some of the pathogenic covs. hku1, nl63, oc43, and 229e covs are associated with mild symptoms in humans, whereas severe acute respiratory syndrome cov (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov) are known to cause severe disease (fehr and perlman 2015) . in 2002 in -2003 , sars-cov emerged in china with 8000 clinical cases and 800 deaths. since 2012, mers-cov has caused persistent epidemics in the arabian peninsula. both the viruses have been found to originate from bats and then transmitted into intermediate mammalian host civets in the case of sars-cov and camels in the case of mers-cov and eventually infected humans (song et al. 2019) .sars-cov-2 has been declared as a pandemic, with 1,844,683 confirmed cases and 117,021 deaths globally by 14th april 2020 (world health organization 2020). to characterize the novel coronavirus, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and throat swabs were collected from nine patients who had visited the wuhan seafood market during the initial outbreak. special pathogen-free human airway epithelial (hae) cells were used for virus isolation. the collected samples were inoculated into the hae cells through the apical surfaces. hae cells were monitored for cytopathic effects and supernatant was collected to perform rt-pcr assays. apical samples were collected for next generation sequencing after three passages. the whole-genome sequences of sars-cov-2 were generated by a combination of sanger, illumina, and oxford nanopore sequencing (lu et al. 2020) . phylogenetic analysis has revealed that bats might be at the source of sars-cov-2 (andersen et al. 2020) . additionally, some studies have suggested that the origin of sars-cov-2 is associated with pangolins shereen et al. 2020) . to decipher the mechanism of replication and development of effective preventive and therapeutic strategies, understanding the structure of sars-cov-2, genome organization, and replication is crucial. therefore this chapter focuses on the morphology and structure, genomic organization, and replication cycle of sars-cov-2.sars-cov-2 isolated from nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples were inoculated on the vero cells. in order to identify sars-cov-2, inoculated cells were prefixed using 2% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde, and transmission electron microscopy was performed. the structure of sars-cov-2 observed by examining infected cells after 3 days post infection. electron microscopy revealed the coronavirus-specific morphology of sars-cov-2 with virus particle sizes ranging from 70 to 90 nm observed under a wide variety of intracellular organelles, most specifically in vesicles (park et al. 2020 ). due to high sequence similarity, the structure of sars-cov-2 is speculated to be the same as sars-cov (kumar et al. 2020) . the surface viral protein spike, membrane, and envelope of coronavirus are embedded in host membrane-derived lipid bilayer encapsulating the helical nucleocapsid comprising viral rna ( fig. 3 .1) (finlay et al. 2004 ). the structure of spike ) and protease of sars-cov-2 (zhang et al. 2020) has been resolved, which provides an opportunity to develop a newer class of drugs for treatment of covid-19. the size of coronavirus genome is in the range of 26 to 32 kb and comprise 6-11 open reading frames (orfs) encoding 9680 amino acid polyproteins ). the first orf comprises approximately 67% of the genome that encodes 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps), whereas the remaining orfs encode for accessory and structural proteins. the genome of sars-cov-2 lacks the hemagglutininesterase gene. however, it comprises two flanking untranslated regions (utrs) at 5 0 end of 265 and 3 0 end of 358 nucleotides. sequence variation among sars-cov-2 and sars-cov revealed no significant difference in orfs and nsps. the nsps includes two viral cysteine proteases including papain-like protease (nsp3), chymotrypsin-like, 3c-like, or main protease (nsp5), rna-dependent rna polymerase (nsp12), helicase (nsp13), and others likely to be involved in the transcription and replication of sars-cov-2 (chan et al. 2020 ). in addition to nsps, four major structural proteins are spike surface glycoprotein (s), membrane, nucleocapsid protein (n), envelope (e) and accessory proteins encoded by orfs. n-terminal glycosylated ectodomain is present at the n-terminal end of m protein that comprises of three transmembrane domains (tm) and a long c-terminal ct domain ( fig. 3.2) .the m and e proteins are required for virus morphogenesis, assembly, and budding, whereas s glycoprotein is a fusion viral protein comprising two subunits s1 and s2. the s1 subunit, which shares 70% sequence identity with bat sars-like covs and human sars-cov, comprises signal peptide, n-terminal domain (ntd), and receptor-binding domain (rbd) (walls et al. 2020 ). most of the differences were found in the external subdomain that is primarily responsible for interaction of spike with the ace2 receptor. the ectodomain of spike protein (1-1208 amino acid residues) was cloned, expressed and crystallize to solve the spike glycoprotein structure of sars-cov-2. the structure of spike glycoprotein structure of sars-cov-2 resembles the spike protein of sars-cov with an rmsd of 3.8 å. the the first orf comprises of approximately 67% of the genome that encodes 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps), whereas the remaining orfs encode for accessory and structural proteins. the nsps includes two viral cysteine proteases, including papain-like protease (nsp3), chymotrypsin-like, 3c-like, or main protease (nsp5), rna-dependent rna polymerase (nsp12), helicase (nsp13), and others likely to be involved in the transcription and replication of sars-cov-2. in addition to nsps, the genome encodes for four major structural proteins including spike surface glycoprotein (s), membrane, nucleocapsid protein (n), envelope (e) and accessory proteins like orfs study also reveals that the receptor-binding region (rbd) exhibited the highest structural divergence (wrapp et al. 2020) . the s2 subunit that shares 99% sequence identity with bat sars-like covs and human sars-cov comprises two heptad repeat regions known as hr-n and hr-c, which form the coiled-coil structures surrounded by the protein ectodomain. the s protein has been found to exhibit a furin cleavage site (prrars'v) at the interface between s1 and s2 subunits that is processed during the biogenesis (coutard et al. 2020 ).entry of coronaviruses into host target cells depends on the binding of spike glycoprotein to the cellular receptor and priming of s protein by host cell proteases. like sars-cov, sars-cov-2 uses the ace2 receptor for internalization and tmprss2 serine proteases for s protein priming (hoffmann et al. 2020 ). similar to sars-cov, the extrapulmonary spread of sars-cov-2 may be seen due to the widespread tissue expression of the ace2 receptor. in addition, studies revealed that the spike protein of sars-cov-2 exhibits 10-20 times higher affinity as compared to that of sars-cov (wrapp et al. 2020) . binding of spike protein to the ace2 receptor results in conformational changes in spike protein that leads to the fusion of viral envelop protein with host cell membrane following entry via endosomal pathway (coutard et al. 2020; matsuyama and taguchi 2009 ). this event is followed by the release of viral rna into the host cytoplasm that undergoes translation and generates replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1b that further cleaved by virus encoded proteinases into small proteins. the replication of coronavirus involves ribosomal frame shifting during the translation process and generates both genomic and multiple copies of subgenomic rna species by discontinuous transcription that encodes for relevant viral proteins. assembly of virion takes place via interaction of viral rna and protein at endoplasmic reticulum (er) and golgi complex. these virions are subsequently released out of the cells via vesicles (fig. 3. 3) (hoffmann et al. 2020 ).the pathological findings of sars-cov-2 infected patients highly resemble that of sars-cov and mers-cov infected patients. flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood samples showed significant reduction of cd4 and cd8 t cell counts, and their status was found to be hyperactivated as higher proportion of dual positive (hla-dr and cd38) was seen. rapid progression of pneumonia was seen in chest x-ray images with some differences between the right and left lung. histopathological investigation of lung, liver, and heart tissue was performed. lung biopsy showed cellular fibromyxoid exudates with bilateral diffuse alveolar damage. the right lung showed prominent desquamation of pneumocytes and formation of hyaline membrane, indicating signs of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), whereas the left lung showed pulmonary edema with formation of hyaline membrane ). in addition, both lungs were found to exhibit interstitial mononuclear patchy inflammatory infiltrates dominated specifically by lymphocytes (tian et al. 2020 ). the intra-alveolar spaces were characterized by multinucleated syncytial cells with atypical enlarged pneumocytes showing virus-induced cytopathic effect. liver biopsy of patients infected with sars-cov-2 showed moderate microvesicular steatosis and mild portal and lobular activity, suggesting that injury might have been caused by the virus or drug induced. a few interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates were observed in the heart tissue. these pathological changes may provide new insights into the pathogenesis of pneumonia induced by sars-cov-2 that may help clinicians to effectively deal with covid-19 patients.phylogenetic analysis revealed that sars-cov-2 might have originated from bats or pangolins. structural investigations of virus-infected cells reveal the coronavirusspecific morphology of sars-cov-2 and the size of the virus (70-90 nm). the size of sars-cov-2 genome ranges from 26 to 32 kb and comprises 6-11 orfs which lacks hemagglutinin-esterase gene. however, it comprises of 5 0 and 3 0 flanking untranslated regions (utrs). the spike glycoprotein structure of sars-cov-2 resembles the spike protein of sars-cov with an rmsd of 3.8 å. like sars-cov, sars-cov-2 uses the ace2 receptor for internalization and tmprss2 serine proteases for s protein priming. histopathological investigation of tissues from sars-cov-2 infected patients showed virus-induced cytopathic effect with signs of acute respiratory distress syndrome in lung cells.sars-cov-2 has recently emerged and has been declared as a pandemic by the world health organization. based on the genomic sequences submitted to ncbi database, the scientific community has analyzed the samples and suggested preventive and therapeutic strategies. therefore, investigation of genomic diversity in the collected specimens from around the globe needs to be conducted in order to design common, effective therapies and vaccines. in addition, genomic characterization helps us accurately identify the origin and evolution of the virus. deciphering the mechanism of sars-cov-2 replication in various cell-based models may help us understand the pathogenesis and identify specific targets to develop effective antiviral drugs.numerous promising therapeutic [1, 2] or vaccine [3, 4] research efforts are underway for covid-19, yet a therapeutic or vaccine is not currently available. traditional drug and biologic development are experiment-driven, typically executed via large-scale screening in vitro and in vivo. while traditional approaches have led to many effective and safe therapeutics, they require years to complete and therefore cannot alone be relied upon to support a rapid response to novel pathogens [5] [6] [7] .data-driven (machine learning) methods are increasingly being explored for rapid therapeutic development [8, 9] , potentially offering the promise of a very rapid design phase. however, a purely data-driven machine learning system would be limited in rapid response scenarios due to the inevitable insufficiency of available data on novel or emerging pathogens. theory-driven computational methods, such as molecular dynamics simulations, can provide virtually limitless amounts of data for target systems, but still require experimental validation.lawrence livermore national laboratory (llnl) and glaxosmithkline (gsk) vaccines research have developed a combined computational-experimental platform for vaccine antigen design over the last two years. this combined platform combines experiment-driven, data-driven, and theory-driven approaches to leverage the strength of each approach, while mitigating their limitations. the initial predictions from this platform are driven by a computational component based on integrating existing experimental data, structural biology/bioinformatic modeling, and molecular dynamics simulations on high-performance computing systems. an active machine learning model aims to optimize binding behavior by iteratively proposing mutations to the amino acid sequence of an initial antigen. proposed mutant antigens are evaluated with existing computational binding estimation tools using known or estimated antibody-antigen structures. the platform leverages a feature representation of the three-dimensional antigenantibody interface and a bayesian optimization algorithm to propose computational evaluation of mutants with high predicted performance and mutants that improve the machine learning model itself. the computational platform further improves its predictions by proposing designs that are evaluated with a high throughput experimental evaluation component, the results of which are incorporated into the machine learning model in a feedback loop. this combined computational-experimental antigen design platform, and results generated by it, will be described in greater detail in a future joint publication with gsk, including details of the machine learning model.in response to the covid-19 pandemic, we modified and used our computational components of the antigen design platform to propose mutations to sars-cov-1 neutralizing antibodies to achieve and optimize binding to the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the sars-cov-2 spike protein. this approach is motivated and enabled by knowledge of existing antibodies specific to the rbd of the sars-cov-1 spike protein that prevent sars-cov-1 from binding the human ace2 receptor and entering the cell, thus neutralizing the virus [10, 11] . the high similarity of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2, including the rbd [12] , suggest that such an approach could produce efficacious therapeutic antibodies. in 22 days (1/23-2/13/2020), we demonstrated that our platform could generate antibody designs using only sars-cov-2 sequence information, with support from antibody/antigen structures that had previously been experimentally determined for sars-cov-1. we executed this entire workflow by constructing a homologybased structural model before any experimentally determined structures of the sars-cov-2 sprotein were available.in the absence of a known sars-cov-2 spike protein structure, we characterized the sars-cov-2 surface glycoprotein sequence yp_009724390.1 [13] by constructing a homology-based structural model using the as2ts protein modeling system [14] . the structures of the spike proteins from sars-cov-1 (protein data bank (pdb) entries: 5x58 [15] , 6nb6 [10] , 2dd8 [11] , and 3bgf [16] ) were identified as the closest and most complete pdb structural templates to use for modeling, with resolutions 3.2, 4.2, 2.3, and 3.0 å respectively. of the four templates, the last three provide experimentally solved complexes with three antibodies, s230, m396, and f26g19. as our main focus in constructed homology models was to achieve the highest possible accuracy in the rbd-fab (antigen-binding fragment) interfaces we used additional pdb templates to refine models in corresponding regions. for example, pdb template 2ghw [17] was used to improve accuracy in the modeled interface between rbd and fab of neutralizing antibody 80r.a cryoem-derived structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein became available on feb. 19, 2020 and was publicly released feb 26, 2020 [18] (https://www.rcsb.org/structure/6vsb). x-ray crystal structures (of the receptor-binding domain) became available starting march 4, 2020 (http://www.rcsb.org/structure/6vw1 , to be published). comparison with our homology models indicates that our estimated structures (completed jan 23, 2020; publicly available beginning feb 3, 2020) were accurate, especially at the fab (antigen-binding fragment) [19] antibody interfaces. figure 1 and table 1 show residue deviations for our sars-cov-2 homology models, sars-cov-2 cryoem structures, and sars-cov-1 structures, using a sars-cov-2 x-ray structure 6w41_c as the reference. the two regions indicated by rectangular boxes (residues 382-393 and 475-484) are part of loop regions where local conformations deviate, but note that these regions are not part of the interface with the selected antibodies. figure 2 depicts our homology-based model superimposed on a cryoem structure, with the m396 antibody structure provided to indicate the fab-rbd interface region. note that the only regions with deviations above 2.0 å are outside the interface region.lga [19] , and global distance calculation gdc [20] from x-ray structures. listed in descending order by lga.type rmsd sequence identitylga gdc details of our computational-experimental platform will be described in greater detail in a future publication, including details on the active machine learning model, the feature space used to represent the three dimensional antigen-antibody interface, and the antibody optimization pipeline. overall, to generate the initial 20 antibodies, we executed the following steps:1. obtain structures for which experimentally-determined atomic coordinates were previously deposited in the pdb for several sars-cov-1-neutralizing antibodies in complex with the sars-cov-1 s-protein; obtain sequences from sars-cov-2 s-protein.2. map public sars-cov-2 spike protein sequences into structures. we estimated 10 costructures involving 3 antibodies. (completed jan 23, 2020; made publicly available feb 3, 2020. we used two of these antibodies (m396 and s230) in our subsequent calculations.3. define a set of residues for modification in each of the starting sars-cov-1-neutralizing antibodies via automatic contact estimation. 4. use machine learning module of computational design platform to iteratively propose mutations to the original antibody (m396) and perform free energy calculations using foldx [21] on llnl high-performance computing (hpc) to maximize estimated affinities to our sars-cov-2 spike protein homology model. by feb 13, 2020, we evaluated 89,263 mutant antibodies selected from a design space of 10 40 (20 amino acids 31 positions ). the primary template for this structure was pdb 2dd8.5. use hpc to perform additional free energy calculations on 110 selected antibody sequences by performing free energy calculations using rosetta [22] and 102 antibodies with molecular dynamics simulations [23] ; assess all sequences with the statium energy prediction tool [24] . (completed by feb 13, 2020)6. assess the developability of 139 selected antibody sequences using the 5 developability metrics from the therapeutic antibody profiler [25] . we used the machine learning module of our computational design platform to iteratively propose mutations to the original antibody (m396) and run foldx [21] calculations on llnl hpc to estimate free energies to the sars-cov-2 spike protein homology model. foldx binding calculations estimate the change in free energy (ddg) of the antibody-antigen protein complex resulting from the proposed mutations (to m396). we used this calculation as part of an objective function to drive the antibody optimization via the machine learning model. we evaluated 89,263 mutants with foldx during the course of our search for improved antibodies with estimated ddg values ranging from -10.1 to 19.2 kcal/mole. figure 3 plots improvements in the foldx-estimated ddg values over the course of the machine learning-driven optimization process. these results indicate that the machine learning model was effective in searching the combinatorial space of possible antibody mutants to perform design optimization and identify increasingly improved predicted antibody designs. we then selected a subset of these antibody mutants for additional calculations using rosetta [22] , statium [24] , and molecular dynamics calculations [23] , as well as antibody developability estimates via the therapeutic antibody profiler [25] (see methods section).while all in silico calculations performed were used to select our 20 first round antibodies, the molecular mechanics/generalized born solvent accessible surface area (mm/gbsa) molecular dynamics calculations [23] , described in the methods section, are considered to be our most accurate estimate. mm/gbsa calculates antibody/antigen interaction free energies using fully solvated molecular dynamics (md) for conformational sampling of the protein complex, but estimates free energy by a computationally less expensive implicit solvent model (gbsa). m396, our starting template for design, is known to neutralize sars-cov-1 by binding its rbd and preventing the virus from binding and entering the human ace2 receptor; our mm/gbsa calculations for m396 in complex with the sars-cov-1 spike protein yield -52.2 kcal/mole (±7.2). m396 is known not to bind to the sars-cov-2 spike protein [18] and yields -48. with sars-cov-1. these results suggest that these m396-derived antibody mutants potentially bind and neutralize sars-cov-2.starting on jan 23, 2020, we used two high-performance computers at llnl over the course of 22 days to support over 200,000 cpu hours and 20,000 gpu hours, performing 178,856 in silico free energy calculations of candidate antibodies in complex with the sars-cov-2 rbd. we performed this work using just the sars-cov-2 sequence and previously published neutralizing antibody structures for sars-cov-1. our predicted structures of sars-cov-2 proved to be accurate within the targeted rbd region when compared to experimentally derived structures published weeks later. with our predicted sars-cov-2 structures, we used our in silico design platform to evaluate 89,263 mutant antibodies by iteratively proposing mutations to sars-cov-1 neutralizing antibodies to optimize binding within the sars-cov-2 rbd. we selected 20 initial antibody sequences predicted to target the sars-cov-2 rbd. starting from a baseline free energy of -48.1 kcal/mol (± 8.3), our 20 selected first round antibody structures are predicted to have improved interaction with the sars-cov-2 rbd with free energies ranging as low as -82.0 kcal/mole. the baseline sars-cov-1 antibody in complex with the sars-cov-1 rbd has a calculated free energy of -52.2 kcal/mole and neutralizes the virus by preventing it from binding and entering the human ace2 receptor. these results suggest that our predicted antibody mutants may bind the sars-cov-2 rbd and therefore potentially neutralize the virus. additionally, our antibody mutants score well according to multiple antibody developability metrics via the therapeutic antibody profiler.these 20 antibody designs are now being expressed and experimentally tested for binding to sars-cov-2 spike protein, which will provide invaluable feedback to further improve the machine learning-driven designs. we are also continually improving our platform and performing additional in silico calculations, which will be included in future updates to this document. in addition, we are currently (1) performing higher fidelity molecular dynamics calculations to increase the accuracy of predictions using [26, 27] , (2) investigating binding "hotspots" via single point mutation computational analysis, and (3) exploring any potential impacts from glycosylation at the rbd site.the supplementary materials to this document include (1) the 10 homology-based structural models we developed of sars-cov-2 in complex with sars-cov-1 neutralizing antibodies and (2) all antibody mutant sequences and in silico free energy calculations performed for 89,263 mutant antibodies derived from the m396 sars-cov-1 neutralizing antibody, which we used to select a first round of 20 candidate antibodies for experimental evaluation.in the absence of a known sars-cov-2 spike protein structure, we characterized the surface glycoprotein sequence yp_009724390.1 [13] by constructing a homology-based structural model using the as2ts system [14] and sars-cov-1. to assess regions of sequencestructure conservation or variability between sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 (sequence similarity=71%), we created a set of initial structural models using available templates. the comparative analysis between constructed models and all available templates from pdb was performed using the stralsv algorithm [28] , which identifies protein fragments that exhibit structural similarities despite low primary amino acid sequence similarity and regions where some structure conformation uncertainties can be observed. we used results from these searches for modeling missing loop regions and assessment of possible structure conformation diversity in preliminary models.in the constructed final models, the conformation of sidechain atoms was predicted using scwrl [29] when residue-residue correspondences did not match. residues that were identical between the template and the sars-cov-2 spike protein were copied from the templates onto the models. the structural and stereochemical quality of the models was checked using a contact-dot algorithm in the molprobity software package [30] , and the final constructed models were finished with relaxation using ucsf chimera [31] . figures 4 and 5 show two of our constructed structural models of the sars-cov-2 spike protein in complex with a fab (s230 and m396 in figs. 3 and 4, respectively) of a sars-cov-1 neutralizing antibody. a set of all provided models was constructed to help assessment of possible different conformations in the spike-antibody complexes.for our ddg foldx calculations of 89,263 mutant antibodies in complex with the rbd, we started with structure minimization using the "minimize structure" procedure available in ucsf chimera [31] . this process was followed by up to 50 iterations of the "repairpdb" function in foldx. we performed ddg calculations on the defined list of mutations using the "buildmodel" procedure, which estimates stability (dg) defined by the free energy of a protein. we used up to 46 runs in this procedure to check if calculated rotamers of specified mutations converged to the optimal or trapped solution. a first set of our ddg estimates was calculated as a difference in free energy (dg) between the mutant and wild-type (labeled "foldx ddg average" in supplementary materials). additional ddg estimates were calculated using the "analysecomplex" algorithm for which we used the wild-type and mutated models to calculate ddg based on energy changes in interface only within rbd-fab complexes (labeled "foldx ddg interface" in supplementary materials).to estimate ddg values using rosetta, we started from structure minimization using the "relax" procedure. for each s protein-fab complex model, we made 10 relaxed structures from which we chose the representative model with the lowest free energy. in these structures, we calculated ddg estimates as change of stability using the "ddg_monomer" algorithm with 50 iterations and settings as described in [32] (labeled "rosetta ddg total energy" in supplementary materials). additional ddg estimates were calculated using the "flex_ddg" protocol [33] , which evaluates energy changes by focusing on interfaces within rbd-fab complexes only (labeled "rosetta ddg flex" in supplementary materials). in addition, rosetta calculations (total energy and flex) were performed for all possible single-point mutations for each of the 31 locations selected for mutation (19 amino acid mutation possibilities *31 locations = 589 total rosetta single-point mutation calculations).we used molecular mechanics/generalized born solvent accessible surface area (mm/gbsa) calculations for antibody/antigen interaction free energies [19] . mm/gbsa uses fully solvated molecular dynamics for conformational sampling of the protein complex but estimates free energy by a computationally cheaper implicit solvent model (gbsa). all molecular dynamics simulations were performed with openmm [34] , a toolkit for molecular simulation, using the amber force field [35] . positional constraints (1 kcal/mole*å 2 ) were place on the backbone atoms (c, n, and ca) during heating of the system. the system was heated in 50 k increments for 100 ps at each temperature. once the system was at 310 k, all constraints were removed and equilibration was performed for 9 ns. ten individual 5 ns dynamics simulations were performed from the equilibrated system for conformational sampling. the last 1 ns of the dynamics in 50 ps increments from each of the simulations was used for the mm/gbsa calculation (200 total structures). the mm/gbsa calculations were performed using mmpbsa.py that is part of the amber suite of programs.as a bioinformatic heuristic, we computed the number of mutations that are considered to be "unlikely" (labeled "number of unconventional mutations" in the dataset provided in the supplementary materials) for each mutant antibody considered. this heuristic describes mutations that are low probability under a mutational probability distribution derived from the blosum62 substitution matrix [36] . this mutational probability distribution gives some substitutions higher probabilities (e.g., a->s; 0.1168) and some lower (e.g., a->w; 0.00594), where the total of the probabilities of the 19 "destination" amino acids is 1.0. if a given point mutation is given a probability of < 0.052 (i.e., less than 1/19th) the mutation is declared "unconventional" and this count is incremented by one. for example, for alanine (a), 11 of 19 mutations are "unconventional" with this heuristic.the outbreak of the new betacoronavirus 2019-ncov, formally named sars-cov-2, represents a world-wide epidemic threat that has been causing major disruptions in societies and economies 1-2 . for these reasons the new virus has been internationally declared a public health emergency.in this context, structural knowledge of the proteins of the virus can provide important information to develop strategies against the infection, ranging from diagnosis to therapy. in general, coronaviruses use this protein localized on the envelope to bind their cell receptors. after binding, a series of molecular events lead to the fusion of the viral membrane with that of the host cell, eventually leading to virus entry and invasion.one of the necessary steps in this mechanism is the binding of the spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd) to the cell receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). indeed, knock out of ace2 in hela cells was shown to prevent infection.for these reasons the development of antibodies that target the spike rbd of coronaviruses and block their interaction with ace2, disrupting a fundamental infection mechanism, represent attractive therapeutic solutions. monoclonal antibodies with high affinities had been previously developed against the spike rbd of sars-cov. however, despite the correlations between the two viruses, no rbd-targeted sars-cov monoclonal antibodies have shown the ability to bind and neutralize 2019-ncov.the recent publication of the cryo-em structure of the 2019-ncov spike trimer at 3.5 å resolution can provide a useful basis to link these observations to molecular causes, guide the design of sars-cov-2 specific antibodies, and possibly suggest the basis for molecules able to block cell viral entry.here, we carry out a comparative analysis of the spike protein rbds from sars-cov-2 and sars-cov to reveal the key properties of their surfaces that can be reconnected to observed differences in antibody (ab) and receptor binding. starting from the atomic resolution information available from the solved structures of the two proteins, the mlce (matrix of low coupling energies) method is applied to identify the subsets of surface residues that can be defined as "interacting". mlce analysis of protein energetics accounts for the interactions that each residue establishes with all other residues of the protein it belongs to. the correlation of this parameter with the structural properties of the protein thus highlights which substructures are (pre)organized to interact with a potential partner (a cell receptor or an antibody). mlce analyzes the interaction energies of all of the amino acids in a protein. in particular, it computes the nonbonded part of the potential (van der waals, electrostatic interactions, solvent effects) via an mm/gbsa calculation, obtaining, for a protein composed by n residues, an n × n symmetric interaction matrix mij. eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix highlights the regions of strongest and weakest couplings: the fragments that are on the surface, contiguous in space and weakly coupled to the protein core, define the potential interaction regions. in other words, the putative interacting patches are assumed to be characterized by frustrated intramolecular interactions. the actual interaction with a partner will actually occur if favorable interactions determine a lower free energy for the bound than the unbound state [3] [4] . indeed, minimal energetic coupling with the rest of the protein allows these substructures to undergo conformational changes, to be recognized by a binding partner (antibodies, receptors). all these properties are hallmarks of antibody binding epitopes and ppi substructures.the mlce method for the prediction of protein-protein interaction regions and antibody binding epitopes has been validated in several previous studies [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] .here, we took advantage of the recent publication of the structures of sars-cov-2 spike protein in its pre-fusion state (doi.org/10.1126/science.abb2507) and of known structure of the sars-cov spike protein to comparatively apply our interaction epitope prediction method mlce.the application of mlce to the receptor binding domain (rbd, aa 319-591) of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (pdb code 6vsb; doi: 10.2210/pdb6vsb/pdb) 15 and of the sars-cov spike protein (pdb code 5x58; doi: 10.2210/pdb5x58/pdb) ( figure 1 ) shows that the two protein regions that contain potential interaction regions/ab-binding epitopes share the same topological localization at the two opposite ends of the 3d structures ( figure 1 ). however, this trait appears to be the only common one. the linear sequences that correspond to the predicted interacting epitope regions are reported in table 1 .importantly, the predicted epitopes for sars-cov spike rbd show a good degree of overlap with the epitopes mapped for neutralizing ab 80r 16 , s230 17 and m396 18 , providing a relevant validation of our approach. however, in spite of the high degree of structural similarity between the two spike proteins, these mabs failed to bind sars-cov-2 rbd, probably due to the low degree of sequence conservation in the regions contacted by these antibodies. the fact that most of the sars-covdirected mabs are not reactive against the novel betacoronavirus once more highlights the need to discover specific epitopes in sars-cov-2.actually, except for the common topological localization, the predicted ab-binding epitopes differ between the two proteins, both in their sequence and 3d structural organization (table 1 , 2 and figure 1 ). in some cases, linear sequences spanning distant segments of the primary structure come together in the three-dimensional structure to form extended substructures potentially (pre)organized for binding. this is particularly true for the conformational epitope at the n-and cterminal region of sars-cov-2 rbd: the interacting region spans a large part of a well-defined betasheet subdomain (table 1 , 2 and figure 2 ). it is tempting to suggest that the expression of such subdomain in isolation could give rise to a highly immunoreactive molecule [19] [20] [21] .in sars-cov-2 rbd, the knowledge of substructures representing potential conformational epitopes may be helpful in guiding the development of peptide-based immunogens able to elicit antibodies that specifically target the cognate protein to which the predicted epitopes belong (figure 2 ). simply speaking, the termini of the linear segments making up the conformational epitopes could be aptly bridged with a number of gly residues sufficient to approximate the distance in the experimental structure (table 3 ). antibodies raised against these molecules, which recapitulate the main determinants of immunoreactivity of the full protein, could have useful applications in a therapeutic setting [19] [20] [21] . furthermore, information on potentially specific sars-cov-2 spike rbd-specific epitopes the specific sars-cov-2 rbd epitope sequences and structures identified here can thus be used to design new molecular probes (immunoprobes) with facile synthetic accessibility and the potential to function both as antigen-mimicking baits to target virus-specific antibodies in patients' fluids, and as immunogens to generate new abs able to detect relevant antigens [22] [23] .importantly, after we ran our predictions on the sars-cov-2 rbd, crystal structures of this domain in complex with the cellular receptor protein ace2 was reported by lan et al. (aa 480-488) 24 and by yan et al. 25 . of note, one predicted interaction region almost completely overlaps with the substructure of spike protein rdb engaged in binding with ace2 (478 tpcngvegf 486). synthetic mimicry of this sequence could aptly generate high priority candidates aimed at disrupting ppis between sars-cov-2 rbd and its cell receptor ace2. such molecules could be used to block viral entry into cells.similarly, our approach also predicts a patch on sars-cov spike rbd, which is partly involved in binding ace2 (see 26 ).overall, while the two rbd proteins likely evolved from a common ancestor and share a common fold, they are characterized by different sequences. the physico-chemical properties determined by such sequence differences, efficaciously unveiled by mlce, reverberate in the modulation of the networks of intraprotein interactions that underlie the (pre)organization of regions for potential recognition of binding partners (cell receptors or antibodies).these results represent, to the best of our knowledge, one of the first molecular physical-chemistry based rationalization of the reasons why some of the tested sars-cov rbd monoclonal abs do not have appreciable cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2 rbd 15 , despite the fact that the two domains were recently reported to display the same affinity for the ace2, with kd values of 15.2 nm and 15 nm for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, respectively 27 .in this complex scenario, our predictions can help disentangle some of the issues related to betacoronavirues infectivity and immunological response. acknowledgement we acknowledge funding by regione lombardia, project ready (regional network for developing diagnostic methods in rapid response to emerging epidemics and bio-emergencies)the coordinates of the proteins analyzed through the text were downloaded from the pdb with the missing residues belonging to highly flexible loops not solved in the structure of the spike protein were modeled by homology using the swissmodel web server (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/), that retrieved the structure of the sars-cov 5x58 as the best template.the structures were used as input for epitope prediction using the matrix of local coupling energies method (mlce), which combines the analysis of structural determinants of a given protein with its energetic properties [3] [4] . this approach allows to identify nonoptimized, low-intensity energetic interaction-networks, corresponding to those substructures that can be more prone to establish interactions with antibodies, and be suitably recognized by binding partners. briefly, the contiguous where * is the a-th eigenvalue and % * is the i-th component of the corresponding eigenvector. the eigenvector with the most negative correspondent eigenvalue contains most of the interaction information for the stabilizing interaction of the system. an approximated interaction matrix / %& is thus given byif the structure of the protein is known, one can estimate a contact matrix %& by assuming two amino acids in contact if the distance between two of their heavy atoms is smaller than a threshold. thehadamard product of the two matrices gives us the matrix of the local coupling energies %& = / %& • %& we will select as possible interacting zones sets of close by residues that show weak or frustrated interactions.the analysis of the energetic properties of the surface residues is based on the mlce method.basically, we perform a mm/gbsa analysis of the structure in a force field, obtaining a symmetric per-residue interaction matrix %& keeping only non-bonded interaction (i.e. electrostatic, van der waals and solvation contributions). we diagonalize the matrix, obtaining a set of eigenvectors (%) sorted following the increasing value of their eigenvectors % where is the number of amino acids in the sequence. we thus can write the original matrix %& as ij = ( 7 , k=.(7) ( ) (7) ( ) it has been shown that the first eigenvector alone can be used to build an approximate interaction matrix : ij =λ .(.) ( ) (.) ( ), which recapitulates the interactions most relevant for the stabilization of a certain conformation of a defined protein or protein substructure.the mm/gbsa is made with amber 14 software with the ff14sb forcefield. tables 1 and 2 are highlighted with colors. figure 2 . the space filling regions indicate possible conformational epitopes for sars-cov-2 formed by the juxtapositions of the sequences reports in table 1 . the region binding to ace2 and correctly predicted is also highlighted.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which causes covid-19, is a coronavirus closely related to sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronaviruses (1). covid-19 can manifest in adults as a severe interstitial pneumonia with hyperinflammation while severe respiratory manifestations are rare in children (2) (3) (4) . recently, however, multisystem inflammatory system in children (mis-c) has been recognized in patients that either tested positive for covid-19 (by pcr or serology) or had epidemiological links to covid-19 (5) (6) (7) . after initial reports in uk (5), many cases have now been reported in europe (6, 7) , and new york (usa cdc). however, no such cases have been reported in china, japan, or south korea, which have also been severely impacted by the covid-19 pandemic (ecdc).mis-c manifests as persistent fever and hyperinflammation with multi organ system involvement including cardiac, gastrointestinal, renal, hematologic, dermatologic and neurologic symptoms (5-7) which are highly reminiscent of toxic shock syndrome (tss) (8, 9) (table 1) , rather than kawasaki disease due to marked demographic, clinical, and laboratory differences (6) . the similarities to tss and the association of mis-c with covid-19 led us to hypothesize that sars-cov-2 may possess superantigenic fragments that induce an inflammatory cascade and perhaps also contribute to the hyperinflammation and cytokine storm features observed in severe adult covid-19 cases (3, 4) . the question we raised is: does sars-cov-2 s possess superantigenic fragments that could elicit such reactions upon binding proteins involved in the host cell cytotoxic adaptive immune response? such a reaction was not observed in the sars-cov pandemic of 2003 (shortly sars1). what is unique to sars-cov-2, and how recent mutations in sars-cov-2 s may have promoted such an increased virulence? although children have been largely spared from severe covid-19 disease, a rare hyperinflammatory syndrome has been described in europe and the east coast of the united states, termed multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (mis-c). the symptoms and diagnostic lab values of mis-c resemble those of toxic shock, typically caused by pathogenic superantigens stimulating excessive activation of the adaptive immune system. we show that sars-cov-2 spike has a sequence and structure motif highly similar to those of bacterial superantigens, and may directly bind to the t cell receptors. this sequence motif, not present in other coronaviruses, may explain the unique potential for sars-cov-2 to cause both mis-c and the cytokine storm observed in adult covid-19 patients.cd4+ and cd8+ t cells. the ability of sags to bypass the antigen specificity of the tcrs results in broad activation of t cells and a cytokine storm, leading to toxic shock (12, 13) . notably sags do not bind the major (antigenic) peptide binding groove of mhcii, but instead bind other regions as well as the αβtcrs, directly. while early studies showed that bacterial sags activate t cells by binding the β-chain of dimeric tcrs at their variable domain (v) (14) (15) (16) , more recent studies revealed that they can bind to either αor β-chains, or both (17) . the question is then, does sars-cov-2 s possess any superantigenic fragments/domains that could bind to the αβtcrs?here, we used computational modelling to determine whether the sars-cov-2 s possesses sag activity. we demonstrate that an insert present in sars-cov-2 s, which is absent from sars1 and mers, mediates high affinity, non-specific binding to the tcr. notably, a motif of ~20 amino acids enclosing this insert unique to sars-cov-2 among beta coronaviruses has sequence and structure features highly similar to those of the seb toxin. furthermore, our analysis indicates that a sars-cov-2 s mutation detected in a european strain may enhance tcr binding, suggesting such mutations may account for geographical differences in mis-c occurrence. these finding have important implications for the management and treatment of covid-19.sars-cov-2 spike harbors a high affinity site for tcr β-chain binding, which contains an insertion, p681rra684, unique to sars2. we first examined whether sars-cov-2 s could bind to the αβtcr. to this aim, we constructed a sars-cov-2 s structural model based on the cryo-em structure resolved for the spike glycoprotein (18) , and we used the x-ray structure of αβtcr resolved in a ternary complex with seh and mhcii (17) , and generated a series of structural models for possible sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein -tcr complex formation using cluspro (19) . our simulations led to the binding pose presented in fig. 1a as one of the most probable mechanisms of complex formation, as described in detail in supplemental information (si) and supplementary  fig. s1 . therein, the tcr binds at the interface between the s1 and s2 subunits of the spike protein, near the s1/s2 cleavage site. a closeup view of the interface between the spike and tcrvβ domain (fig. 1b) reveals several strong interatomic interactions, involving residues s680-r683 on the spike, and r70-e74 and [q52, d56] on the respective cdrs 3 and 2 on vβ. overall (a) and closeup (b) views of the complex and interfacial interactions. in (b) the spike monomers are colored white, ice blue, and spectrally from blue (n-terminal domain) to red, all displayed in surface representation. for better visualization, the spike trimer is oriented such that its receptor binding domains (rbds) are at the bottom. tcr αand β-chains are in red and cyan ribbons. in (b), the segment s680pprar685 including the prra insert and highly conserved cleavage site r685 is shown in van der waals representation (black labels) and nearby cdr residues of the tcrvβ domain are labeled in blue/white. see additional information in supplementary fig. s1 .we note that the tcrvβ-binding epitope on sars-cov-2 s is centered around a sequence motif, p681rra684 (or shortly prra, hereafter), and its sequential and spatial neighbors. comparison of sars-cov-2 s to other beta-coronavirus spike protein sequences showed (20) that sars-cov-2 is distinguished by the existence of this four-residue insertion, prra, preceding the furin cleavage site (r685-s686 peptide bond) between the subunits s1 and s2 of each protomer ( fig. 2a) . structural comparison of the trimeric s proteins between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 further shows their close structural similarity in general (except for the rbd which is engaged in specific interfacial interactions (18) ), but the two spikes significantly differ near the prrars motif unique to sars-cov-2, which is exposed to the extracellular medium (fig. 2b ).further examination of the motif near prra reveals close structural similarity to the seb superantigen as well as sequence similarities to neurotoxins and a viral sag. the insertion prra together with the sequentially preceding seven amino acids and succeeding arg (fully conserved among β-coronaviruses) have been pointed out to form a motif, y674qtqtnsprrar685, homologous to that of neurotoxins from ophiophagus (cobra) and bungarus genera, as well as neurotoxin-like regions from three rabv strains (21) (fig. 2c) . we further noticed that the same segment bears close similarity to hiv-1 glycoprotein gp120 superantigenic motif f164-v164. gp120 sag motif (22) in the last row. (d) sars-cov-2 s trimer composed of s1 subunits only. the protomers are colored orange, red and gray, and displayed in van der waals format. the protruding motifs e661-r685 are highlighted in white, green, red, and blue representing the hydrophobic, hydrophilic, acidic, and basic residues. this close sequence similarity to both bacterial and viral sags, in support of the potential superantigenic character of the amino acid stretch y674-r685 of sars-cov-2 s directed us to further analyze its local sequence and structural properties. our analysis led to an interesting sequence similarity between the partially overlapping fragment t678-q690 of the spike and the seb superantigenic peptide y150nkk-katvqeld161 (fig. 3a) . this dodecapeptide sequence within the seb shows strong conservation among a broad range of staphylococcal and streptococcal sags (23, 24) . we note that the sequentially aligned segment of sars1 (s664-k672) bears minimal similarity to the seb sag (fig. 3a left) . what is even more interesting is that sars-cov-2 motif showed a palindromic behavior with respect to the superantigenic seb sequence in the sense that a broader stretch, from e661 to r685, could be aligned to the superantigen peptide in the reverse direction as well (fig. 3a right) . this brings to our attention the versatility and high propensity of the sars-cov-2 s tcrvβ-binding site residues to potentially act as a superantigenic fragment.significantly, the structures of the two peptides exhibit a remarkable similarity (fig. 3b-c) , including a salt bridge stabilizing each structural motif (e159-k152 in seb and e661-r685 in sars-cov-2 s), the relative orientations of three positively charged residues (k152-k153-k154 in seb and r682-r683-r685 in sars-cov-2 s ), a β-hairpin which apparently serves as a scaffold, and may be further supported in sars coronavirus by a potential disulfide bond between c662-c671. the former two features are absent in sars1 spike (fig. 3d) . this analysis overall indicates that the segment t678nsprrar685 forms a putatively superantigenic core, consistently aligned against various bacterial or viral sags (figs. 2c and 3a-c) with or without the participation of the adjoining amino acids. however, combined broader sequence and structure analysis in fig. 3 panels a (right) and b-c, reveals an even more compelling feature: this putative sag core is structurally consolidated by spatial proximity to a conserved acidic segment, e661cd663, which forms a highly stable salt bridge with the polybasic segment prrar of sars-cov-2 s, much in the same way as to the salt bridge observed in seb (but not in sars1 s).we note that the seb superantigen peptide y150nkkkatvqeld161 has been reported to bind cd28 (23), a t cell receptor that provides co-stimulatory signals required for t cell activation and survival. cd28 and tcrv domains share the same (immunoglobulin) fold (fig. 3e) , and the binding mechanism shown in fig. 1b is likely to be adopted with minor rearrangements for enabling the binding of seb to cd28.finally, because of the homologous superantigenic segment of seb binding cd28, we also tested the potential binding of sars2 spike e661-r685 onto cd28, considering the possibility that the target of sars2 spike superantigenic segment might be cd28. our simulations indicated that the same segment can equally bind to cd28, further supporting the strong propensity of the fragment to stimulate t cell activation.the existence of potential superantigenic, toxic or intercellular-adhesion molecule (icam)-like sequence fragments in sars1 was thoroughly examined by li et al. following the 2003 pandemic (26) . this led to the identification of the nine sequence stretches including three botulinum neurotoxin type d or g precursors, and two motifs that have a high similarity with the intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (icam-1). comparative analysis with sars-cov-2 spike sequence revealed that seven of these sequence motifs are conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (supplementary fig. s2) . among them, we note that y279nengtitdavdcaldplsetkc301, an icam-1 (cd54)-like motif, also participates in the association between the sars-cov-2 spike and the bound αβtcr (see fig. 4 ).note that icam-1 involvement is critical to mediating immune and inflammatory responses. the observed interaction of the icam-1-like motif of sars-cov-2 s with tcrvα, in tandem with the interaction of the above discussed putative sag motif (around the insert prra) with tcrvα, is likely to further strengthen the association of the virus with the t cell and the ensuing activation. precisely, n280-e281-n282 and t286 belonging to the icam-like fragment closely interact with the tcrvα cdrs; mainly t286 (spike) makes close contacts with s94 (cdr3), e281 (spike) forms a hydrogen bond with t51 (cdr2), and n280 and n282 (spike) closely associate with r69 (fig. 4d) . a rare mutation, d839y/e, recently observed in a sars2 strain from europe contributes to stabilizing the interaction with tcr. interestingly, the sars-cov-2 spike binding region harbors three residues that have been recently reported to have mutated in new strains from europe and usa (27, 28) : d614g, a831v and d839y/n/e). the former two may potentially interact with mhcii; while the latter (d839, european strain) is located close to tcrvβ and strongly interacts with n30; (fig. 4a and c, and supplementary figs. s3 and s4a) . its substitution by glutamate in the mutant d839e increases the strength of the intermolecular (and thereby virus-t cell) association (supplementary fig.  s4c ). even stronger interactions between spike and tcrvβ are observed upon replacing d839 with a tyrosine as illustrated in supplementary fig. s4d : the interfacial interactions in this case are further stabilized by a hydrogen bond between y839 and d32; an aromatic (polar-π) interaction between y839 and n30; as well as possible electrostatic interactions with k73 and s97. quantitative evaluation of the change in binding affinity between the spike and tcr upon mutating d839 to y, e and n yields δδgd→y = -2.2kcal mol -1 , δδgd→e = -2.1kcal mol -1 , and δδgd→n = -1.3kcal mol -1 respectively (see supplementary  table s1 for details). thus, the d839y/n/e mutations would be expected to strengthen/support the above described association between the superantigenic prra-containing segment and the tcrvβ.an understanding of the immunopathology leading to severe manifestations of covid-19, in both adults and children, is of critical importance for effective management and treatment of the disease. mis-c shows remarkable similarity to pediatric tss (5-9). using in silico modeling and analysis, we found that sars-cov-2 encodes a superantigen motif near its s1/s2 cleavage site. this region is highly similar in structure to the seb sag motif that interacts with both the tcr and cd28 (23) and mediates tss. seb enables large-scale t cell activation and proliferation (13) , resulting in massive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines including ifnγ, tnfα and il-2 from t cells as well as il-1 and tnfα from apcs (13) . this cytokine storm leads to multi-organ tissue damage similar to what is now observed in mis-c. we therefore propose that mis-c observed in covid-19 patients may be mediated by superantigen activity of the sars-cov-2 s protein.to date, mis-c is mostly observed in europe and east coast of north america, and has not been described in asia, despite sizeable outbreaks of covid-19 (5-7) (cdc and ecdc). we show that a mutation at d839 found in a european strain of sars-cov-2 enhances the binding affinity of the sag motif to the tcr. this could (at least partly) explain the geographical skewing of mis-c to areas where the european strain is endemic, and identification of other strain-specific mutations may help predict where future outbreak of mis-c may occur.our findings raise the exciting possibility that immunomodulatory therapeutic options used for tss may also be effective for mis-c, including ivig and steroids. indeed, initial published and unpublished reports suggest that mis-c patients respond well to ivig with or without steroids (5-7). ivig recognizes seb epitopes (29) , and thus may function in part by neutralization of a superantigen. given structural similarities between seb and the s protein sag motif, there is potential for cross-reactivity of these immunoglobins, explaining at least in part the response of mis-c cases to ivig. other fda-approved anti-inflammatory drugs tested in models of seb tss may also be effective, including ctla4-ig which can inhibit cd28 co-stimulation (30) , and the mtor inhibitor rapamycin (31) , which is already in use for covid-19. in addition, humanized monoclonal anti-seb abs have been described (32) that could also be of potential therapeutic benefit in mis-c patients. notably, it has been shown in the mouse model of tss that lethal seb superantigen challenge can be prevented by short peptide mimetics of its superantigen motif (23) . it would be interesting to examine whether short peptide mimetics of sars-cov-2 spike superantigen region might be employed to prevent/attenuate inflammatory cytokine gene induction and toxic shock in mis-c patients.at present, the majority of antibody therapies under investigation are designed to target the sars-cov-2 receptor binding domains (rbds) (33, 34) , and our simulations also indicated that rbd might potentially interact with tcrs. however, compared with rbds, relatively fewer mutations are found in the sag region of sars-cov-2; notably, the "prra" insert is unique to sars-cov-2 and retained among all of its isolates sequenced to date (27, 28) . it might be constructive to design antibodies or drugs targeting this sag region, to not only block the cleavage essential to enabling viral entry (1, 20) , but also modulate the sag-induced inflammatory cytokine gene induction (13) .fortunately, severe respiratory manifestations of covid-19 in children as well as development of mis-c are rare. this may be due to trained immunity (2) or cross-viral immunity to other coronavirus strains (35) . t and b cells play an important role in the anti-viral response. cd4+ and cd8+ t cells from convalescent covid-19 patients can recognize a range of sars2 epitopes, and the s protein represents a major target (35) . interestingly, t cells from unexposed individuals can also respond to s protein epitopes from sars-cov-2, which supports the hypothesis of cross-viral immunity from other coronavirus strains (35) . however, why only a fraction of infected children develop mis-c is unclear. it is possible that a poor initial antibody response to the virus fails to neutralize sag leading to immune enhancement following re exposure or that certain hla types are more permissive of binding sag, and indeed hla has been shown to play a role in covid susceptibility (36) . of the nine cases initially reported in the uk, six were of afro-caribbean descent, which also suggests a potential genetic component to susceptibility (5) .it is interesting to note that approximately a third or fewer of mis-c patients tested positive for the sars-cov-2, but the majority (but not all) have serologic evidence of infection or a history of exposure to covid-19 (5) (6) (7) . this may suggest that the sars-cov-2 sag causes a delayed hyperinflammation response in certain children. sags have been implicated in autoimmunity by triggering self-reactive t cells (12) . antibody-mediated enhancement upon re-exposure to the virus may also contribute to uncontrolled infection and inflammation (37) . it is also possible that despite a negative nasopharyngeal pcr test, the virus may still be present in the gastrointestinal tract (38) . mis-c patients demonstrate unusually severe gi symptoms, abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea, in addition to severe myocardial dysfunction and cardiac shock (5-7) and such severe gi symptoms are also frequently associated with the sag (9).in summary we made three major observations: (a) prrar and sequential neighbors interact with tcrvβ residues d56, r70 and e74 at the cdrs, and this association closely resembles that of seb sag with tcrvβ; (b) nearby d839 participates in this interaction and its mutation to tyrosine would further strengthen the association with tcrvβ; and (c) a sequence motif (n280-t286) typical of icam-1 further interacts with the tcrvα further stabilizing/enhancing the association between the viral spike and host cell tcr. so, the binding pose of tcr with respect to the spike allows simultaneously for all three associations. the first is the most important. the 2 nd is significant because it is the european strain. the 3 rd may be imparting a stronger host-virus adhesion. therefore, strategies used for the treatment of seb-mediated toxic shock or approaches to block the interaction of s protein with the tcr may reduce hyperinflammatory manifestations of covid-19 in both adults and children.sars-cov-2 (p0dtc2) and sars-cov (cvhsa_p59594) spike models were generated using swiss-model (39), based on the resolved spike glycoprotein structures of sars-cov-2(18) (pdb: 6vsb) and sars-cov (40) (pdb: 6acd).the missing loops in the crystal structures were built using libraries of backbone fragments (41) or by constraint space de novo reconstruction of these backbone segments (42) . two mutants associated with european covid-19 patients (28) were constructed using charmm-gui (43): one is the main strain mutant d614g and the other contains four mutations including q239k, a831v, d614g and d839y. these two sars-cov-2 spike mutants together with the sars-cov-2 (p0dtc2) originally taken from wuhan were used to investigate the binding to αβtcr, and mhcii (pdb: 2xn9) (17) using cluspro (19) and prodigy (44) . see details in the si.sars-cov-2 spike model in the prefusion state was generated using swissmodel 1 based on the resolved cryo-em structure (protein data bank (pdb): 6vsb 2 ) for the spike glycoprotein where one of the receptor binding domains (rbds) is in the up conformation. the structure of the t cell receptor (tcr) containing both tcrα and tcrβ chains was taken from the crystal structure of the ternary complex between human tcr, staphylococcal enterotoxin h (seh) and human major histocompatibility complex class ii (mhcii) molecule 3 . using protein-protein docking software cluspro 4 , we constructed in silico a series of binary complexes for sars-cov-2 spike and tcr. we obtained 30 clusters of conformations for spike-tcr binary complexes, upon clustering ~1000 models generated by cluspro. the clusters were rank-ordered by cluster size, as recommended 4 . we analyzed all models and found that the majority (>90%) showed that tcr bound to spike via its constant domain. given that the constant domain is proximal to the cell membrane and tcr employs the variable domain for binding superantigens and/or antigen/mhc complexes 3 , we then added restraints to our docking simulations to prevent the binding of tcr constant domain and filter out those conformers where the variable domain would bind to the spike. this led to 27 clusters (based on a set of 666 models) from cluspro. interestingly, 45% of models showed the binding of tcr near the region of "prra" insert and 46% of models showed the binding of tcr within multiple rbds. thus, we identified two hot spots for tcr binding within sars-cov-2 spike: one is near "prra" insert and the other within the rbd. representative members belonging to the top-ranking clusters are presented in fig s1. structure of the human mhcii was taken from the crystal structure of the ternary complex 3 (pdb: 2xn9) between human tcr, seh and mhcii. first, we performed docking simulations to generate binary complexes between mhcii and sars-cov-2 spike. six representative mhciispike binary complexes were selected to explore further docking of tcr to form a ternary complex. we analyzed all predicted ternary complex models of mhcii-spike-tcr. potential tertiary mhcii-spike-tcr complex models were selected following three filtering criteria: (1) tcr either binds near "prra" insert region or the rbd; (2) the binding regions involve homologous superantigen or toxin binding motifs predicted for sars-cov (fig. s2) ; (3) mhcii and tcr are in close proximity. these filters led to the mhcii-spike-tcr complex model illustrated in fig. s3a . interestingly, the sars-cov-2 spike binding region harbors three residues that have been recently reported to have mutated in new strains from europe and usa 5,6 ( fig.  s3b) : d614g, a831v and d839y/n/e). while we do not exclude the possible occurrence of other potential tertiary complexes, especially those involving the rbds, we focus here on the complex shown in fig. s3 , which uniquely satisfied all three aforementioned criteria.we mutated d839 of the sars-cov-2 spike in silico to asparagine, glutamic acid and tyrosine in line with the aforementioned mutant d839y/n/e observed in a new strain from europe. to this aim, we used pymol mutagenesis tool 7 and evaluated the change in local conformation and energetics in the complex formed with tcr. the most probable rotamers were selected and energetically minimized in the presence of the bound tcr (conformation shown in fig. 1) using openmm 8 . binding affinities (δg) and dissociation constants (kd) were obtained for (i) the full complex (with the intact spike and entire tcr as interactors) or (ii) a single spike subunit and tcrvβ with the d839y/n/e mutation on spike at 37 °c using prodigy server 9,10 . tables   table s1 : binding affinities predicted for the interactions between the αβtcr and sars-cov-2 spike before/after the point mutation d839y/n/e. δg (kcal mol -1 ) kd (nm) δg (kcal mol -1 ) kd (nm) δg (kcal mol -1 ) kd (nm) δg (kcal mol -1 ) kd (nm)severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which causes covid-19, is a coronavirus closely related to sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronaviruses (1). covid-19 can manifest in adults as a severe interstitial pneumonia with hyperinflammation while severe respiratory manifestations are rare in children (2) (3) (4) . recently, however, multisystem inflammatory system in children (mis-c) has been recognized in patients that either tested positive for covid-19 (by pcr or serology) or had epidemiological links to covid-19 (5) (6) (7) . after initial reports in uk (5), many cases have now been reported in europe (6, 7) , and new york (usa cdc). however, no such cases have been reported in china, japan, or south korea, which have also been severely impacted by the covid-19 pandemic (ecdc).mis-c manifests as persistent fever and hyperinflammation with multi organ system involvement including cardiac, gastrointestinal, renal, hematologic, dermatologic and neurologic symptoms (5-7) which are highly reminiscent of toxic shock syndrome (tss) (8, 9) (table 1) , rather than kawasaki disease due to marked demographic, clinical, and laboratory differences (6) . the similarities to tss and the association of mis-c with covid-19 led us to hypothesize that sars-cov-2 may possess superantigenic fragments that induce an inflammatory cascade and perhaps also contribute to the hyperinflammation and cytokine storm features observed in severe adult covid-19 cases (3, 4) . the question we raised is: does sars-cov-2 s possess superantigenic fragments that could elicit such reactions upon binding proteins involved in the host cell cytotoxic adaptive immune response? such a reaction was not observed in the sars-cov pandemic of 2003 (shortly sars1). what is unique to sars-cov-2, and how recent mutations in sars-cov-2 s may have promoted such an increased virulence? tss can be caused by two types of superantigens (sags): bacterial or viral. bacterial sags have been broadly studied. they include proteins secreted by staphylococcus aureus and streptococcus pyogenes that induce inflammatory cytokine gene induction and toxic shock. typical examples are tss toxin 1 (tsst1), and staphylococcal enterotoxins b (seb) and h (seh). they are highly potent t cell activators that can bind to mhc class ii (mhcii) molecules and/or to tcrs of both cd4+ and cd8+ t cells. the ability of sags to bypass the antigen specificity of the tcrs results in broad activation of t cells and a cytokine storm, leading to toxic shock (12, 13) . notably sags do not bind the major (antigenic) peptide binding groove of mhcii, but instead bind other regions as well as the αβtcrs, directly. while early studies showed that bacterial sags activate t cells by binding the β-chain of dimeric tcrs at their variable domain (v) (14) (15) (16) , more recent studies revealed that they can bind to either αor β-chains, or both (17) . the question is then, does sars-cov-2 s possess any superantigenic fragments/domains that could bind to the αβtcrs?here, we used computational modelling to determine whether the sars-cov-2 s possesses sag activity. we demonstrate that an insert present in sars-cov-2 s, which is absent from sars1 and mers, mediates high affinity, non-specific binding to the tcr. notably, a motif of ~20 amino acids enclosing this insert unique to sars-cov-2 among beta coronaviruses has sequence and structure features highly similar to those of the seb toxin. furthermore, our analysis indicates that a sars-cov-2 s mutation detected in a european strain may enhance tcr binding, suggesting such mutations may account for geographical differences in mis-c occurrence. these finding have important implications for the management and treatment of covid-19.sars-cov-2 spike harbors a high affinity site for tcr β-chain binding, which contains an insertion, p681rra684, unique to sars2. we first examined whether sars-cov-2 s could bind to the αβtcr. to this aim, we constructed a sars-cov-2 s structural model based on the cryo-em structure resolved for the spike glycoprotein (18) , and we used the x-ray structure of αβtcr resolved in a ternary complex with seh and mhcii (17) , and generated a series of structural models for possible sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein -tcr complex formation using cluspro (19) . our simulations led to the binding pose presented in fig. 1a as one of the most probable mechanisms of complex formation, as described in detail in supplemental information (si) and supplementary  fig. s1 . therein, the tcr binds at the interface between the s1 and s2 subunits of the spike protein, near the s1/s2 cleavage site. a closeup view of the interface between the spike and tcrvβ domain (fig. 1b) reveals several strong interatomic interactions, involving residues s680-r683 on the spike, and r70-e74 and [q52, d56] on the respective cdrs 3 and 2 on vβ. overall (a) and closeup (b) views of the complex and interfacial interactions. in (b) the spike monomers are colored white, ice blue, and spectrally from blue (n-terminal domain) to red, all displayed in surface representation. for better visualization, the spike trimer is oriented such that its receptor binding domains (rbds) are at the bottom. tcr αand β-chains are in red and cyan ribbons. in (b), the segment s680pprar685 including the prra insert and highly conserved cleavage site r685 is shown in van der waals representation (black labels) and nearby cdr residues of the tcrvβ domain are labeled in blue/white. see additional information in supplementary fig. s1 .we note that the tcrvβ-binding epitope on sars-cov-2 s is centered around a sequence motif, p681rra684 (or shortly prra, hereafter), and its sequential and spatial neighbors. comparison of sars-cov-2 s to other beta-coronavirus spike protein sequences showed (20) that sars-cov-2 is distinguished by the existence of this four-residue insertion, prra, preceding the furin cleavage site (r685-s686 peptide bond) between the subunits s1 and s2 of each protomer ( fig. 2a) . structural comparison of the trimeric s proteins between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 further shows their close structural similarity in general (except for the rbd which is engaged in specific interfacial interactions (18) ), but the two spikes significantly differ near the prrars motif unique to sars-cov-2, which is exposed to the extracellular medium (fig. 2b ).further examination of the motif near prra reveals close structural similarity to the seb superantigen as well as sequence similarities to neurotoxins and a viral sag. the insertion prra together with the sequentially preceding seven amino acids and succeeding arg (fully conserved among β-coronaviruses) have been pointed out to form a motif, y674qtqtnsprrar685, homologous to that of neurotoxins from ophiophagus (cobra) and bungarus genera, as well as neurotoxin-like regions from three rabv strains (21) (fig. 2c) . we further noticed that the same segment bears close similarity to hiv-1 glycoprotein gp120 superantigenic motif f164-v164. (21) as well as hiv-1 gp120 sag motif (22) in the last row. (d) sars-cov-2 s trimer composed of s1 subunits only. the protomers are colored orange, red and gray, and displayed in van der waals format. the protruding motifs e661-r685 are highlighted in white, green, red, and blue representing the hydrophobic, hydrophilic, acidic, and basic residues. this close sequence similarity to both bacterial and viral sags, in support of the potential superantigenic character of the amino acid stretch y674-r685 of sars-cov-2 s directed us to further analyze its local sequence and structural properties. our analysis led to an interesting sequence similarity between the partially overlapping fragment t678-q690 of the spike and the seb superantigenic peptide y150nkk-katvqeld161 (fig. 3a) . this dodecapeptide sequence within the seb shows strong conservation among a broad range of staphylococcal and streptococcal sags (23, 24) . we note that the sequentially aligned segment of sars1 (s664-k672) bears minimal similarity to the seb sag (fig. 3a left) . what is even more interesting is that sars-cov-2 motif showed a palindromic behavior with respect to the superantigenic seb sequence in the sense that a broader stretch, from e661 to r685, could be aligned to the superantigen peptide in the reverse direction as well (fig. 3a right) . this brings to our attention the versatility and high propensity of the sars-cov-2 s tcrvβ-binding site residues to potentially act as a superantigenic fragment.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.109272 doi: biorxiv preprintsignificantly, the structures of the two peptides exhibit a remarkable similarity (fig. 3b-c) , including a salt bridge stabilizing each structural motif (e159-k152 in seb and e661-r685 in sars-cov-2 s), the relative orientations of three positively charged residues (k152-k153-k154 in seb and r682-r683-r685 in sars-cov-2 s ), a β-hairpin which apparently serves as a scaffold, and may be further supported in sars coronavirus by a potential disulfide bond between c662-c671. the former two features are absent in sars1 spike (fig. 3d) . this analysis overall indicates that the segment t678nsprrar685 forms a putatively superantigenic core, consistently aligned against various bacterial or viral sags (figs. 2c and 3a-c) with or without the participation of the adjoining amino acids. however, combined broader sequence and structure analysis in fig. 3 panels a (right) and b-c, reveals an even more compelling feature: this putative sag core is structurally consolidated by spatial proximity to a conserved acidic segment, e661cd663, which forms a highly stable salt bridge with the polybasic segment prrar of sars-cov-2 s, much in the same way as to the salt bridge observed in seb (but not in sars1 s).we note that the seb superantigen peptide y150nkkkatvqeld161 has been reported to bind cd28 (23), a t cell receptor that provides co-stimulatory signals required for t cell activation and survival. cd28 and tcrv domains share the same (immunoglobulin) fold (fig. 3e) , and the binding mechanism shown in fig. 1b is likely to be adopted with minor rearrangements for enabling the binding of seb to cd28.finally, because of the homologous superantigenic segment of seb binding cd28, we also tested the potential binding of sars2 spike e661-r685 onto cd28, considering the possibility that the target of sars2 spike superantigenic segment might be cd28. our simulations indicated that the same segment can equally bind to cd28, further supporting the strong propensity of the fragment to stimulate t cell activation.the existence of potential superantigenic, toxic or intercellular-adhesion molecule (icam)-like sequence fragments in sars1 was thoroughly examined by li et al. following the 2003 pandemic (26) . this led to the identification of the nine sequence stretches including three botulinum neurotoxin type d or g precursors, and two motifs that have a high similarity with the intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (icam-1). comparative analysis with sars-cov-2 spike sequence revealed that seven of these sequence motifs are conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (supplementary fig. s2) . among them, we note that y279nengtitdavdcaldplsetkc301, an icam-1 (cd54)-like motif, also participates in the association between the sars-cov-2 spike and the bound αβtcr (see fig. 4 ).note that icam-1 involvement is critical to mediating immune and inflammatory responses. the observed interaction of the icam-1-like motif of sars-cov-2 s with tcrvα, in tandem with the interaction of the above discussed putative sag motif (around the insert prra) with tcrvα, is likely to further strengthen the association of the virus with the t cell and the ensuing activation. precisely, n280-e281-n282 and t286 belonging to the icam-like fragment closely interact with the tcrvα cdrs; mainly t286 (spike) makes close contacts with s94 (cdr3), e281 (spike) forms a hydrogen bond with t51 (cdr2), and n280 and n282 (spike) closely associate with r69 (fig. 4d) . a rare mutation, d839y/e, recently observed in a sars2 strain from europe contributes to stabilizing the interaction with tcr. interestingly, the sars-cov-2 spike binding region harbors three residues that have been recently reported to have mutated in new strains from europe and usa (27, 28) : d614g, a831v and d839y/n/e). the former two may potentially interact with mhcii; while the latter (d839, european strain) is located close to tcrvβ and strongly interacts with n30; (fig. 4a and c, and supplementary figs. s3 and s4a) . its substitution by glutamate in the mutant d839e increases the strength of the intermolecular (and thereby virus-t cell) association (supplementary fig.  s4c ). even stronger interactions between spike and tcrvβ are observed upon replacing d839 with a tyrosine as illustrated in supplementary fig. s4d : the interfacial interactions in this case are further stabilized by a hydrogen bond between y839 and d32; an aromatic . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.109272 doi: biorxiv preprint (polar-π) interaction between y839 and n30; as well as possible electrostatic interactions with k73 and s97. quantitative evaluation of the change in binding affinity between the spike and tcr upon mutating d839 to y, e and n yields δδgd→y = -2.2kcal mol -1 , δδgd→e = -2.1kcal mol -1 , and δδgd→n = -1.3kcal mol -1 respectively (see supplementary  table s1 for details). thus, the d839y/n/e mutations would be expected to strengthen/support the above described association between the superantigenic prra-containing segment and the tcrvβ.an understanding of the immunopathology leading to severe manifestations of covid-19, in both adults and children, is of critical importance for effective management and treatment of the disease. mis-c shows remarkable similarity to pediatric tss (5-9). using in silico modeling and analysis, we found that sars-cov-2 encodes a superantigen motif near its s1/s2 cleavage site. this region is highly similar in structure to the seb sag motif that interacts with both the tcr and cd28 (23) and mediates tss. seb enables large-scale t cell activation and proliferation (13) , resulting in massive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines including ifnγ, tnfα and il-2 from t cells as well as il-1 and tnfα from apcs (13) . this cytokine storm leads to multi-organ tissue damage similar to what is now observed in mis-c. we therefore propose that mis-c observed in covid-19 patients may be mediated by superantigen activity of the sars-cov-2 s protein.to date, mis-c is mostly observed in europe and east coast of north america, and has not been described in asia, despite sizeable outbreaks of covid-19 (5-7) (cdc and ecdc). we show that a mutation at d839 found in a european strain of sars-cov-2 enhances the binding affinity of the sag motif to the tcr. this could (at least partly) explain the geographical skewing of mis-c to areas where the european strain is endemic, and identification of other strain-specific mutations may help predict where future outbreak of mis-c may occur.our findings raise the exciting possibility that immunomodulatory therapeutic options used for tss may also be effective for mis-c, including ivig and steroids. indeed, initial published and unpublished reports suggest that mis-c patients respond well to ivig with or without steroids (5-7). ivig recognizes seb epitopes (29) , and thus may function in part by neutralization of a superantigen. given structural similarities between seb and the s protein sag motif, there is potential for cross-reactivity of these immunoglobins, explaining at least in part the response of mis-c cases to ivig. other fda-approved anti-inflammatory drugs tested in models of seb tss may also be effective, including ctla4-ig which can inhibit cd28 co-stimulation (30) , and the mtor inhibitor rapamycin (31) , which is already in use for covid-19. in addition, humanized monoclonal anti-seb abs have been described (32) that could also be of potential therapeutic benefit in mis-c patients. notably, it has been shown in the mouse model of tss that lethal seb superantigen challenge can be prevented by short peptide mimetics of its superantigen motif (23) . it would be interesting to examine whether short peptide mimetics of sars-cov-2 spike superantigen region might be employed to prevent/attenuate inflammatory cytokine gene induction and toxic shock in mis-c patients.at present, the majority of antibody therapies under investigation are designed to target the sars-cov-2 receptor binding domains (rbds) (33, 34) , and our simulations also indicated that rbd might potentially interact with tcrs. however, compared with rbds, relatively fewer mutations are found in the sag region of sars-cov-2; notably, the "prra" insert is unique to sars-cov-2 and retained among all of its isolates sequenced to date (27, 28) . it might be constructive to design antibodies or drugs targeting this sag region, to not only block the cleavage essential to enabling viral entry (1, 20) , but also modulate the sag-induced inflammatory cytokine gene induction (13) .fortunately, severe respiratory manifestations of covid-19 in children as well as development of mis-c are rare. this may be due to trained immunity (2) or cross-viral immunity to other coronavirus strains (35) . t and b cells play an important role in the anti-viral response. cd4+ and cd8+ t cells from convalescent covid-19 patients can recognize a range of sars2 epitopes, and the s protein represents a major target (35) . interestingly, t cells from unexposed individuals can also respond to s protein epitopes from sars-cov-2, which supports the hypothesis of cross-viral immunity from other coronavirus strains (35) . however, why only a fraction of infected children develop mis-c is unclear. it is possible that a poor initial antibody response to the virus fails to neutralize sag leading to immune enhancement following re exposure or that certain hla types are more permissive of binding sag, and indeed hla has been shown to play a role in covid susceptibility (36) . of the nine cases initially reported in the uk, six were of afro-caribbean descent, which also suggests a potential genetic component to susceptibility (5) .it is interesting to note that approximately a third or fewer of mis-c patients tested positive for the sars-cov-2, but the majority (but not all) have serologic evidence of infection or a history of exposure to covid-19 (5) (6) (7) . this may suggest that the sars-cov-2 sag causes a delayed hyperinflammation response in certain children. sags have been implicated in autoimmunity by triggering self-reactive t cells (12) . antibody-mediated enhancement upon re-exposure to the virus may also contribute to uncontrolled infection and inflammation (37) . it is also possible that despite a negative nasopharyngeal pcr test, the virus may still be present in the gastrointestinal tract (38) . mis-c patients demonstrate unusually severe gi symptoms, abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea, in addition to severe myocardial dysfunction and cardiac shock (5-7) and such severe gi symptoms are also frequently associated with the sag (9).in summary we made three major observations: (a) prrar and sequential neighbors interact with tcrvβ residues d56, r70 and e74 at the cdrs, and this association closely resembles that of seb sag with tcrvβ; (b) nearby d839 participates in this interaction and its mutation to tyrosine would further strengthen the association with tcrvβ; and (c) a sequence motif (n280-t286) typical of icam-1 further interacts with the tcrvα further stabilizing/enhancing the association between the viral spike and host cell tcr. so, the binding pose of tcr with respect to the spike allows simultaneously for all three associations. the first is the most important. the 2 nd is significant because it is the european strain. the 3 rd may be imparting a stronger host-virus adhesion. therefore, strategies used for the treatment of seb-mediated toxic shock or approaches to block the interaction of s protein with the tcr may reduce hyperinflammatory manifestations of covid-19 in both adults and children.sars-cov-2 (p0dtc2) and sars-cov (cvhsa_p59594) spike models were generated using swiss-model (39), based on the resolved spike glycoprotein structures of sars-cov-2(18) (pdb: 6vsb) and sars-cov (40) (pdb: 6acd).the missing loops in the crystal structures were built using libraries of backbone fragments (41) or by constraint space de novo reconstruction of these backbone segments (42) . two mutants associated with european covid-19 patients (28) were constructed using charmm-gui (43): one is the main strain mutant d614g and the other contains four mutations including q239k, a831v, d614g and d839y. these two sars-cov-2 spike mutants together with the sars-cov-2 (p0dtc2) originally taken from wuhan were used to investigate the binding to αβtcr, and mhcii (pdb: 2xn9) (17) using cluspro (19) and prodigy (44) . see details in the si.the current pandemic potentially lethal novel coronavirus (named sars-cov-2/covid-19), caused major impact to millions of peoples health and global economy [1] (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov). to date, more than 126,212 deaths and nearly two million confirmed positive cases have been reported globally, making sars-cov-2 a urgent public health concern. along the side of using using neutralizing antibodies targeting spike glycoproteins, which is involved in host cell adhesion [2] , several antiviral drugs and drugs such as hydroxychloroquine are also being evaluated for repurpose as possible treatments for sars-cov-2 [3] . the different classes of antivirals under evaluation include 3cl protein inhibitors (ribavirin, lopinavir/ritonavir), rna synthesis inhibitors (remdesivir, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/tdf and 3tc), neuraminidase inhibitors (tamiflu and peramivir ) [4] and other small molecule drugs which target the ability of sars-cov-2 to interact with host cells (ace2 inhibitors) [3, 5] . however, the potential drug target and mechanism of several candidate drugs remains elusive and warrants further structural and biophysical studies to unravel how these potential antiviral drugs bind and impact on sars-cov-2. among the above clinically advancing several random drugs trails against sars-cov-2, arbidol (umifenovir) (fig. 1a) is also been screening against sars-cov-2 [6] . however, the drug target of viral protein and the mechanism of action of arbidol over sars-cov-2 is elusive, which is essential to understand drug action mechanism to develop better therapeutics. considering the current public health crisis, we aimed to unravel the potential drug target, molecular interactions and address the mechanism of action of arbidol on sars-cov-2.foremost, it was interesting for us to know that arbidol is the known drug for influenza [1, 7] that's binds haemagglutinin (ha) protein. this raises an intriguing question that are there any sequence or structural similarities between sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein and influenza virus (h3n2) ha protein, which could have resulted in the positive drug effect. the comparative protein sequence analysis shows that a short region of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein trimerization domain (s2) (aa947 -aa1027) resembles to that of h3n2 ha (fig. s1a ). the outer membrane spike glycosylation protein of sars-cov-2 is essential for host cell adhesion via human ace2 and cd26 receptors [2, 8] and its trimerization is imperative for host membrane fusion. this raises the intriguing question whether the arbidol could also bind similar way to that of ha in sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. finding the potential arbidol antiviral drug binding target and structural studies to unravel the mechanism of interaction has great implications and essential at the current global public health emergency which could open the arena in developing new potential therapeutics.to this end, we performed molecular dynamics and structure-guided drug binding analysis to screen the arbidol binding sites in sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein though two independent servers: (i) haddock2.2 (https://haddock.science.uu.nl/), and (ii) swissdock (http://swissdock.ch/docking) for reliability using sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein trimer (pdb: 6vsb) [2] . both servers predictions were consistent and provide six possible positions where a arbidol could potentially interact with the spike glycoprotein ( fig. s1b and s1c ).among the obtained six clusters of arbidol binding sites, we notice a single false positive (c1), a single true site (c2) and four unimportant/surface binding regions (c3-6) clusters, which is assessed and corroborated based on the solvent accessibility surface area (sasa), c-score (confidence score) and z-score (clash score) of binding location and exposed residues of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. further refinement was completed using coot (www.mrc-imb.cam.uk/) to ensure appropriate docking and no clashes in the side chain residues. binding free energies were taken into consideration for selecting the best possible docked site. the final model with aribidol docked in the homotrimer structure of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein (fig. 1b) was visualised in pymol.to unravel the arbidol binding mode and mechanism of action, we first looked at the most possible amino acid residues of spike glycoprotein involved in establishing the interaction with arbidol. we found that k776, e780, k947, e1017, r1019, s1021, n1023, l1024, t1027 of the s2 trimerization domain makes interaction with arbidol either via van der waals forces or hydrogen bonding ( fig. 1d and fig. s1e ). specifically, arbidol is sandwiched between the trimerization helices of two protomers k776, r1019, n1023, l1024, t1027 (chain a) and e780, k947, e1017, s1021, l1024 (chain b) ( fig. 1c and 1d) . where the total buried interface of ~900å 2 for three arbidol binding regions (~300å 2 /arbidol), as calculated from the pisa server (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/pisa/). we next looked at how arbidol interacts in h3n2 ha protein (pdb: 5t6n) [7] . interestingly, we noticed that arbidol interaction in influenza ha protein is also mediated via arg, lys, leu and glu as the key interacting residues (r54, e57, k58, l90, e97, l98, l99) ( fig. 1e and 1f) . furthermore, the arbidol is sandwiched between the two trimerization helices of two protomers (chain a and b, fig. 1f ). furthermore, we found that the position of h3n2 ha binding residues e57, r54, e97, l98, l99, k307, t59, k58 were similar with that of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein residues k776, & 780, e1017, r1019, l1024, y1027. furthermore, to compare the exact structural similarities between the sars-cov-2 and h3n2 trimerization domains involved in abridol binding, we superimposed the arbidol binding regions of sars-cov-2 and h3n2, which superimposes with rmsd 0.82å for c atoms. this also suggests possible structural similarities in the drug binding region of spike glycoprotein in influenza virus and sars-cov-2, which accentuates how an influenza virus drug could be a potential drug for sars-cov-2 infections.the sequence and structural similarities between the binding sites of arbidol (both solved and simulated) seems promising and suggests arbidol efficacy in combating the sars-cov-2. based on the molecular dynamics and structural studies corroborate that spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 is the drug target for the arbidol. this incites the drug binding mode with its key interacting residues and its mechanism where arbidol can effectively block or impede the trimerization of spike glycoprotein, which is essential for cell adherence and entry [9] . blocking the trimerization of spike glycoprotein also leads in the formation of naked or unmatured virus which are least infectious. although this study has significant implications repurposing and knowing the drug target and in understanding the mechanism of viral inhibition, the efficacy and safety of arbidol against sars-cov-2 still requires clinical investigation. as current drug options are more focused on inhibitors for ace2 and viral rna polymerase, potential drugs to impede the viral spike protein trimerization is also equally essential as the combination of drugs have a profound effect in combating the viral infection. this study also accenture in the development of new therapeutics for sars-cov-2 based on arbidol using structure-guided drug designing.sars-cov and mers-cov are considered highly pathogenic and are known to be transmitted from bats to humans via intermediate host palm civets 4 and dromedary camels 5 the full-length structure of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein was simulated by the i-tasser server online tool. 10 the spike-ace2 binding model was predicted using prism 2.0. 11 the spike protein and ace2 structure files were analyzed using pymol software (pymol v1.0).sars-cov-2 encodes at least 27 proteins, including 15 nonstructural proteins, 4 structural proteins, and 8 auxiliary proteins. 12 spike glycoprotein (s), a structural protein located on the outer envelope of the virion, binds to the host-receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). the s glycoprotein of sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 has 1104 to 1273 amino acids and contains an amino (n)terminal s1 subunit and a carboxyl (c)-terminal s2 subunit 13 ( figure 1 ). in the s1 subunit, the receptor-binding domain (rbd), spanning about 200 residues, consists of two subdomains: the core and external subdomains. 14, 15 the rbd core subdomain is responsible for the formation of s trimer particles. 16 the external subdomain contains two exposed loops on the surface, which bind with ace2. 17 investigating the evolutionary relationship of the rbd sequence in spike protein is helpful for understanding the virus origin trends.f i g u r e 1 structural diagrams of spike glycoproteins of sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2. all spike proteins of coronaviruses contain s1 subunit and s2 subunit, which were divided by the s cleavage sites. fp, fusion peptide; hr, heptad repeat 1 and heptad repeat 2; rbd, receptor-binding domain, contains core binding motif in the external subdomain; sp, signal peptide phylogenetic reconstruction determines the evolutionary relationship and host selection between spike glycoproteins in the human-close beta coronaviruses. to better understand the host selection of beta coronaviruses, the relationship of spike glycoprotein between sars-cov-2 and other closely related beta coronaviruses has been analyzed. the result showed that bat sars-like cov ratg13, with 96.2% overall genome sequence identity, 18 is an inner joint neighbor of sars-cov-2 ( figure 2 ). in october 2019, it was reported that sendai virus and coronavirus were the dominant viruses in the virome data of malayan pangolins. 19 it is noteworthy that sars-cov was the most widely distributed coronavirus in the pangolin samples. we blasted the sars-cov-2 reads and found that the spike protein sequence was present in pangolin sars-like cov (numbered srr10168377 here). the s protein in pangolin sars-like cov srr10168377 (marked as red star) possesses only 75% similarity with sars-cov-2, partly because there were more than 220 residues in the s2 subunit that had not been read in the virome data.removing the lost sequences, there was still 88% similarity with sars-cov-2 (data not shown); the full-length sequence of spike protein between pangolin sars-like cov and sars-cov-2 seems to be a little different. the temporal tree showed that the divergence time of spike sequence between bat sars-like ratg13 and sars-cov-2 is 0.18, while it is 1.50 in bat sars-like ratg13 to sars-cov-2 cluster ( figure s1 ).global expansion and deep sequencing work have led to an increased amount of the sars-cov-2 genotype. studying selective stress may be helpful for assessing the variability and potential for host changes of sars-cov-2. based on a report, 20 the selective pressure analysis showed that genes (orf10 and orf7a) have a greater selective pressure, and spike has an average pressure relative to the whole genome ( figure s2 ). the spike rbd-receptor interaction is a key factor determining the host range of coronaviruses. the rbd sequences of spike protein from sars-cov, bat, or pangolin sarslike cov and sars-cov-2 were aligned ( figure 3 ). there are some deletions from 473 to 490 residues in bat sars-like cov, which are located in the external subdomain, and it seems that these viruses do not infect humans naturally, given that there is no direct evidence showing that bat sars-like cov has ever infected humans. interestingly, the sars-cov-2 rbd sequence from 329 to 521 possesses 93% identity with pangolin sars-like cov srr10168377, which has higher than 89% similarity with bat sars-like cov ratg13 residues k479 and s487 in civet sars-cov can effectively recognize civet ace2, but bind with human ace2 much less efficiently. 23 the residue thr487 in rbd binds to tyr41 and lys353 in human ace2 by van der waals contacts, 25 (table 1) . mouse and dog also have multiple (≥5) substitutions while cat and hamster only contain three mutations in the region. it was showed that lys31, tyr41, and lys353 mutations substantially interfere with the s1-ig association. 24 this study provides information and possibilities that like snakes and pangolins, turtles (c. picta bellii, c. mydas, and p. sinensis) may also act as the potential intermediate hosts transmitting sars-cov-2 to human, although much more needs to be confirmed. s-e-m-n -3' flanked by untranslated regions on both the ends. the rep gene codes for the nonstructural protein, membrane and envelope protein that are essential in viral assembly and nucleocapsid protein is important for rna synthesis (15) . the spike protein is responsible for the attachment of the virus to the host cell and its subsequent entry into it (6, 15, 16) .recently, mutations in the orf1, orf8, n region of sars-cov-2 were observed (17) . the mutations in non-structural proteins (nsp) 2 and nsp 3 could be the reasons for its unique mechanism of action as compared to sars. the presence of glutamine, serine, and proline at various positions in the sequence of sars-cov-2 is believed to affect its properties as shown in table 1 , table 2 and table 3 (18) .only 3.8 % variability was seen in the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 and the strain of coronavirus obtained from bats i.e. ratg13, thereby indicating 96.2 % similarity between the two.these genomes of sars-cov-2 were seen to be expressed in two types of strains of cov, namely l and s type. recently genomes of 103 patients infected with sars-cov-2 were analysed, where-in 101 of them showed a linkage in polymorphism for single nucleotide. among these 72 of them expressed l type, which is named due to involvement of leucine codon and 29 strains showed s type named due to involvement of serine codon. this change was observed at the site of 8,728 and 28,144 of the sequence (19) .similar studies of sars-cov-2 genome analysis showed type i and type ii sars-cov-2 genotypes that differed at sites 8750, 29063 and 28112 (20) as shown in figure 5 and sars-cov-2 genome types a (ancestral genome), b (obtained by mutations at c28144t and t8782c in type a) and c (obtained by mutation at g26144t in type b) (21) . full genome sequencing of various sars-cov-2 isolates have shown multiple variations in different orfs corresponding to the sequence of sars-cov-2 obtained from bat ratg13 which shows that as the virus having spread globally, has evolved with numerous mutations (22) as shown in supplementary table 1 that could place the medical fraternity at an even more alarming situation.structural proteins of sars-cov-2the envelope of corona-virion contains protruding projections from its surface called the large surface glycoproteins or spike proteins responsible for recognizing the host's receptor followed by its binding to it and fusing with its membrane (23) . due to the crown-shaped appearance of these projections it has been named coronavirus {corona-a crown (latin)} (24).the amino acid sequence of the sars-cov-2 spike protein has ~ 75 % homology with sars-cov spike protein (25) . other findings have reported a 70% similarity of s1 subunit and 99% similarity of s2 subunit of sars-cov-2 with sars-cov (11) . its molecular weight is about 141178 kda and contains 1273 amino acids (26) . generally, a coronavirus particle may contain about 50-100 timers of spikes (27) . the spike protein consists of an ectodomain element, transmembrane moiety and a short intracellular c fragment. the viral ectodomain inherits two subunits, namely s1 that facilitates receptor binding and s2 that facilitates membrane fusion. it is structured like a clove built from three s1 subunits and s2 stem formed of a trimer (10) as shown in figure 6a . the genomic sequence of spike with its amino acids is shown in figure 6b . the functional components of spike protein were mapped according to the amino acid positions as shown in table 4 .spike proteins also help in promoting adhesion of infected cells with adjacent non-infected cells that enhance the spreading of the virus (29) . the additional 12 nucleotides towards the arginine cleaving site correlate to a cleavage site similar to furin and this site is known to be cleaved during virus activation (24) .the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and type ii transmembrane serine protease (tmprss2) are co-expressed in type ii pneumocytes. tmprss2 initiates cleavage followed by activation of spike protein that promotes membrane fusion and viral entry into the cells and also the transmission of infection to neighbouring cells, specifically in the conditions of low ph (30) . the spike protein of sars-cov-2 undergoes a structural transformation for the binding of the viral membrane to the host membrane to occur. a receptor binding domain (rbd) is present in the s1 subunit that recognizes and binds to the human ace2 with 10-20 times more affinity than the sars-cov domain (31) possibly due to polymorphism at 501t thus enhancing the receptor spike interactions and promoting infectivity (32) . a unique feature is seen in the s1 ad s2 sites of sars-cov-2 where both these sites form a prolonged loop which lies towards the outer end of the trimer thus rendering sars-cov-2 to more proteolytic interaction by the proteases of host cells (4).the s1 subunit occurs in the prefusion trimer phase. however, upon binding to the host cell receptor, it destabilizes and sheds itself and causes the s2 subunit to transform into a stable postfusion state.this spike protein can display itself in an upward phase (available for a receptor) or downward phase (unavailable for a receptor).in the downward phase of n-cov, the rbd lies near the trimer's central pocket (31) .the s2 subunit comprises a single fusion peptide (fp), an additional proteolytic site with an internal fusion peptide, and just prior to the transmembrane domain, a two heptad-repeat (24) . recent analysis has suggested four novel inserts in the spike protein that are unique to sars-cov2. in the s1 subunit, the insert i hints about the n terminal domain while the c terminal domain has been implicated by the insert ii and insert iii. at the junction of the subdomain 1 and subdomain 2 of the s1 subunit lies the insert iv. interestingly the inserts i, ii, and iii have shown remarkable homology with the hiv-1 gp120 while insert iv to gag proteins (33) .another study revealed the characteristic features of certain amino acid in s protein that has rendered sars-cov-2 with high affinity to ace receptor. the presence of glutamine 493, asparagine 501, leucine 455, phenylalanine 486 and serine 494 amino acids have shown to provide a boost in ace2 binding (32) .therefore, the s protein plays a crucial role in viral entry into the host cells and the structural abilities in this newly discovered sars-cov-2 boost its intended actions. the fact that these protruding spikes are the first point of contact with host receptors, therapeutic strategies can be applied to prevent its binding to target receptors and prevent further actions.the n protein is the most abundant viral protein and is expressed in host samples during the early stages of infection. it is known to bind to viral rna to form a core of a ribonucleoprotein which helps in its host cell entry and interaction with cellular processes following the fusion of virus (34) .the sequence of sars-cov-2 n protein shows ~90 % similarity with the n protein of sars-cov (25) . the rtc i.e. the replication transcription complexes formed by the non-structural proteins (nsp) play an essential part in viral genome synthesis (35) . a linker region is sandwiched between an n terminal domain (ntd) and a c terminal domain (ctd) as shown in figure 7 .the n protein in sars-cov caused activation of cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) enhancer further causing the expression of cox-2 that causes inflammation in the lungs (37) . it is also involved in the inhibition of phosphorylation of b23 phosphoprotein that is essential in the progression of the cell cycle during the duplication of centrosome (38) . the n protein interacts with the p42 proteasome subunit, which is known to degrade the viral proteins (39) . it also showed to inhibit type i interferon (ifn) causing restrictions in immune responses generated by the body due to viral infections (40) .cell line studies showed that due to the inhibitory action of n protein on the cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinase complex (c-cdk) the progression of s-phase was reduced (41) another cell line study showed reduced proliferation of cells due to inhibition of cytokinesis and protein translation due to n protein-induced aggregation of a translation factor named as human elongation factor 1 α (hef1 α) (42) . the viral rna synthesis is known to increase when n protein is seen to interact with heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnrnpa1) (43) .the structural elucidation sars-cov-2 n protein ntd showed that a single asymmetric confirmation of four n protein ntd depicted a structural alignment of an orthorhombic crystal.basically, it looks like a wrist made up of acidic moieties with a palm of basic components and the core of β sheet extending like fingers (36) . the ntd of n protein is known to bind to the rna genome where the sequencing of different ordered and disordered regions of n protein showed that rna binding occurs at the n45-181 region that exists as a monomer (44) . it was also reported that the presence of amino acids arginine at position 94 and tyrosine at 122 might be essential for the binding of sars-cov rna (45) . but further studies proved that the combination of the linker region and the ntd and even the ctd of n protein was essential in enhanced binding capacity to the viral rna where the latter showed about 6-8 times more binding performance than the earlier, as ctd is dimeric in nature with 2 disordered regions around it as compared to the single disordered region around ntd (46) .the central linker region is rich in serine and arginine residues (sr region) possessing essential phosphorylation sites that may regulate the n protein functioning (47) . this site forms the major phosphorylation site that enhances the interactions in proteins, localization of linker proteins within the cell, and mediates the desired activity. higher the alanine substitutions reduced the amount of n protein phosphorylation. (48). in the linker region, the interactions of sr moieties with the central region lead to the formation of dimers of n proteins essential for activity (49).the ctd is hydrophobic in nature, rich in helix, and is also known as the domain where dimerization occurs. the reason for this is that it contains residues that form homodimers by self-association of itself (45) . structurally every single asymmetric moiety of ctd consists of four individual homodimers joined to form an octamer. the arrangement of these moieties appears in the shape of the letter "x" that forms symmetric fold structures, one being perpendicular and another perpendicular to the midpoint of the structure. due to the positive charges in this region, the n terminus appears to be basic that could hint it to be a site for the binding of nucleic acid (50).the domain components possess large forces of repulsion that prevents interactions within the domains. this provides an electrostatically larger binding surface and prevents oligomer and nucleocapsid formation. therefore when nucleic acid binds to it causes neutralization of the charges causing accumulation of protein molecules to come closer and oligomerize thus forming nucleocapsids (46) .the n protein showcases various activities essential in the functioning and proliferation of the virus and thus is another essential component after spike proteins. along with s, the n shows a promising area in the field of developing effective therapeutics to prevent the proliferation of viral progenies.the e protein is a tiny integral membrane protein composed of an ntd, hydrophobic domain, and a chain at c terminal (51) having 76-109 amino acids (52) and 8-12 kda in size (53).the n terminal stretches from 1 st -9 th amino acids, the hydrophobic region ranges from 10 th -37 th position and c terminal from 38 th -76 th position in the structural sequence (54) . the amino acids in the 1-11 position are present in virion while the hydrophobic tail is towards the cytoplasm(55). the hydrophobic region forms oligomers to form an ionic pore across the membranes. structural elucidation of this protein shows its pentameric form containing 35 α-helical regions and 40 looped regions. both these structures showed randomized movements that modulated the normal activity of the ion channels, thus enhancing the viral pathogenicity (56) . in contrast, interactions within the c terminal domain may affect this pentameric conformation (57) .a novel feature is seen in the 69 th position of the e protein sequence of sars-cov-2 where arginine has been replaced by alanine, glutamine and aspartate compared in other similar coronaviruses.also, at positions 55-56 threonine and valine have been identified (58) . after translation e can undergo palmitoylation at cysteine residues or n mediated glycosylation at aspartate amino acid but may not be necessary for virus like particles (vlp) formation (59) .this protein form viroporins that are proteins of hydrophobic nature and small in architecture. these viroporins are essential for viral assembly, along with its release. they also mediate pathogenic processes and induce cytotoxicity (60) . the interactions of nsp2 and nsp3 heterotypically essential in inducing the desired curvature in the endoplasmic reticulum (er) membrane and m and e coexpression facilitates the production of spherical virulent particles (29) .the tail of sars-cov e protein that lies in cytoplasm targets cis-golgi complex region with the help of proline residues incorporated in it. the n terminal of e protein also contains additional golgi complex associating elements due to which mutations in the tail region do not affect the golgi complex targeting process (61) . the ionic gradient may be dissipated in the ergic and golgi compartment by the e that may lead to the exit of virion (52). the final four amino acids present in the c terminal of e protein hosts a motif named as postsynaptic density protein/disc large/zonula occludans-1 (pdz) binding motif (pdm). therefore e protein may facilitate disruption of the epithelium of the lungs due to binding of protein associated with caenorhabditis elegans lin-7 protein 1 (pals1) to the pdm (62).the m protein is present in a high amount out of all proteins in coronaviruses (63) . its length spans to about 220-260 amino acids with a short length n terminal domain, attached to triple transmembrane domains that are further connected to a carboxyl-terminal domain and belong to the n-linked glycosylated proteins and conserved domain of 12 amino acids (64) .structural analysis of this protein shows that it exists in two forms, namely long and compact form.these two forms are originally homodimers of n terminal ectodomain and c terminal endodomain that are different in conformation. the endodomain may undergo elongation or compression due to which it is named as a long and compact form. spike protein can be seen over these both forms but predominantly at the long-form that may suggest this form promotes spike installation. the tyrosine reduces at 211 may be essential instability of the long form of m. this form bends the membrane that creates a spherical structure encircling the ribonucleoprotein. (65) .the m protein is organized in a 2d lattice and provides a scaffold in viral assembly (27) . they undergo translation on the polysomes bound to the membranes, fused in the er, and carried towards the golgi complex where they interact with e proteins to generate virions. out of the three tdm, the first one is capable enough to encourage self-association of m proteins, improved membrane affinity, and retention in golgi (66) . proline is expected to create a steric bulk and rigorousness due to which the structure of sars-cov-2 may undergo a change in its conformation (18 x-x running title: sars-cov-2 structural proteinsthe outbreak of the sars-cov-2 related disease covid-19 has caused more than 6 million infections and over 0.3 million deaths globally. the sars-cov-2 spike protein exhibits two notable features; its receptor-binding domain (rbd) is optimized to bind the human cell receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and each subunit of the spike protein trimer has a polybasic cleavage site. 1 given the structural similarity between the spike proteins of the sars-cov-2 and its close relative sars-cov (2003) , the rbd of the sars-cov-2 has been quickly recognized in targeting the ace2 receptor, [2] [3] [4] which is required for subsequent viral entry. the atomic structures of the contact region between the sars-cov-2 rbd and ace2 have been experimentally obtained by different groups. [5] [6] [7] owing to the crucial role of the sars-cov-2 rbd, numerous vaccine and drug candidates have been proposed to target the rbd to inhibit the rbd-ace2 binding. [8] [9] [10] however, more research is beginning to show that mutations distal from the rbd (non-rbd mutations) of sars-cov-2 also influence its transmissibility. for instance, walls et al. 2 found that by mutating the t678nsprrar685 residues, which are distributed around 10 nm from the sars-cov-2 rbd, to a variant with t678--il--r685, the transduction efficiency decreased in human ace2-expressing baby hamster kidney cells. the mutant d614g (a single change in the genetic code; d = aspartic acid, g = glycine) of the sars-cov-2 spike protein, which began spreading in europe in february, displayed stronger transmissibility. 11 the d614 and g614 residues are located about 7 -10 nm from the sars-cov-2 rbd.surprisingly, yuan et al. 12 found that the antibody cr3022 isolated from a recovered sars-cov patient targeted a highly conserved epitope of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, which is also distal from their rbds. that is, the antibody cr3022 does not directly bind the spike protein rbd. all these works support the significance of non-rbd mutations and non-rbd-targeting in vaccine and drug design, which remains elusive thus far.in the present work, large scale all-atom explicit solvent molecular dynamics (md) simulations reveal that the spike protein polybasic cleavage sites, which are distributed approximately 10 nm away from the rbd, can enhance the binding affinity between the sars-cov-2 rbd and ace2. this information is used to design a negatively charged tetrapeptide, glugluleuglu, that targets the polybasic cleavage sites.the negatively charged glutamic acids (glu) are introduced to charge neutralize the polybasic cleavage sites and the nonpolar leucine (leu) is included to increase the hydrophobicity of the tetrapeptide, which favors binding to the polybasic cleavage site. the tetrapeptide glugluleuglu is found to bind to one specific polybasic cleavage site, resulting in a remarkable weakening (34%) of the spike protein-ace2 binding energy. our work provides guidelines to design therapeutic peptides to inhibit sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 binding. each subunit of the sars-cov-2 trimeric spike protein has one polybasic cleavage site (r 682rar685). 1the polybasic cleavage sites (r 682rar685) have not been reported for sars-cov or any other lineage b coronaviruses, and therefore, they are thought to be unique to sars-cov-2. 2, 13, 14 in comparison to the extensive studies carried out on the sars-cov-2 rbd, the polybasic cleavage sites have thus far not been widely investigated, and their function remains elusive. they are believed to be related to the viral transmissibility of sars-cov-2. 2, 14 moreover, they have been found to be essential for spike protein-driven viral entry into lung cells 15 .to elucidate the influence of the polybasic cleavage sites, the wild type (wt) spike protein-ace2 complex was investigated along with two mutants (figure 1) . the sars-cov-2 spike protein-ace2 complex was downloaded from the zhang-server, 16 which contains the full length of the wild type sars-cov-2 spike protein bound to the ace2 receptor. the spike protein-ace2 complex was solvated in a water box with a length of 16×18×24 nm 3 , where 0.15 m nacl was included. all-atom md simulation was conducted to equilibrate the system using the charmm 36m force field. 17 to preserve the spike protein-ace2 binding structure the non-hydrogen atoms of the spike protein trimer and ace2 were restrained, which were removed in the following simulations.the wt spike protein was subsequently mutated. for mutant 1, the n679sprra684 residues were removed for all the three subunits of the spike protein trimer. this mutant is similar to the variant experimentally investigated (t678--il--r685) 2 . in the case of mutant 2, the r682r683 residues were changed to e 682e683 for all three subunits of the trimeric spike protein, where e stands for negatively charged glutamic acid. for each of the three systems (wt and mutants 1 and 2) all-atom explicit solvent simulations were performed for a duration of 100 ns. and five parallel runs were carried out based on the simulation configurations at 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 ns. see the methods section. the five parallel simulations were employed to calculate the binding energy (table s2 in the supporting information) and intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the sars-cov-2 rbd and ace2. figure 2a is the final simulation snapshot of the wild type spike protein-ace2 complex.the polybasic cleavage sites are located 10 -13 nm away from the rbd. in all three systems, the sars-cov-2 rbd stayed bound to ace2 (figure 2b-d) . nevertheless, the potential energy between the rbd and ace2, which was the summation of the intermolecular short-range coulomb and lennard-jones interactions, exhibited remarkable differences ( figure 2e) . the rbd-ace2 binding energy for the wt spike protein is -740 ± 70 kj/mol. the removal of n679sprra684 compromises the rbd-ace2 interaction by 36% to -470 ± 50 kj/mol, supporting that mutant 1 heavily depresses the binding affinity between the rbd and ace2. this is in line with the experimental finding that the mutation of t 678nsprrar685 to a variant with t678--il--r685 of a murine leukemia virus decreased the transduction efficiency of human ace2-expressing baby hamster kidney cells. 2 meanwhile, the mutation from r682r683 to e682e683 decreased the rbd-ace2 binding energy by 20% to -590 ± 40 kj/mol. therefore, both mutants greatly destabilized the rbd-ace2 binding in comparison to the wt spike protein.note that ace2 is highly negatively charged (-28 e), which leads to a highly negatively charged extracellular membrane surface. the coulomb interactions favor the adsorption of positively charged species, for instance, arginine residues. also of note is that due to the positively charged nature, arginine has been found to enhance the cellular uptake of peptides 18 and promote the therapeutic delivery of peptides across the blood-brain barrier for alzheimer's disease 19 . therefore, the observed drops in the rbd-ace2 binding energy for mutants 1 and 2 could be primarily ascribed to a change in (long-range) coulomb interactions between ace2 and the spike protein (table s2) , even though the polybasic cleavage sites are around 10 nm away from the rbd and ace2. moreover, the substitution of positively charged arginine with negatively charged glutamic acid increases protein hydration (table s2) , which is consistent with the fact that negatively charged amino acids exhibit stronger hydration than positively charged ones. [20] [21] [22] further analysis of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the rbd and ace2 demonstrated a similar influence of the mutants (figure 2f ). for the wt spike protein, there exist 8 ± 1 hydrogen bonds between the rbd and ace2. this is in good agreement with the experimental finding 5 that eight rbd-ace2 intermolecular polar interactions were suggested based on the cryo-em structure. for mutant 1 the number of rbd-ace2 intermolecular hydrogen bonds decreased by 60% to 3.2 ± 0.5, and by 21% (to 6.3 ± 0.8) for mutant 2. these results further support that both mutants weaken the rbd-ace2 binding affinity, in line with the calculated rbd-ace2 intermolecular interaction energy.visualization of the distribution of the rbd-ace2 intermolecular hydrogen bonds (figure 2b-d) suggested that balanced hydrogen bonds at both ends of the rbd-ace2 contact region play a crucial role in stabilizing the rbd-ace2 binding. specifically, the number of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds decreases at both termini from the wt spike protein to the mutant 2 and to the mutant 1.interestingly, when we were preparing this work, an antibody cr3022 12 was reported to bind a non-rbd region of the spike protein. here, we explore the possibility to inhibit sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 binding by neutralizing the polybasic cleavage sites. to this end, we designed an oligopeptide: a tetrapeptide glugluleuglu (eele). negatively charged glutamic acids (glu) were included to neutralize the positively charged arginine residues at the polybasic cleavage sites. the hydrophobic leucine (leu) residue was introduced to decrease the hydration, as a test simulation on a tetrapeptide eeee showed that eeee became quickly dissolved (within 10 ns) owing to the high hydration of the negatively charged amino acids. [20] [21] [22] potential energy and number of hydrogen bonds between the rbd and ace2. in (c), the averages and standard deviations are from five parallel runs (figure 4) .three eele molecules were initially put next to the three polybasic sites of the trimeric spike protein.the system was equilibrated using the same process as that in the simulations in the absence of the tetrapeptide. one typical configuration is presented in figure 3a . the inclusion of the tetrapeptide eele can still preserve the spike protein-ace2 complex (figure 3a, b) . nevertheless, the rbd-ace2 intermolecular potential energy ( figure 3c) remarkably dropped by 34% from -740 ± 70 kj/mol without eele to -490 ± 50 kj/mol in the presence of eele. similarly, the number of rbd-ace2 intermolecular hydrogen bonds dropped by 41%. therefore, the presence of eele greatly lessened rbd-ace2 binding.of note is that only one subunit of the trimeric spike protein directly binds to the ace2 receptor.consequently, the three polybasic cleavage sites have different distances to the ace2 receptor and distinct local environment. furthermore, the ace2 receptor and the tetrapeptide eele are both negatively charged (-28e for ace2 and -3e for eele). these effects collectively lead to the observation that the three tetrapeptides exhibited different binding behavior to the neighboring polybasic cleavage sites. specifically, the polybasic cleavage site distributed the farthest from ace2 stably binds to the tetrapeptide eele for the whole simulation duration of 100 ns ( figure 3a) ; in contrast, the two polybasic cleavage sites closer to ace2 form weaker interactions with their neighboring tetrapeptides eele, which became unbound at around 40 ns and 74 ns.to experimentally design polybasic cleavage site-targeting clinical therapeutic peptides, a further increase in the oligopeptide hydrophobicity is required to elevate the stability in the sars-cov-2 spike protein-oligopeptide binding to determine if binding to all of the polybasic cleavage sites reduces the rbd-ace2 overall binding energy even further. meanwhile, the delivery of therapeutic peptides is known to be challenging concerning their short half-life due to the rapid proteolytic degradation and short circulation time due to the low molecular weight. 23, 24 these could be potentially overcome by covalently grafting oligopeptides at the side chains of peptide brush polymers, 25 or integrating them onto peptide amphiphiles 26 or pegylation 27 .using large-scale all-atom explicit solvent simulations, we investigated the impact of the sars-cov-2 polybasic cleavage sites, which are distributed approximately 10 nm away from the rbd, on the binding affinity of the rbd and ace2. it is found that in comparison to the wild type sars-cov-2 spike protein, a mutant with the deletion of n679sprra684 and a mutant with the substitution of r682r683 to e682e683 can both lessen the binding strength of the sars-cov-2 rbd and ace2. the mutation-driven difference is ascribed to the electrostatic interactions between the spike proteins (wild type and mutants) and ace2 and their hydration. in line with recent experimental findings, 2, 11 this work supports that distal mutations can impact the sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 binding affinity. our design of a tetrapeptide, glugluleuglu, that binds to the polybasic cleavage site of sars-cov-2, demonstrates that the polybasic cleavage site is a target for neutralizing sar-cov-2 rbd-ace2 binding. this supports a recent finding that the non-rbd region of sars-cov-2 can be targetted by an antibody. 12 this work besides shedding light on the mechanism by which the sars-cov-2 spike protein binds to human cells, suggests therapeutic peptides design to target the polybasic cleavage sites that inhibit sars-cov-2 rbd binding to ace2.all-atom explicit solvent molecular dynamics (md) simulations were performed using the package gromacs (version 2016.4). 28 the charmm 36m potential 17 was employed for the proteins, na + and clions. the recommended charmm tip3p water model 29 was employed with the structures constrained using the settle algorithm 30 .the sars-cov-2 spike protein-ace2 binding structure was downloaded from the zhang-server. 16 the spike protein-ace2 complex was reconstructed using the c-i-tasser model 31 based on the protein identification number qhd43416 32 for the spike protein. each subunit of the trimeric spike protein included the residues from m 1 to t1273 with the net charge of -7e, and the ace2 has the residues from s19 to d615 with the net charge of -28e, with e being the elementary charge.the spike protein-ace2 complex was first solvated in a simulation box with an edge length of 16×18×24 nm 3 (figure 4) . 0.15 m nacl was added along with 49 na + counterions of spike protein and ace2. the system composition is listed in table s1 in the supporting information. the energy of the simulation box was first minimized, which was followed by a simulation of 1 ps using the canonical ensemble (constant number of particles, volume, and temperature, nvt). the integration time step of 2 fs was employed with all the hydrogen-involved covalent bonds constrained using the lincs algorithm 33, 34 .another simulation of 1 ps was subsequently conducted using the isothermal-isobaric ensemble (constant number of particles, pressure, and temperature, npt). the velocity rescale temperature coupling was employed along with the berendsen pressure coupling. in the following equilibration simulation of 10 ns, the nosé-hoover temperature coupling was applied along with the parrinello-rahman pressure coupling. 35 in all the equilibration simulations above, the coordinates of the non-hydrogen atoms of both the spike protein trimer and ace2 were restrained using a force constant of 1000 kj/mol/nm 2 to preserve the spike protein-ace2 binding structure. the other parameters were the same as those in the production simulation below.the spike protein-ace2 complex (a) was solvated in a simulation box with 0.15 m nacl (b). the spike protein trimer is colored cyan, silver, and blue, respectively, and ace2 in orange. na + and clions are displayed using small blue and cyan beads, respectively, with water omitted for display. the polybasic cleavage sites (r682rar685) are highlighted with bigger blue beads. the system was equilibrated (c). the wt spike protein was mutated by removing n 679sprra684 (mutant 1 with r685 in purple; d) and changing r682r683 to e682e683 (mutant 2 with e682ear685 in red; e). each simulation lasted 100 ns (c, d, e). five parallel runs (10 ns each) were performed based on the configurations at 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 ns. same process was applied to the system with eele tetrapeptides (f).in the production simulation (figure 4c) , the periodic boundary conditions were employed in all three dimensions. the neighbor searching was conducted up to 12 å using the verlet particle-based method and was updated every 20-time steps. the lennard-jones (lj) 12-6 interactions were switched off from 10 to 12 å via the potential-switch method in gromacs. the short-range coulomb interactions were truncated at the cut-off distance of 12 å, and the long-range interactions were calculated using the smooth particle mesh ewald (pme) algorithm 36, 37 . the temperatures of proteins, ions, and water were separately coupled using the nosé-hover algorithm (reference temperature 298k, characteristic time 1 ps). the isotropic parrinello-rahman barostat was employed with the reference pressure of 1 bar, the characteristic time 4 ps, and the compressibility 4.5×10 -5 bar -1 . all the covalent bonds were constrained, which supported an integration time step of 2.5 fs. these parameters were recommended for the accurate reproduction of the original charmm simulation on lipid membrane system 38 the system had around 700,000 atoms and was computationally expensive. the performance was around 14 ns/day with 8 high-performance computing nodes, each with 24 cpu cores (intel haswell e5-2680, 2.5 ghz, 2 × 9.6 gt/s intel® qpi, 2500 mhz).the short-range coulomb and lj interaction energies ( table s2 in the supporting information) were calculated using the gromacs program gmx energy. the intermolecular hydrogen bonds were calculated using the gromacs program gmx hbond. the structural criteria of hydrogen bond were applied that the donor (d) -acceptor (a) distance r da ≤ 3.5 å and the hydrogen−donor−acceptor angle θhda ≤ 30°. 42, 43 based on the equilibrated structure, the wild type spike protein was mutated. for mutant 1, the n679sprra684 residues were deleted from all the three subunits of the spike protein trimer. this was to mimic the experimentally reported mutant by walls et al. 2 that the residues of t678nsprrar685 in the wild type spike protein of sars-cov-2 were mutated to t678--il--r685. accordingly, six clions, which were distributed next to the six arginine residues of r 682r683 were removed to neutralize the system. the system was further equilibrated to relax the mutated region, which was followed by the production simulations. the simulation parameters were the same as those in the simulation on the wild type spike protein. similarly, five parallel simulations were carried out based on the production simulation of 100 ns ( figure 4d) .for mutant 2, the r682r683 residues were changed to e682e683 for all the three subunits of the spike protein trimer. accordingly, the six clions, which were distributed next to the six arginine residues (r682r683) were replaced with na + ions to neutralize the system. again, the simulation parameters were the same as those in the simulation on the wild type spike protein. the production simulation lasted 100 ns, where five parallel simulations were performed ( figure 4e ).three tetrapeptides glugluleuglu (eele) were included, which were initially put next to the three polybasic cleavage sites (r682rar685) of the trimeric wild type spike protein ( figure 4f ). the spike protein-ace2 complex and the tetrapeptide eele were then solved in a simulation box with an edge length of 16×18×24 nm 3 . 0.15 m nacl was added along with 9 na + counterions of eele and 49 na + counterions of spike protein and ace2 (table s1 in the supporting information). the equilibration and productions were the same as whose for the wild type spike protein in the absence of the tetrapeptide.the calculated rbd-ace2 intermolecular coulomb and lennard-jones interactions are presented in table s2 in the supporting information.the following files are available free of charge at http://pubs.acs.org/doi/xxx. in the last two decades, zoonotic coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus sars cov (2002) 1 coronaviruses, the novel sars cov-2 appears to be spreading more rapidly and readily, posing a challenging task before the administrative and scientific communities. the sars identified from camel to human transmission in saudi arabia in 2012. 2, [9] [10] [11] [12] these coronaviruses have crossed species and resulted in causing human infections leading to mortality. it is reported that civet sars cov can also infect humans. 13 the viral rna stores the genetic information and also serves to translate into structural and non-structural proteins (nsps) of sars cov-2. the sars cov uses angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) as receptor for entry into human epithelial cells 20 to cause the infection.virus infectivity studies on hela cells have shown that sars cov-2 also uses ace-2 as receptor for cellular entry. 19 it has been reported that the first sars cov-2 infection in wuhan, china is caused from the original host, bats 19 , and in less than 4 months transmitted among the human populations in the entire world. the initial contact between the sars cov/cov-2 and human host is via recognition between the heavily glycosylated cell envelope spike protein of the virus and the ace-2 receptor of the human host resulting in infection. in order to understand the specificity, estimate the extent of similarities and variations in the sars cov-2 spike proteins required for binding the host receptor, we analyzed the representative spike protein sequences. further, in order to estimate the evolutionary progression of the bat sars cov genome, such that it is able to adapt to a human host as a novel coronavirus causing covid-19, we have analyzed the complete genomes of the bat, civet, human sars cov and human sars cov-2. we have carried out computational analyses on the nucleotide and protein sequences by generating multiple sequence alignments (msas), constructing phylogenetic trees and analyzing the three-dimensional structures of the spike proteins to address the above.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.the spike proteins were retrieved from the ncbi database using the sequence similarity search blast program 21 were considered for analyses. the redundancy in each dataset was removed using the cd-hit program. 22 the nucleotide and protein sequence homology analyses based on msa reveals the substitutions, deletions and insertions at each position. to understand the evolutionary relationships between the members, the msas were further processed to generate phylogenetic trees -a pictorial representation of the evolutionary relationships between related members of various sequences analyzed. the msas and phylogenetic trees of the spike proteins and complete genomes were generated using the next generation phylogeny.fr web service available at https://ngphylogeny.fr. 23 the protocol takes all sequences (nucleotide or protein) as input in fasta file format and generates the msa and phylogenetic tree. in the ngphylogeny server, we have selected fastme 2.0 program that infers phylogenies using a distance approach since it is capable of handling large datasets. 24 based on the input fasta sequences, a msa is generated that adopts multiple alignment the sars cov and sars cov-2 spike proteins retrieved from various host sources have a sequence length ranging between 1240 to 1273 amino acids. structurally, a spike protein is characterized by three regions; 1) the n-terminal extracellular domain, 2) a transmembrane anchor domain and 3) an intracellular segment. the n-terminal extracellular domain comprises a receptor binding subunit (s1) and a membrane-fusion subunit (s2). the s1subunit comprises two domains, ntd and rbd. the sequence analyses of spike proteins from the various host sources is shown in the msa in supplementary figure s1 and the phylogenetic tree in figure 1 . from figure 1 , it is observed that the paralogous proteins from individual host sources are associated with a distinct clade, the spike proteins from human sars cov-2 share highest sequence similarity according to the least pairwise distances.also, the orthologous spike proteins from other host species are highly similar according to the low pairwise distances. therefore, it is intriguing to see that despite high sequence identity between the spike proteins from various host sources, only some sars cov and sars cov-2 are able to bind the human host ace-2 receptor. in order to understand this, we have analyzed the msa of the spike proteins.from supplementary figure s1 , it is observed that the n-terminal ~500 amino acids, comprising s1 subunit vary to a moderate extent among all host sources relative to the later receptor. 31 the structures were superimposed and amino acid residues within 5 å distance from the ace-2 receptor were identified and highlighted in the pairwise sequence alignment of rbd ( figure 2b ). despite amino acid mutations in these regions in both proteins, the structures are highly superimposable. the location corresponding to the deletions of the two sequence regions in bat sars cov with respect to human sars cov-2 match with the ace-2 binding region ( figure 2c ). the second insertion sequence region, i.e.,cov-2 and is stabilized by a disulfide bond between 480c and 488c ( figure 2c ). this disulfide bond is conserved in all spike proteins that comprise the insertion sequence regions in rbd. in bat sars cov spike proteins, the position equivalent to 488c is replaced by a conserved glycine residue and therefore the above disulfide bond will be absent.interestingly, the bat sars cov spike protein qhr63300 which has acquired the insertion sequences in rbd also possesses the disulfide bond. we believe that the presence of the above sequence regions in rbd and the disulfide bond that stabilizes the conformation of the extended loop are required for the recognition of human ace-2.the sequence regions identified in this work serve as potential candidate epitopes for the design of antibodies specific for human sars cov-2 recognition. our analyses suggest that the bat spike protein qhr63300 has undergone significant evolutionary changes such that it resembles the human sars cov-2 spike protein more than the bat sars cov which may have led to the transmission of sars cov from bat to human as the novel sars cov-2.our results also suggest that the bat sars cov spike proteins; avp78042 and avp78031, are in the progression of acquiring mutations towards becoming sars cov-2-like proteins.the phylogenetic tree in figure 1 showing the proteins; qhr63300, avp78042 and avp78031 close to the human sars cov-2 are in support of our hypothesis.the representative complete genomes of nucleotide sequences from bat, civet, human cov and human cov-2 were analyzed. the msa is shown in figure s2 and the phylogenetic tree this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.in figure 3 . from figure 3 , it is observed that the human sars cov-2 genomes cluster into one clade (pairwise distance is lower than 0.002) revealing high identity that suggest their two sequence regions; "mesefr" and "syltpg" in the ntd of spike protein in human sars cov-2 and two sequence regions; "vggny" and "eiyqagstpcngv" in the rbd that interact with ace-2 may be exploited as potential candidates for antibody design. the accepted article this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.there is little or no research initiated to enlighten nigerians about the pathogenesis and targets for drug development for the newly discovered severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection as a way forward to achieve long-lasting future treatment of the disease, also many citizens of the country are not aware on the deadliness of the disease. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a kind of viral infection causing pneumonia-like symptoms was first reported in wuhan, china, in december 2019, and the disease is caused by sars-cov-2 [1, 2] . the outbreak was declared a pandemic by who on 30 th of january 2020, and it is regarded as the third introduction of a highly pathogenic virus into the human population. the severity at which the virus causes infection to the human population is age and immune status dependent. it is shorter among patients greater than 70-years old compared with those under the age of 70 with early symptoms which include fever, cough, and fatigue, other symptoms include sputum production, headache, haemoptysis, dyspnoea, and lymphopenia (figure 1 ) [3] . clinical features unmask by a chest computer tomography (ct) scan presented as pneumonia, however, there are also abnormal features such as rnaaemia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute cardiac injury, and incidence of ground-glass opacities that can lead to death [3] . unfortunately, the use of interferon inhalation for the treatment of some cases did not show clinical progress but worsen the condition and can lead to pulmonary opacities [4] . besides, patients infected with sars-cov-2 also developed gastrointestinal associated symptoms like diarrhea [3, 5] . to minimize the transmission of the sars-cov-2 through health care workers and patients, it is important to develop methods for the identification of various modes of viral transmission such as through fecal and urine samples [3] .genome sequencing of the virus of five patients with pneumonia hospitalized from december 18 to december 29, 2019, showed the presence of a previously unknown β coronavirus (β-cov) strain in all of them *6+. upon isolation and sequencing of the β-cov, it shows 88% identity to the sequence of two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndromes (sars)-like coronaviruses, batsl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, and about 50% identity to the sequence of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [7] . there are similarities in the genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with a minimum number of ten open reading frames (orfs) with the genome sequences of other covs such as mers-cov and sars-cov. the first orf making up two-third of the sars-cov-2 rna undergoes translation to two polyproteins. in comparison to mers-cov and sars-cov, in which their two polyproteins (pp1a and pp1ab) are then further processed by a post-translational modification to 16 non-structural proteins (nsps), which are nsp1 to nsp16 [8] . those nsps are then translocated from the rough endoplasmic reticulum into double-membrane vesicles where the replication and transcription of the virus occurred [9, 10] . while the remaining orfs of the sars-cov-2 that are localized on the one-third of the remaining genome are responsible for encoding non-replicating participating accessory proteins with unknown functions and structural proteins such as membrane (m), nucleocapsid (n), envelope (e), and spike proteins (s). an investigation by scientists in china revealed that the sars-cov requires angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor for their binding and invasion of the host. also, the binding is significant in the determination of the disorders caused by sars-cov-2 infection j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pathogenesis of the infection caused by sars-cov [11] . nevertheless, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a receptor required by mers-cov for invasion [12] . to predict the specificity of zoonotic coronaviruses in the infection of humans and adaptation possibility, a better understanding of the proteases action and receptor binding is essential. therefore, the development of therapeutics for the treatment of sars-cov-2 is highly warranted [3] . however, this review aims to discuss the molecular pathogenesis of sars-cov-2, its target for drug development, to enlighten nigerians on the deadliness of the disease, and the way forward to achieve future treatment of the current pandemic.the molecular pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 is poorly understood up to date. nevertheless, mers-cov and sars-cov mechanisms can shed light on the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2. the essential protein of sars-cov-2 that mediates binding to a human cell is spike protein (a protein involved in the first step of infection), the protein is composed of s1 and s2 subunit, in which according to cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoem) studies the receptor-binding domain (rbd) is a 3d structure with the size of ~12kda which is localized in the s1 subunit. the vibrational movement of the rbd has been examined during the characterization of the structure of related mers-cov and sars-cov and was found to have the same mechanism of action with sars-cov-2. interestingly, there are similarities in the structure of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike glycoprotein but the only structural difference is in the rbd, where the sars-cov-2 rbd is an angle closer to the central cavity of the trimer in the down conformation, while sars-cov rbd can packs tightly against the domain of the n-terminal of the neighboring protomer in the down conformation [13] . the binding affinity of the two viruses was investigated using surface plasmon resonance which showed that even though sars-cov and sars-cov-2 share the same binding receptor ace-2, the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 is ~15nm which is almost 10-15 fold higher than sars-cov binding to ace-2 receptor, this is the reason why sars-cov-2 can easily be transmitted from human to human. whereas, the complex formed by sars-cov-2 s-ectodomain and ace-2 has been studied using high-resolution cryoem, which revealed that the complex is similar to the sars-cov complex. the spike structural protein mediates entry of sars-cov-2 into human cells, it is a trimetric protein of class 1 fusion protein with metastable prefusion conformation, it undergoes structural rearrangement before human cell membrane fusion. the rearrangement is activated upon binding of rbd of the s1 subunit to the host cell receptor ace2 [13] . destabilization of the prefusion trimer will then take place upon receptor binding (viral membrane with the host cell membrane) which will lead to the shedding of the s1 and s2 subunit transition to more stable postfusion conformation. the rbd of the s1 will pass through hinge-like movement leading to transient hiding (down conformation receptor inaccessible state) or exposing (up confirmation i.e. receptor accessible state) of the receptor binding determinant, therefore this is the mechanism of engaging host cell receptor by sars-cov-2 [14] [15] [16] .before entry into human cells, mers-cov binds to the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) receptor and sars-cov binds to the ace2 receptor. membrane fusion and viral infectivity of coronavirus occurred by proteolytic cleavage of s20 position of s protein, this occurred in sars-cov pathogenesis. the use of two-step furin activation is essential for the fusion of mers with the host membrane [17] . the entry of sars-cov is also mediated by clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis [18, 19] .the sars-cov-2 binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme receptor (ace2) which results in its entry into the host. the virus releases its rna into the cytoplasm, the orf1a, and orfab of the rna is translated into polyprotein 1a (pp1a) and polyprotein ab (ppab). the orf1a encodes the enzyme protease that cleaves the polyproteins into non-structural proteins (nsps) which form the rna replicase-transcriptase complex that is needed for structural protein synthesis. the replicase complex executes the formation of negative-sense rna. upon fragmentation of the negative-sense rna into sub-genomic rna through discontinuous transcription, after which fragments that encode j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f spike, membrane, nucleocapsid, and envelope protein are formed, the structural proteins are then synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and then they pass through the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate compartment (ergic) into the golgi apparatus where sortation and assembly take place. finally, viral protein and genomic rna are then assembled as virion in the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi and then released outside the cell as a vesicle [20] [21] [22] [23] . after the invasion of cells by sars-cov-2, its antigen will be attached to antigen-presenting cells as the central anti-viral immunity. finally, major histocompatibility complex (mhc) or human leukocyte antigen (hla) in humans present antigenic peptides and then cytotoxic t lymphocytes specific for the sars-cov recognized viral antigen. therefore, this pathogenesis mechanism (figure 2 ) of sars-cov will help in the understanding of drug development strategies for sars-cov-2 infection. upon presentation of antigen by antigen-presenting cells, cellular and humoral immunity of the body is then stimulated by virus-specific b and t cells. therefore, igm and igg are the common antibody profile of sars-cov, and 12 weeks are marked as the time taken for igm against sars-cov to disappear, with igg lasting longer [23] . more researches on the cellular immunity of coronavirus have been carried out, and the most updated report reveals that the number of cd4þ and cd8þ t cells in the peripheral blood of sars-cov-2 infected patients significantly reduced [24] . during the acute phase of sars-cov infection, there is a decrease in cd4þ and cd8þ t cells. interestingly, sars-cov recovered patients have four years of t cell memory and the t cells can undergo ifn-g production, delayed-type hypersensitivity (dth) response, and proliferation even without the antigen [25] . also, t cell memories against sars-cov persist after six years of infection from recovered patients [26] . therefore, the understanding of the immunology of sars-cov-2 can help in the development of a vaccine [27] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f figure 2 . an overview of sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. the virus binds to the ace2 receptor to enter the human cell and its rna got translated to structural proteins (spike, nucleocapsid, membrane, and envelope), these proteins are essential in the invasion and infection of the human cell.pathological events associated with sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov infection is called acute respiratory distress syndrome (ard) [24] . the mechanism of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is that the effector immune cell uncontrollably released deadly systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines such as ifn-a, ifn-g, il-1b, il6, il-12, il-18, il-33, tnf-a, tgfb, etc. and also chemokines such as ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, cxcl8, cxcl9, cxcl10, etc [27, 28] . the cytokine and chemokine release by the effector cells will lead to organ failure and death, this happened in the severe case of sars-cov-2 infection [24] .for better survival of mers cov and sars-cov in the invaded host, for example, pattern recognition receptor is responsible for recognizing pathogen-associated molecule, however, the mers and sars viruses will develop a way of producing double-membrane vesicle without pattern recognition receptor, this allows the viral genome to replicate without the control of the immune system [29] . can be inhibited by mers accessory protein through activation of melanoma differentiated associated protein gene 5 (mda5) by interaction with double-stranded directly [30] [31] [32] . to elaborate, nuclear transport of ifn regulatory protein and activation of ifn b promoter is blocked by mers-cov orf4a, orf4b, orf5, and membrane proteins [33] . since coronaviruses, such mers can destabilize the immune system by altering the antigen presentation cells through the downregulation of gene expression. therefore, it is important in drug development to develop a strategy of destroying immune evasion by sars-cov-2 [4] .drug development from scratch will take at least a decade, following this, repositioning of existing antiviral drugs effective on sars-cov-2 might be the only solution to the current pandemic of sudden infectious diseases. the human innate immunes system plays a crucial role in the replication of the coronaviruses, together with the use of interferon will boost the immune response in counteracting coronaviruses [34] . sars-cov and sars-cov-2 bind to ace2 while mers-cov binds to protease receptors called dpp4 before entry into a human cell. therapeutics acting on the coronaviruses can either be blocking virus association with the human cell, inhibition of viral selfassembly through inhibition of structural protein, blocking rna synthesis through viral genetic material inhibition, and blocking critical enzymes of the virus to inhibit replication [35] . three strategies of coronavirus drug development were introduced by scientists. the strategy is testing the broad-spectrum of existing antiviral drugs [27] . drugs such as ribavirin, and cyclophilin inhibitors, and interferons are used to treat coronavirus associated symptoms such as pneumonia and can be considered to fall into this category. therefore, known metabolic characteristics, dosage, efficacy, side effect, approval for viral treatment are the major advantage associated with this therapeutic strategy. the major problems with such drugs are killing of coronaviruses in a targeted manner because they are too broad-spectrum, therefore, better-targeted therapeutics are indeed needed. the second strategy involved the use of existing molecular databases to screen and find molecules with therapeutic potential that are effective on coronaviruses [36] . the availability of high throughput techniques makes it possible for the screening of potential therapeutics, which can aid in finding the function of some new molecules, for instance, the discovery of drugs such as lopinavir/ritonavir (anti-hiv). the third strategy is the development of new targeted drugs from scratch based on coronaviruses pathological features and genetic information. it was perceived that drug development through this strategy will exhibit more efficacy against the virus. however, this might cost several years of drug development and clinical trials and it is estimated that drug development can take seven years, or even more than 10 years [34] . it is recommended that research should be initiated on drug development from scratch for highly contiguous viruses, this is to prepare for future pandemics.based on molecular targets, four major strategies of sars-cov-2 drug development were discussed below. also, the targets can be used to develop new drugs from scratch based on the pathological and genomic characteristics of the new sars-cov-2.3.1 therapeutics acting on protein and enzymes that are critical to the growth of the virus, by preventing its replication and synthesis of rna: -non-structural proteins (nsps) are involved in protein synthesis, translation, rna transcription, processing, modification, virus replication, and host infection. therefore, nsps are considered as a significant functional protein of coronaviruses, in which coronavirus main proteinase (3clpro), papain-like proteinase (plpro), rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), and helicase are superior molecular targets for small inhibitory molecule drug development as a result of their well-understood enzyme active sites and biological functions. for example, papain-like proteinase (plpro); this protein cleaves replicase polyprotein n-terminus, leading to the of release nsp1, nsp2, and nsp3, which is indispensable for the replication control corrections [7] . also, plpro can antagonize the immunity of the infected patient [16, 37] . these group of enzymes is necessary for the replication and viral infection, and it is the most popular target for (3clpro) ; otherwise called nsp5, this protein is cleaved automatically from polyprotein to form mature enzyme and it is then further cleaved downstream at 11 sites which will then leads to the release of nsp4 to nsp16. interestingly, maturation of nsp's is directly mediated by 3clpro, and the life cycle of the virus depends on the maturation of 3clpro. studies into the structure and catalytic mechanism of 3clpro can make it a promising drug development target for covid-19. therefore, anti-bacterial drugs such as lymecycline and anti-hypertensive drugs such as nicardipine are all known to block the activity of the 3c-like main protease. rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp); otherwise known as nsp12, this protein is conserved in coronaviruses, it forms the vital enzyme of the viral replication and transcriptional complex, rdrp has conserved amino acid of which are serine and 2 aspartic acid. therefore, nsp12 has been used as an important target for sars and mers drug development. even though no specific inhibitor of nsp12-rdrp has been found, its targeted inhibition will not result in significant side effects and toxicity of the host cell. strengthening research on this target can lead to therapeutic development for sars-cov infection [38] [39] [40] . however, natural products that exhibit anti-virus, anti-tumor, and anti-inflammation effects will exert binding affinity to rdrp, molecules such as betulonal (from cassine xylocarpa), gnidicin, and gniditrin (from gnidia lamprantha) will bind and inhibit the rdrp of coronaviruses. helicase (nsp13); this is a multifunctional protein with n terminal metal-binding domain and helicase domain. the structure of the n terminal contains 26 cysteine residues that make up the zinc and binding domain, with c terminus conserved motif. helicase is also a necessary component for the replication of coronavirus. therefore, helicase is identified as a target for antiviral drug discovery, but there is less research on helicase inhibitors. drugs such as anti-bacterial (lymecycline, cefsulodine, and rolitetracycline), anti-fungal such as itraconazole, an anti-hiv drug such as saquinavir, an anticoagulant drug such as dabigatran, and diuretic drug such as canrenoic acid were shown to be potent inhibitors of helicase [41, 42] . also, studies have shown that myricetin and scutellarein can potentially inhibit the sars-cov-2 helicase protein in vitro by affecting the atpase activity, but not the unwinding activity of nsp13 [43] .inhibiting its self-assembly: -the core structural protein of coronavirus that gathered to form a special corolla like structure on the viral surface like trimer is called spike protein, its binds to host cell receptor using its rbd which results to the invasion of the host. host cell protease cleaves spike protein into s1 and s2, the s1 binds to surface receptor of the host, and s2 mediates virus to cell fusion and cell to cell fusion. cleavage activation and structural integrity are crucial in the invasion and virulence activity, which is mediated by spike protein [44] . strategies to block spike protein as a means of preventing coronavirus from entering the host are regarded as valuable for the development of antiviral drugs [44, 45] . natural flavonoids (licoflavonol from glycyrrhiza uralensis), therapeutics such as anticoagulant drug (dabigatran etexilate), anti-fungal drugs (posaconazole and itraconazole), anti-hypertensive drugs (rescinnamine, iloprost, and prazosin), and an anti-bacterial drug (sulfasalazine, azlocillin, penicillin, and cefsulodin) inhibit coronavirus binding to a receptor in the cell surface of human cell [6] .the rdb located in the s1 of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 is also a target for the development of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. despite the fact of structural homology of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov by cryoem studies, a monoclonal antibody that was originally developed to target sars-cov rbd was tested against sars-cov-2 rbd sd1 fragment, but the antibody did not show binding affinity to sars-cov-2. this is to say there are some amino acids involved in the interaction between the rbd of the spike protein and ace2 receptor in sars-cov-2 that are not the same in sars-cov.this is further supported by [46] that modeling of sars-cov-2 rdb interaction with ace2 revealed some sequence of amino acids that are important for the interaction between ace2 and rbd of spike glycoprotein, but there is less clarity on the actual sequence involved in that interaction. therefore, there is a need for new monoclonal antibody development for rbd of sars-cov-2. hence, the knowledge of spike protein of the sars-cov-2 atomic level using cryoem will enable scientists to carry out protein engineering, design, and development of more effective inhibitory molecules and monoclonal antibodies [13] .-virulence factors in coronavirus that interferes with the innate immunity of infected cells are nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a. the nsp1 induces degradation of host mrna and interferon type 1 production upon binding to the 40s ribosomal subunit [47] . while nsp3c binds with the nucleotide of the host (adp-ribose) which gives coronavirus the ability to resist innate immunity, for instance, bone marrow matrix antigen 2 blocks assembled coronavirus in the host cell. also, sars-cov orf7a interacts with bst 2 and blocks its glycosylation which results in termination of orf7a activity [48] . therefore, the aforementioned virulence factors are potential drug discovery targets for coronavirus. for example, anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory natural products can bind and inhibit those virulence factors, also drugs such as platycodin d, streptomycin, tetracycline, piperacillin, cefpiramide, and lymecycline (from platycodon grandifloras) can potentially inhibit coronavirus virulence factors [49, 50] .-the receptor of the spike rna binding domain of sars-cov is the ace2 receptor. since sars-cov can interact with the angiotensin receptor, blocking the receptor can be a target for therapeutics development for sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, antihypertensive drugs (losartan), anti-bacterial (cefmenoxime), hepatoprotective (silybin), anti-diabetes (troglitazone), and analgesia (ergotamine) bind with high affinity to angiotensin 2 receptor [6] .rna dependent rna polymerase (nsp12) is the most promising molecular target for sars-cov-2 drug development. the current state in finding treatment for sars-cov-2 is drug repositioning in which drug targeted for the treatment of the ebola virus called remdesivir, which showed efficacy against sars-cov-2 replication. therefore, the rna dependent rna polymerase inhibitor (rdrp's)called remdesivir was developed by gilead science, inc to mimic the structure of adenosine, and is regarded as nucleotide analog, it was developed originally to inhibit ebola virus replication. even though the drug did not pass the phase 3 clinical trial on the ebola virus, but studies have shown that it is promising for the treatment of covid-19 [51] . also, the drug was reported to be the most promising for sars-cov-2 replication inhibition by who. as a result of structural similarities of rdrp's of various viruses, remdesivir can serve as a broad antiviral drug. studies have also shown that the drug is effective against mers-cov. interestingly, the usa and china commence the phase 3 clinical trial of remdesivir against sars-cov-2 [52] . even though drugs such as broad-spectrum antibiotics, anti-viral drugs, and interferons-a nebulization have been used in the reduction of viral load, but it is the only remdesivir that has a promising impact on sars-cov-2. the controversy of the efficacy of drugs used in the treatment of sars-cov and mers-cov such as ribavirin, corticosteroids, lopinavir-ritonavir, and interferon, is what makes them not to be investigated for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. but the satisfactory result was achieved after the trial of remdesivir in mice model, in which after the treatment of the mice a day after infection with coronavirus there is a decrease in the viral load and an improvement in mice pulmonary function. however, remdesivir administration after the viral load reaches a maximum peak of infection cannot improve the symptoms of the patient, but remdesivir can improve patient symptoms before the virus reaches its maximum peak. treatment of rhesus monkey with remdesivir 24 hours before the infection is promising in the reduction of symptoms associated with mers-cov infection, and within 2 hours of administration of 10g of remdesivir in rhesus monkey results to peripheral blood mononuclear blood distribution of the drug, followed by drug activation to nucleotide triphosphate [53] . according to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the new england journal of medicine, a patient with recent travel to wuhan china was diagnosed with covid-19 after returning to washington on january 15, 2020, even though there is an improvement on the patient symptoms upon remdesivir treatment, but the viral load got decreased before the treatment, this is to say that the viral infection is self-limiting and his immune system might have started fighting the infection. therefore, it is not clear whether the improvement in the symptoms of the patient is due to the drug or the patient's natural immunity. however, remdesivir is expected to be a specific drug that targets the rdrp of sars-cov-2 [54] . the great zealot of chinese to combat the pandemic has initiated research on covid-19 drugs, in which remdesivir was approved for clinical trial after passing stringent ethical review and was on 5 th february 2020 launched for the trial. china's compassionate use reported that remdesivir will be the immediate drug for the treatment of severe covid-19 if proven to be effective. what brought remdesivir to the stage of the clinical trial is safety and good pharmacokinetics [55] . remdesivir in vitro inhibition research carried out by wuhan research institute find out that the drug can block the replication of the virus at (ec50 = 0.77 μm, cc50 > 100 μm, si > 129.87) very low micromolar concentration of infected-vero e6 cells . other studies have shown that effective treatment of sars-cov-2 infection can only be achieved by combinational treatment of chloroquine and remdesivir which will result in the blockage of the viral replication and recovery of the patient from the disease [56] . chloroquine increases the endosomal ph of a cell as well as affecting glycosylation of cellular receptor, these result in blockage of sars-cov-2 infection [50, 57] . the effect of chloroquine on sars-cov-2 was further investigated by [50] , and they reported that chloroquine function at entry and post-entry of the virus in addition to its antiviral activity. also, chloroquine can modulate the immune system which in turn will result in the enhancement of its antiviral activity, it can also inhibit the replication of coronavirus in the epithelial cells of lungs through cellular receptor glycosylation interference. the authorization to use chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection was granted by the fda of the u.s.a, hence chloroquine function in the blocking of virus fusion to the cell membrane [58, 59] . widely distribution of chloroquine in blood and lungs upon its administration orally is another interesting future of the use of chloroquine in establishing treatment for sars-cov-2 infection. it was recommended that covid-19 patients with mild, moderate, and severe symptoms should take 500mg of chloroquine twice in a day, this prescription has shown to decrease the length of stay in the hospital with improved symptoms. hydroxychloroquine has the same activity as chloroquine because they are having an identical mechanism of action [60] . moreover, intensive research is needed to unravel the potential of other receptors for drug discovery and development for sars-cov-2. besides, [59] reported that synthetic mrna called moderna's mrna-1273 can be used as a vaccine for protection against sars-cov-2 infection, in which upon its intramuscular administration, it can evoke antiviral effect directed to the spike protein, this is to say the synthetic mrna encodes pre-fused spike protein of sars-cov-2. the use of mrna to elicit antiviral activity does not need the use of a virus, unlike conventional vaccines.the clinical trial phase 1 of mrna-1273 is currently taking place and if the vaccine is promising, its efficacy will be investigated immediately. to sum up, rna dependent rna polymerase and spike protein of sars-cov-2 are the most promising targets for sars-cov-2 vaccine and drug development, and therapeutics repositioning [61] .drug development for viral pathogens is a long-term process. however, as drug repositioning is taking place for the treatment and reduction of the peak of the covid-19 pandemic, it is also imperative to identify some promising targets for drug development to have long-lasting future treatment for the disease. also, an in-depth understanding of the sars-cov-2 pathogenesis and its atomic studies using cryoem to understand the amino acid involved in the interaction between the rbd of spike protein with ace2 of human cells are essential for effective vaccine and drug development. nigerian government should initiate research and clinical trial on antiviral drugs that can inhibit sars-cov-2 infection.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fas the current pandemic is claiming the health and lives of people all over the world, it is highly important to initiate and expand researches in the study of pathogenesis and drug targets for sars-cov-2, as this will help in developing treatment and vaccine and also will prepare the world to prepare the future reoccurrence of the disease. research should also be initiated on the development of bispecific inhibitors of sars-cov-2 to achieve effective inhibition of the coronavirus activity.the author declares that there are no conflicts of interest j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthis study investigated sars-cov-2 molecular targets (enzymes, receptors, and proteins) for drug development, the most promising targets based on drug repositioning, novel drug, monoclonal antibody, and mrna vaccine development to establish scientific discoveries in nigeria towards fighting the present pandemic.evidence before this studythere is little or no research initiated in nigeria towards the development of treatment and drug repositioning for sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, this is to motivates nigerian scientists to initiate research on drug repurposing and studies of molecular targets for sars-cov-2 therapeutics development from the scratch, so that nigeria will play a crucial role in fighting the present pandemic by helping in the identification of novel molecular targets for new drug development for sars-cov-2 infection. this can help the country to develop new treatments locally, repurpose existing antiviral drugs, and initiate clinical trials on them, which could be beneficial in fighting the pandemic and prevention of the future reoccurrence of the disease.proteins associated with sars-cov-2 infection can be explore for drug and vaccine development. molecular targets critical in sars-cov-2 replication and rna synthesis are papain-like proteinase (plpro), 3c-like main protease (3clpro), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) (nsp12), and helicase (nsp13). spike protein is important in binding to ace2 receptor, which is one of the great targets for drug repositioning, monoclonal antibody, and vaccine development. also, virulence factors such as nsp1, nsp3c, and orf7a can be explored for sars-cov-2 drug development. based on drug repositioning, remdesivir targeting rna dependent rna polymerase and chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine affecting the activity of spike protein binding to ace2 receptor are under clinical trial and they are yielding positive results. however, unless molecular targets are well studied that is when their potential could be unraveled.this study reveals that there is a wide variety of enzymes, proteins, and receptors that can be explored for the development of novel therapeutics from scratch and repurposing of existing antiviral drugs for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. it is suggested that extensive research should be carried out on rna dependent rna polymerase and spike protein to develop novel therapeutics apart from the repositioning of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir. this is a strategy to prepare for the future reoccurrence of the disease and to have long-lasting future treatment. background studies on the fusion-inhibitory peptides derived from the heptad repeat 1 and 2 (hr1 and hr2) regions of the hiv-1 envelope glycoprotein gp41 provided crucial information on the viral fusogenic mechanism. we used a similar approach to study the fusogenic mechanism of severe-acuterespiratory-syndrome-associated coronavirus (sars-cov).methods we tested the inhibitory activity against infection of two sets of peptides corresponding to sequences of sars-cov spike protein hr1 and hr2 regions and investigated the interactions between the hr1 and hr2 peptides by surface plasmon resonance, sedimentation equilibration analysis, circular dichroism, native polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis, size exclusion high-performance liquid chromatography, and computer-aided homology modelling and molecule docking analysis.findings one peptide, cp-1, derived from the hr2 region, inhibited sars-cov infection in the micromolar range. cp-1 bound with high affinity to a peptide from the hr1 region, np-1. cp-1 alone had low ␣-helicity and self-associated to form a trimer in phosphate buffer (ph 7·2). cp-1 and np-1 mixed in equimolar concentrations formed a six-helix bundle, similar to the fusogenic core structure of hiv-1 gp41.interpretation after binding to the target cell, the transmembrane spike protein might change conformation by association between the hr1 and hr2 regions to form an oligomeric structure, leading to fusion between the viral and target-cell membranes. at the prefusion intermediate state, cp-1 could bind to the hr1 region and interfere with the conformational changes, resulting in inhibition of sars-cov fusion with the target cells. cp-1 might be modifiable to increase its anti-sars-cov activity and could be further developed as an antiviral agent for treatment or prophylaxis of sars-cov infection.the global outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) 1 has seriously threatened public health and socioeconomic stability. the disorder is caused by a novel coronavirus, sars-associated coronavirus (sars-cov). [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the virus, 7 but the mechanism by which sars-cov enters target cells is unclear. elucidation of the fusogenic mechanism will provide important information for development of antiviral drugs and vaccines for treatment and prevention of sars.sars-cov could have originated from wild animals because a very similar coronavirus has been isolated from animals such as himalayan palm civets. 8 this coronavirus shares genetic and structural properties with others, including murine hepatitis virus and bovine coronavirus. [9] [10] [11] [12] for example, sars-cov also expresses abundant spike glycoprotein on its surface in a trimeric or dimeric structure, forming spikes about 20 nm long and 10 nm wide at the bulbous end. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] the spike protein of sars-cov, which is involved in virus binding, fusion, and entry, is a typical class i viral fusion protein, similar to the transmembrane glycoproteins of many enveloped viruses. 13 therefore, information obtained from studies of other enveloped viruses such as hiv-1 could be useful for investigation of the fusogenic mechanism mediated by the sars-cov spike protein.in the early 1990s, wild and co-workers and our group discovered potent hiv-1 fusion-inhibitory peptides derived from the gp41 heptad repeat 1 and 2 (hr1 and hr2) regions, designated n-peptides and c-peptides, respectively. [14] [15] [16] one of the c-peptides, t-20 (trimeris, research triangle park, nc, usa), was recently approved by the us food and drug administration as the first of a new class of anti-hiv drugs-fusion inhibitors. studies on the mechanism of action of these anti-hiv-1 peptides provided important information to elucidate the fusogenic mechanism mediated by hiv-1 gp41. [17] [18] [19] after binding of gp120 to cd4 and a coreceptor, gp41 changes interaction between heptad repeat 1 and 2 regions in spike protein of sars-associated coronavirus: implications for virus fusogenic mechanism and identification of fusion inhibitors occurrence of a group of seven aminoacids many times in a protein sequence. the seven aminoacids are labelled a to g; those at a and d are generally hydrophobic and the others are hydrophilic.a method for measuring protein molecular masses in solution and for studying interactions between proteins, including associative states, heterogeneity, and some thermodynamic properties.a complex formed by six rod-like structures. each rod consists of a peptide with ␣-helical conformation, like a spring. three peptides form the central trimeric core, and the other three peptides pack into the grooves on the surface of the central trimeric core.for personal use. only reproduce with permission from the lancet publishing group. aminoacid sequences of peptides derived from the hr1 and hr2 regions of sars-cov spike protein are similar to those from the hiv-1 gp41 hr1 and hr2 regions (figure 1); the similarity suggests that these two transmembrane envelope glycoproteins share a common mechanism mediating fusion between the viral and target-cell membranes. with a similar approach to that used for studying hiv-1 gp41, we designed and synthesised a series of peptides corresponding to the sequences of sars-cov spike protein hr1 and hr2 regions and used these peptides as probes to study the fusogenic mechanism of the virus and to identify antiviral peptides.peptides were synthesised on an applied biosystems pioneer peptide synthesiser (abi, framingham, ma, usa) by standard fmoc/2-(1h-benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (hbtu) methods, purified to homogeneity by high-performance liquid chromatography (hplc: agilent technologies, palo alto, ca, usa), and characterised with a maldi tof mass spectrometer (abi voyager de, foster city, ca). the peptide sequences are shown in table 1. biotinylated cp-1 and np-1 were prepared by addition of biotin with hbtu to the n-termini of the peptides during their synthesis.the inhibitory activity of the synthetic peptides on sars-cov infection of vero e6 cells was assessed as previously described. 26 100 tcid 50 (50% tissue-culture infectious dose) of sars-cov whu strain (accession number ay394850) was mixed with an equal volume of a peptide at graded concentrations and incubated at 37°c for 30 min. the mixture was added to monolayers of vero e6 cells in 96-well tissue-culture plates. after incubation at 37°c for 1 h, the supernatants were removed and fresh medium was added. on day 3 after infection, the cytopathic effect was recorded and the concentrations of the peptides resulting in 50% inhibition (ic 50 ) were calculated.to measure the binding affinity or kinetic dissociation constant of the sars-cov related peptides, we used surface plasmon resonance with an optical biosensor (model bia 2000, biacore inc, piscataway, nj, usa). biotinylated cp-1 (2 mol/l) was immobilised on streptavidin sensor chips (biacore). a surface reference to which no biotinylated cp-1 was bound was included in the analysis. the derivatised sensor chips were washed and equilibrated in phosphate-buffered saline (ph 7·4, 20 l/min), and the peptides to be tested were introduced at five serial dilutions in running buffer (phosphate-buffered saline, ph 7·4, and 0·005% p20) in 200 l injection volumes and at a flow rate of 20 l/min. conformation via hr1 and hr2 interaction to form a fusogenic hexameric core structure, which brings the viral and target-cell membranes into close proximity, resulting in fusion between them. at the intermediate state, a c-peptide can bind the viral gp41 hr1 region and block formation of the six-helix bundle, thus inhibiting virus fusion with the target cell. 20 the discovery of these hiv-1 fusion-inhibitory peptides launched a new line of investigation of viral fusogenic mechanisms and identification of antiviral peptides against infection by many other enveloped viruses-simian 21 and feline 22 immunodeficiency viruses, ebola virus, 23 newcastle disease virus, 24 and respiratory syncytial virus. 25 similarly to hiv-1 gp41, the s2 domain of sars-cov spike protein contains hr1 and hr2 sequences, which tend to form a coiled-coil structure (figure 1). the association, followed by 15 min of dissociation. the sensogram response data were analysed by commercial software (bia-evaluation version 3.1), and the kinetic dissociation constant was calculated. each experiment was done at least three times. the secondary structure of the peptides was determined by circular-dichroism spectroscopy as previously described. 27 the isolated peptides or peptide mixtures were diluted in phosphate buffer (50 mmol/l sodium phosphate, ph 7·2) at the final concentration of 10 mol/l, and the circular-dichroism spectra were acquired on a spectropolarimeter (model j-715, jasco inc, japan) at 4°c with a bandwidth of 5·0 nm, resolution 0·1 nm, path length 0·1 cm, response time 4·0 s, and scanning speed 50 nm/min. thermal denaturation was monitored at 222 nm by application of a thermal gradient of 5°c/min. the spectra were corrected by the subtraction of a blank corresponding to the solvent. the melting curve was smoothed and the midpoint of the thermal unfolding transition (tm) values was calculated with jasco software utilities as previously described. 28 the apparent molecular masses of the peptides and peptide mixtures were measured by sedimentation equilibrium analysis on a beckman coulter optima xl-i analytical ultracentrifuge equipped with a real-time video-based data-acquisition system and rayleigh optics. the peptides were run at three initial concentrations (250 mol/l, 500 mol/l, and 1000 mol/l) in 10 mmol/l sodium phosphate, ph 7·2, containing 150 mmol/l sodium chloride and 5 mmol/l tris(2carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride. sample volumes of 110 l were used in six-sector cells equipped with quartz windows. all experiments were done at 25°c, and sedimentation equilibrium data were collected at 48 000 rpm (167 731ϫg) for np-1, 35 000 rpm (89 180ϫg) for cp-1, and 25 000 rpm (45 500ϫg) for cp-1/np-1 complex. sedimentation equilibrium profiles were edited by the program reedit (jeff lary, national analytical ultracentrifuge center, storrs, ct, usa) and analysed by a non-linear, least-squares method with the program winnonlin. 29 the values of the partial specific volumes for the peptides were calculated from the aminoacid composition with the program sednterp (david hayes, magdalen college, oxford, uk; tom laue, university of new hampshire, durham, nh, usa; john philo, amgen, thousand oaks, ca, usa).native polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis (n-page) was done as previously described. 30 the isolated peptides and peptide mixtures at indicated concentrations were mixed with tris-glycine native sample buffer (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca, usa) at a ratio of one to one and were then loaded (25 l each well) on a 10ϫ1 cm tris-glycine precast gel (18%). gel electrophoresis was carried out with constant 125 v at room temperature for 2 h. the gel was then stained with coomassie blue. the image was taken by a fluorchem 8800 imaging system (alpha innotech corp, san leandro, ca, usa). in another set of experiments, mixtures of np-1 and biotinylated cp-1 were analysed by n-page as described above. the peptides in the gel were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (amersham pharmacia biotech inc, piscataway, nj, usa), which was blocked with 3% non-fat milk at 4ºc overnight, followed by incubation with streptavidin-conjugated horseradish peroxidase at room temperature for 1 h. after extensive washing, the membrane was stained with 3,3ј-diaminobenzidine dye and the image was taken as described above.a bio-sil sec 125-5 column (300ϫ7·8 mm, bio-rad, hercules, ca, usa) was used for size-exclusion hplc (se-hplc) to assess oligomer formation. 30 the hr1derived peptide was incubated with hr2-derived peptide (final concentration of peptide 50 mol/l) at 37ºc for 30 min, and then a 20 l sample was injected into the column connected to an hplc system (waters delta 600, milford, ma, usa). phosphate-buffered saline (ph 7·2) was used as the mobile phase with a flow rate of 1·0 ml/min. the ultraviolet absorbance at 195-320 nm was recorded with a photodiode array detector (waters 996). a bio-rad gel-filtration r12000 processor (sgi, mountain view, ca, usa). the models were optimised with the "refine 3" option in modeller, which uses conjugated gradient together with molecular dynamics by simulated annealing techniques. five models for each run were built, and the model with the lowest objective function was selected. the protein geometry was verified by quanta protein health check, and the resulting model was evaluated further for its stereochemical properties by procheck software. 34 we used the docking program gramm 35 to model the interactions between np-1 and cp-1 peptides. this docking algorithm predicts the structure of a protein (peptide) complex by maximising the geometric match of the images of two protein (peptide) molecules. the details of the docking approach have been described elsewhere. 36 role of the funding source the funding source had no role in study design; collection, analysis, or interpretation of data; the writing of the report; or the decision to submit it for publication.we analysed the spike protein of sars-cov strain tor2 5 by a predictprotein program. 37 the protein consists of an sars-cov spike protein was analysed for the probability of forming ␣-helical coiled-coil structures by use of the program multicoil; 31 sequences are submitted to (http://jura.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/multicoil/multicoil.pl).to predict the conformation of the np-1/cp-1 complex by homology modelling and docking techniques, we first looked at the sequence alignment of the np-1 and cp-1 peptides with the corresponding n-peptides and c-peptides of hiv-1 gp41. this analysis showed about 45-50% sequence similarity (figure 1). we used the x-ray crystal structure of the gp41 core structure (pdb code 1env) to build a model of interaction between the sars-cov np-1 and cp-1 peptides as described below. we aligned hiv-1 n-peptide n36 and sars-cov n-peptide np-1, and hiv-1 c-peptide c43 and sars-cov cpeptide cp-1 by use of the program clustalx. 32 any insertions and deletions were manually adjusted to avoid gaps in the helix regions. homology models of each peptide were built by the automated software 1-1199) , a transmembrane domain (residues 1200-1215), and an intracellular domain (residues 1216-1255). a signal peptide (residues 1-13) at the amino-terminus was observed, but no obvious fusogenic peptide sequence was identified. the spike proteins of most coronaviruses (except porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus and feline infectious peritonitis virus) are cleavable by cellular proteases to yield s1 (receptor binding) and s2 (virus fusion) subunits. 9,10,12,38 sars-cov spike protein does not contain a typical cleavage site (a basic aminoacid sequence-eg, rrfrr, grhrr, krrsrr). 9 therefore, the boundary between the s1 and s2 domains cannot be accurately identified at present. as in other coronavirus spike proteins, the s2 domain has a more conserved sequence than the s1 domain. the latter is a compact globular structure as predicted by the predictprotein program globe for prediction of globularity. the s2 domain contains hr1 (residues 892-1013) and hr2 (residues 1145-1194), similar to other class i viral fusion proteins. 9, 13, 39 analysis by the multicoil program 31 showed that the sequences in the hr1 and hr2 regions have a tendency to form trimeric or dimeric helix bundles, consistent with the observation that coronavirus spike proteins are homotrimers or homodimers. 9 thus, these regions may take part in the oligomerisation and conformational changes of spike protein during virus-cell fusion events. the spike protein of sars-cov has only about 24% pairwise aminoacid identity with the corresponding proteins of other coronaviruses, consistent with the observation by rota and colleagues. 6 however, the identity of their hr1 and hr2 sequences is much higher (table 2), which suggests that the sequences in the hr1 and hr2 regions are more conserved than other sequences in spike protein. alignments of the peptides derived from the hr1 and hr2 regions of sars-cov spike protein and the hiv-1 gp41 revealed high sequence similarity between hiv-1 n-peptide n36 and sars-cov n-peptide np-1 and between hiv-1 c-peptide c43 and sars-cov c-peptide cp-1 (45% and 51%, respectively; figure 1 ). thus, the hr1 and hr2 regions in sars-cov spike protein and hiv-1 gp41 may share certain structural and functional features.we have also noticed that most of the residues located at the "a" and "d" positions of the helical wheels are hydrophobic (figure 1; grey boxes) and more conserved than those in the "b", "c", and "f" positions, which are hydrophilic (figure 1; white boxes). this feature suggests that these helices form homologous oligomers by hydrophobic association through "knobs-into-holes" packing interactions at the "a" and "d" positions, in a way similar to interactions between the n-helices in the hiv-1 gp41 core. 18 the residues at the "b", "c", and "f" positions form a hydrophilic face towards the solution, making the oligomeric bundles water soluble.since the hr1 and hr2 sequences of sars-cov spike protein are highly similar to those of hiv-1 gp41, we hypothesised that the hr1 and hr2 domains have similar functions to those of hiv-1 gp41-ie, participating in the viral fusion process. 17,40 therefore, we designed and synthesised six peptides overlapping the sequences of the hr1 and hr2 regions (table 1; figure 1 ). the peptides range from 34 to 40 aminoacid residues in length.only table 3 : molecular masses of the isolated peptides np-1 and cp-1 and the np-1/cp-1 complex measured by sedimentation equilibrium (ph 7·2); np-1 and other n-peptides had random coil structure in the same solution. when np-1 was mixed with cp-1 in equimolar concentrations, the ␣-helicity increased ( figure 3) . however, the ␣-helicity did not change when np-1 was mixed with cp-2, or when cp-1 was mixed with other peptides from hr1. these findings suggest that np-1 and cp-1 associate to form a complex with ␣-helical conformation. this helical complex is relatively stable in phosphate buffer with a tm of about 59°c ( figure 3 ). gp41 c-peptides, interacts with a site in the hr1 region and interferes with the conformational change of the spike protein during the viral fusion process. to identify the cp-1 binding site in hr1, we immobilised biotinylated cp-1 on streptavidin sensor chips and searched for the cp-1binding peptides from hr1 region, as determined by surface plasmon resonance with biacore. cp-1 strongly bound to np-1 with a high binding affinity or kinetic dissociation constant (1·62ϫ10 -8 mol/l; figure 2 ), whereas other peptides derived from the hr1 region had very low or no binding activity to cp-1 (data not shown). cp-2, which has a ten-residue shift towards the c-terminus of cp-1 ( figure 1; table 1 ), did not bind to np-1, which suggests that the n-terminal residues of cp-1 are important for the interaction between np-1 and cp-1 or that the c-terminal residues in cp-2 interfere with binding between np-1 and cp-1. circular-dichroism spectroscopic analysis showed that the peptide cp-1 had a low content of ␣-helicity (with minima at 208 nm and 222 nm) in phosphate buffer we have previously shown by n-page that the hiv-1 gp41 peptides n36 and c34 can interact with each other to form a six-helix bundle. 30 by a similar approach, we investigated whether cp-1 also forms an oligomeric complex with peptides derived from the hr1 region. with the exception of np-3, n-peptides showed no bands in the gel (figure 4) because they carried net positive charges under the native electrophoresis conditions (table 1) and could therefore have migrated up and off the gel. np-3 did migrate down in the gel because it has net zero charge, but it showed two bands, perhaps because it has differing conformations. peptide cp-1 showed a band in the lower part of the gel. the mixture of np-1 and cp-1 showed two bands: the lower one had the same position as isolated cp-1, and the upper one is expected to be a higher order of oligomeric complex formed by np-1 and cp-1. to confirm whether this band indeed represents a complex formed between np-1 and cp-1, we analysed the mixture of np-1 and biotinylated cp-1 at different ratios by n-page in two gels. one was stained with coomassie blue ( figure 4, middle gel) . the peptides and their complex in another gel were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, which was stained with streptavidin-conjugated horseradish peroxidase and its substrate ( figure 4, lower gel) . with increasing concentrations of np-1, the intensity of upper bands increased and that of the lower bands decreased, which suggests that formation of the upper band depends on the concentration of np-1 and confirms that the band does not represent aggregates of cp-1.since the migration speed of a molecule or a complex in n-page depends on both the size and the net charge of the molecule or complex, this method cannot be used to measure exactly the molecular mass of np-1/cp-1 complex in the gel or to find out whether the lower band of cp-1 is monomer or oligomer. therefore, we analysed the apparent molecular masses of the peptides np-1, cp-1, and np-1/cp-1 complex by sedimentation equilibration, which was successfully used to find out the mass of the six-helix bundle formed by the hiv-1 gp41 n-peptides and c-peptides. 17 the isolated np-1 was a monomer and the molecular mass obtained for cp-1 corresponded to a trimer in phosphate-buffered saline (table 3). the hplc-purified mixture of np-1 and cp-1 showed a complex with a molecular mass of about 24 781 da (figure 5), which was close to the calculated molecular mass of a trimer of dimers. these results were confirmed by se-hplc; np-1 showed a single peak of monomer and cp-1 a major peak corresponding to a trimer, whereas the mixture of np-1 and cp-1 showed three peaks corresponding to np-1 monomer, cp-1 trimer, and np-1/cp-1 trimer of heterodimer (hexamer) ( figure 6 ). these findings suggest that np-1 is a monomeric structure and that cp-1 has a trimeric conformation in phosphate-buffered saline. once they are mixed at equimolar concentration, they interact to form a six-helix bundle consisting of three molecules of np-1 and three of cp-1. this notion is consistent with the biophysical properties of the hiv-1 gp41 n-peptides and c-peptides as shown by sedimentation equilibration and se-hplc. 17, 30, 41 alignments of the np-1 and cp-1 peptides on the corresponding hiv-1 gp41 n-peptides and c-peptides revealed reasonable sequence similarities and gave us confidence that a homology model of np-1 and cp-1 association could be built on the basis of the x-ray crystal structure of the hiv-1 gp41 core formed by the gp41 n-peptides and c-peptides. 18, 19 np-1 showed a typical coiled-coil structure (figure 7). most of cp-1 had an ␣-helical conformation with the exception of a kink in the middle of the structure. the structure of the possible complex between these two peptides was then investigated by use of specialised protein-docking software. 35 the residues at the "a" and "d" positions in the np-1 and cp-1 are hydrophobic. the complex structure formed by the docking technique also shows that there are hydrophobic interactions between these two peptides: eg, l898, i905, f909, i913, and i916 of np-1 interact very well with l1182, v1171, l1168, i1165, and i1161 of cp-1, respectively. owing to the lack of crystal coordinates of the sequence beyond the n-terminus of the hiv-1 gp41 peptide c34, 18 the corresponding n-terminal sequence (residues 1153-1159) of cp-1 could not be modelled and its interaction with the corresponding region in the c-terminus of np-1 could not be predicted.discovery of the peptidic hiv-1 fusion inhibitors [14] [15] [16] and elucidation of their mechanism of action [17] [18] [19] have provided important information to explain the fusogenic mechanism of hiv-1 and other enveloped viruses. 21 the anti-sars-cov peptide cp-1 and other peptides derived from the hr regions of the spike protein can be used as probes to investigate the roles of hr1 and hr2 regions in the process of sars-cov entry into target cells. the biophysical studies showed that the peptides derived from these regions of sars-cov spike proteins have similar properties to those derived from the hiv-1 gp41 hr1 and hr2 regions, respectively. for example, like the hiv-1 gp41 n-peptides and c-peptides, np-1 and cp-1 from sars-cov can interact to form highorder oligomeric helices, which may have important roles in the fusion of sars-cov with target cells. on the basis of results from this study and knowledge about hiv-1 gp41 and other viral transmembrane proteins, [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] we propose a model to elucidate the fusogenic mechanism mediated by sars-cov spike protein and the mechanism by which cp-1 inhibits sars-cov infection (figure 8). in the native state, spike proteins on the virus surface could be in oligomeric form through the self-association of their partly helical hr2 regions to form the stems of the spikes on sars-cov; hr1 regions may be in random coil conformation covered by s1 domain. after the binding of the s1 domain to a receptor (eg, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) 7 on the target cell (receptor-binding state), the s2 domain changes conformation by forming ␣-helices, extending and inserting its inert fusion peptide into the target-cell membrane, and exposing hr1 and hr2 regions (intermediate pre-hairpin state). then the hr1s form a trimer and the hr2 trimer dissociates to monomers. subsequently, the hr2 monomers pack onto the grooves of the hr1 trimer to form the six-helix bundle. this fusion-active core structure brings the viral and target-cell membranes into close proximity, resulting in fusion between the membranes and formation of fusion pores, which allow the virus genome to enter the target cell. if a c-peptide, such as cp-1, is present in the intermediate state, it could bind to the hr1 region and block hexamer formation, thereby inhibiting fusion. however, more direct evidence is needed to validate this model. nevertheless, the information obtained from other coronaviruses can provide indirect evidence to support the hypothesis.luo and colleagues 42 have shown that the spike protein of murine hepatitis virus, like hiv-1 gp41, 13, 18 contains hr1 and hr2 regions that may have important roles in spike-protein-mediated cell-cell fusion and virus entry.double alanine substitutions of the four middle heptadic leucine and isoleucine residues within the hr2 region lead to significant reduction in fusion activity and defects in spike oligomerisation. bosch and co-workers 43 reported the structural and functional characterisation of the fusion core complex formed by the hr1 and hr2 regions of the murine hepatitis virus spike protein. although our group and theirs have worked independently on distinct coronaviruses by different approaches, we have obtained surprisingly similar results. first, only peptides derived from the hr2 region, not the hr1 region, have antiviral activity. second, hr2 peptides derived from both murine hepatitis virus and sars-cov spike proteins have antiviral activity in the micromolar range. third, the fragments involving the interaction between the hr1 and hr2 in spike proteins of both viruses are located in the same regions. these findings suggest that murine hepatitis virus and sars-cov have a common fusogenic mechanism, which may be shared by other coronaviruses. the peptides derived from the hr2 regions of the sars-cov and murine hepatitis virus spike proteins have much less potent inhibitory activity than hiv-1 gp41 c-peptides (eg, c34 and t-20), which have activity in the nanomolar range. 16, 44 sars-cov and murine hepatitis virus may therefore have a fusogenic mechanism different from that of hiv-1. however, the peptides derived from the hr2 regions of many other enveloped viruses, including ebola virus, 23 newcastle disease virus, 24 parainfluenza virus, 45 and respiratory syncytial virus, 25 inhibit the corresponding virus infection also in the micromolar range, and these viruses have similar fusogenic mechanisms to hiv-1. 23 two major factors can affect the potency of a fusioninhibitory peptide: the sensitivity of a virus to the corresponding antiviral peptides; and the sequence and conformation of the inhibitory peptide. the sensitivity of hiv-1 to the fusion-inhibitory peptide t-20 correlates with fusion kinetics, envelope/coreceptor affinity, and receptor density. 46 figure 8 : illustration of the conformational changes of sars-cov spike protein during the process of fusion between the virus and target-cell membranesinsights into the viral fusogenic mechanism have been gained from studies on the peptidic hiv-1 fusion inhibitors. the sars-cov spike glycoprotein contains heptad repeat 1 and 2 (hr1 and hr2) sequences that are similar to those from hiv-1 envelope glycoprotein, gp41. this similarity might help to elucidate the mechanism by which sars-cov enters target cells, and thus could have implications for treatment.this paper assesses the ability of synthesised peptides derived from the sars-cov hr1 and hr2 regions to inhibit a cytopathic effect in tissue culture, and it investigates the interactions between hr1 and hr2 peptides. only the cp-1 peptide (derived from the hr2 region) had strong inhibitory activity in tissue culture. cp-1 and the np-1 peptide (derived from the hr1 region) interacted to form a six-helix structure similar to the fusogenic core structure of hiv-1 gp41.these findings confirm that the carboxyl terminal portion of the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov is a type 1 fusion glycoprotein. a possible fusogenic mechanism involves cp-1 binding to the hr1 region, thereby interfering with conformational changes that lead to fusion between the viral and target-cell membranes.the lancet • vol 363 • march 20, 2004 • www.thelancet.com these viruses might have different sensitivity to the corresponding inhibitory peptides. the antiviral activity of the peptidic fusion inhibitors depends on their optimum peptide sequences and conformations. changes in their sequences or conformations could substantially affect their antiviral activity and the stability of the complexes they form. 17, 47, 48 however, optimisation of the peptide sequence and conformation could improve antiviral activity.therefore, cp-1 can be used as a lead in designing more potent anti-sars-cov peptides for drug development. use of such peptides for treatment of sars is better than application of anti-hiv peptides for chemotherapy of aids because only a few doses should be needed to treat an individual with acute sars-cov infection (no chronic sars has been reported), whereas an hiv-infected individual might have to use t-20, one of the most expensive anti-hiv drugs, for life. furthermore, the anti-sars-cov peptides might also be used prophylactically as nasal spray or inhalation formulations to protect at-risk populations working and travelling in sars-endemic areas. the peptides derived from the hr1 and hr2 regions of sars-cov spike protein could be used to establish high-throughput assays for screening non-peptidic sars-cov fusion inhibitors; we have successfully developed several such assays with the hiv-1 gp41 n-peptides and c-peptides for identification of small-molecule hiv-1 fusion inhibitors. 20, 49, 50 any compounds that block the hr1-hr2 interaction could be used as leads for development of virus fusion inhibitors. contributors s jiang planned, directed, and executed this project. s liu carried out n-page, circular dichroism, and se-hplc analysis. g xiao did the virus inhibition assay. s liu and g xiao made equal contributions. y chen and h xiong carried out the surface plasmon resonance analysis. y he coordinated the study. j niu and j farmar synthesised the peptides. c r escalante carried out sedimentation equilibration analysis. a k debnath did the molecular modelling and docking study. p tien supervised the virus inhibition assay.as sars-cov-2 (the cause of the covid-19 pandemic) has swept across the globe, we have been reminded of what it is like to live with rampant infectious disease, without effective drugs or vaccines. researchers have piled in to the quest to provide rational designs. the structural biology community are no exception, with structures of sars-cov-2 proteins emerging at unprecedented speed. one of their main focuses has been the viral spike glycoprotein that binds to the receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), allowing virus entry. here, we discuss some of these recent papers on structural characterization of the spike and highlight how they might guide structure-based approaches to develop an effective spike-based vaccine.coronavirus spikes are trimeric molecules that present their receptor-binding domains (rbds) at their distal tips. these rbds recognize receptors, allowing the virus to enter cells. during entry, the spike undergoes a large conformational rearrangement from its pre-fusion to post-fusion state, driving viral fusion with the cell membrane. coronavirus spikes have been structurally characterized before, in particular for sars-cov and mers-cov, two related viruses that have caused epidemics of respiratory disease. a crucial question was whether sars-cov-2 resembled either of these related viruses. if it did, this would be exciting news, as years of study of these viruses could be applied to the quest for a sars-cov-2 vaccine.using cryo-electron microscopy, a number of studies, including walls et al. 1 , determined (reviewed in ref. 5 ) suggest that the most effective neutralizing responses are due to antibodies that target this small domain. ensuring that we induce only the 'best' antibodies also reduces the risk of producing dangerous antibodies that help virus entry through antibody-dependent enhancement. whether the future holds stabilized spikes or rbds, the new spike structures, which revealed that our knowledge of sars-cov is also applicable to sars-cov-2, are good news. now we must all hope that the quest to design rational vaccines based on this knowledge is as quickly realized as those structural studies, as the research community work together to fight this global pandemic.oxford, uk. ✉ e-mail: underthelens@bioch.ox.ac.uk structures of the spike. these resembled most closely the structure of the sars-cov spike. as seen for other coronaviruses, two conformations were visualizeda closed state, with the rbds docked against the trimeric core, and an open conformation with a single rbd raised into its 'up' position 1 . these studies also showed, just like sars-cov, that sars-cov-2 uses ace2 for human cell entry 1 . a crystal structure soon followed, showing how the rbd binds to ace2 (ref. 2 ). shortly after this, the first structure of a neutralizing antibody bound to the rbd of the spike glycoprotein showed that sars-cov-reactive antibodies could neutralize the new virus 3 , and polyclonal antibody sera against sars-cov also proved effective 1 . in many ways, these structural studies showed that the new virus resembles a virus that causes sars; a true sars-cov-2.so, what does this mean for design of a vaccine? two spike-based vaccine-design strategies, developed for sars-cov, should be applicable. the first approach relies on stabilization of the spike. to generate the most effective neutralizing antibody responses, vaccinated individuals should generate antibodies to the pre-fusion spike, thus preventing ace2 binding and cell entry. for this reason, structure-guided mutations have been designed that fix the sars-cov spike into this pre-fusion state 4 . stabilized sars-cov-2 spikes, designed using this method, are therefore promising for a vaccine. but do we need the whole spike? a second approach is to design a vaccine that just contains the rbd. a number of studies a spike with which to beat covid-19?nature reviews | m ic robiologycoronaviruses (covs) are a group of enveloped positive-stranded rna viruses that can cause respiratory, intestinal and central nervous system infections in humans and animals [1] . until last year, six strains of coronaviruses that are able to infect humans have been identified [1, 2] . among them, four human coronaviruses, including hcov-oc43, hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, and hcovhku1, are not highly pathogenic and only cause mild respiratory diseases [1] . however, two other coronaviruses, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) [3] [4] [5] [6] and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [7, 8] , have caused two large-scale pandemics and resulted in more than 8000 cases including nearly 800 related deaths and about 2500 cases including about 860 related deaths, respectively. the outbreaks of sars-cov and mers-cov showed that some coronaviruses can be highly-pathogenic viruses when they transmit to humans from animals [9] . therefore, it is urgent to develop antiviral treatments or vaccines targeting such high-risk coronaviruses like sars-cov and mers-cov.before efficient antiviral drugs or vaccines are developed for sars-cov or mers-cov, another outbreak of pneumonia caused by a new coronavirus (2019-ncov) has emerged in wuhan since december 2019. as of february 17, 2020, 2019-ncov has caused more than 70000 cases in china and nearly 8000 cases around the world with about 1700 related deaths [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . the full-length genome sequence of 2019-ncov was soon determined by the zhang group [15] . it was revealed that 2019-ncov has a probable bat origin and is 96% identical at the whole-genome level to a bat sars-like coronavirus [16] . in addition, 2019-ncov is also closely related to other sars-like coronaviruses and shares 79.5% sequence identify to sars-cov [16] . for some encoded proteins like coronavirus main proteinase (3clpro), papain-like protease (plpro), and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), the sequence identity is even higher and can be as high as 96% between 2019-ncov and sars-cov [17] . therefore, it has been thought that 2019-ncov would function the similar way to sars-cov in the human-infection and pathogenic mechanism [16] [17] [18] .coronaviruses uses the surface spike (s) glycoprotein on the envelope to attach host cells and mediate host cell membrane and viral membrane fusion during infection [19] . the spike protein includes two regions, s1 and s2, where s1 is for host cell receptor binding and s2 is for membrane fusion. the s1 region also includes an n-terminal domain (ntd) and three c-terminal domains (ctd1, ctd2, and ctd3) [21] . for sars-cov, the receptor binding domain (rbd) is located in the ctd1 of the s1 region. sars-cov attaches the human host cells through the binding of the rbd protein to the angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2) [20] . therefore, the interaction between rbd and ace2 is a prerequisite for the human infection with sars-cov. given the high homology between sars-cov and 2019-ncov, it was expected that 2019-ncov would also use the ace2 molecule as the receptor to entry human cells [18] . this hypothesis was further experimentally confirmed by the virus infectivity studies from the shi group, in which 2019-ncov is able to use the ace2 proteins from humans, chinese horseshoe bats, and civet as an entry receptor in the ace2expressing cells, but not cells without ace2 [16] . xu et al. have used moe to calculate the binding free energies between the rbd of spike protein and human ace2, showing that the binding free energy between 2019-ncov and human ace2 was −50.6 kcal/mol, whereas that between sars-cov and human ace2 was −78.6 kcal/mol [18] . very recently, the cryo-em structure of the 2019-ncov spike protein in the prefusion conformation has been determined [22] . the biophysical and structural evidence suggested that 2019-ncov binds ace2 with higher affinity than sars-cov [22] .although it seems clear that 2019-ncov infects human cells through the binding of the rbd domain to the human ace2 receptor [16] [17] [18] 22] , the molecular mechanism of the binding between the rbd protein and the ace2 receptor is still unknown. many questions remain to be answered. for example, previous studies showed that the binding affinity between 2019-ncov and human ace2 is weaker than that between sars-cov and human ace2 [18] . however, in reality, 2019-ncov has resulted in many more cases and seems to be more infectious than sars-cov. in this study, we have extensively investigated the spike protein/human ace2 protein systems of 2019-ncov and sars-cov by using protein-protein docking and molecular dynamics (md) simulations. specifically, we have extensively studied the free energies and dynamics of rbd-ace2 binding, spike protein, and free rbd systems. given that the spike protein is not only a potential drug target but also the virus antigen, the present study will be beneficial for the drug design, vaccine development, and disease prevention for 2019-ncov.in this study, we have investigated the rbd-ace2 complex, spike protein, and free rbd systems of sars-cov (genbank id: np 828851.1) and 2019-ncov (genbank id: mn908947.3). for sars-cov, the rbd-ace2 complex structure was directly downloaded from the protein data bank (pdb entry: 3sci) [23] . then, all the water molecules were removed from the complex structure. the free rbd structure was obtained by removing the ace2 protein from the rbd-ace2 complex. the structure of the trimeric spike protein of sars-cov was also downloaded from the pdb (pdb entry: 6acd) [21] . for 2019-ncov, the three dimensional (3d) rbd structure was modeled based on the rbd structure of sars-cov using the modeller program [24] , where the sequence alignment was performed using the clustalw program [25, 26] . the complex structure between the 2019-ncov rbd protein and human ace2 was then predicted by our protein-protein docking approach [28] [29] [30] .the 3d structure of the trimeric spike protein for 2019-ncov was constructed based on the structure of the sars-cov spike protein using modeller.the complex structure between the 2019-ncov rbd protein and the human ace2 molecule was predicted using our hybrid protein-protein docking algorithm, hdock [27] [28] [29] [30] . specifically, given the individual structures of the spike rbd protein and the human ace2 molecule, hdock will globally sample all possible binding modes between the two proteins through a fast fourier transform (fft) search strategy [30] . then, all the sampled binding modes were evaluated by our iterative knowledge-based scoring function [31] . last, the binding modes were ranked according to their binding energy scores, and the top ten binding modes were provided to users. during the docking calculation, all the default parameters were used. namely, the grid spacing was set to 1.2å for 3d translational search, the angle interval was set to 15 • for rotational sampling in 3d euler space, the binding interface information in the pdb was automatically applied during the modeling of individual structures. a web server version of our hdock algorithm can be freely accessed from our web site at http://hdock.phys.hust.edu.cn/ [29] .the amber suite was used for the md simulations [32] . before the simulations, the missing residues in the middle of a chain were added using the modeller [24] . during the simulations, the ff14sb force field was selected [33] , explicit solvent model was used, the time step was set to 2 fs, langevin dynamics were used for temperature control, and the program "pmemd.cuda" was used as the simulation engine, where the simulations were performed on a gpu compute node [34] . specifically, for each system, the following four stages of md simulations were performed before the production simulation: (1) a 1000-step simulation was first run to minimize the solvated protein system with weakly restraints on the backbone atoms; (2) the system was then heated to 300k by a 25000-step (i.e. 50ps) simulation with weakly restraints on the backbone atoms; (3) next, another 25000-step (i.e. 50ps) constant pressure simulation was conducted to equilibrating the density of the system at 300 k; (4)the system was then equilibrated by a 250000-step (i.e. 500ps) of constant pressure simulation at 300k. finally, two 2500000-step production simulations were run to record the trajectories of the system at 300k, where the coordinates were written out every 5000 steps (i.e. 10ps), resulting in a total of 10ns simulation with 1000 recorded trajectories. after the simulations, the "mmpbsa.py" was used to calculate free energies of the systems using the mm-gbsa model [35] , and the "cpptraj" was used to analyze the coordinate trajectories [36] .the rbd proteins of 2019-ncov and sars-cov exhibit a high sequence similarity (89.2%) with a sequence identity of 73.7%. the high homology resulted in an accurate 3d rbd model of 2019-ncov with a small rmsd of 0.55å from the experimental sars-cov rbd structure. with the experimental human ace2 structure and the 2019-ncov rbd model, we then performed proteinprotein docking to predict their binding mode using our hdock approach [28] [29] [30] . figure 1a shows the predicted complex structure between the human ace2 molecule and the 2019-ncov rbd protein.it can be seen from the figure that the predicted rbd-ace2 complex structure for 2019-ncov is very close to the experimentally determined rbd-ace2 complex structure for sars-cov, and the interface root-mean-square-deviation (rmsd) between the two complexes is 0.473å, showing that the rbds of 2019-ncov and sars-cov bind to the same site of the human ace2 receptor ( figure   1a ). these results can also be understood by comparing the residues at the rbd-ace2 binding interface for 2019-ncov and sars-cov. the binding sites on the rbd proteins of 2019-ncov and sars-cov are very conserved and the corresponding residues show a high sequence similarity of 83.3% (figures 1b and c) . among them, those hydrophobic residues that are important for proteinprotein interactions are especially conserved. for the rbd of 2019-ncov, there are 13 hydrophobic residues at the binding site, which are comparable to 13 hydrophobic residues for that of sars-cov ( figure 1b ).we have run a long-time md simulation to generate the trajectories of the rbd-ace2 complex system for 2019-ncov and sars-cov. the binding free energies were calculated using the mm-gbsa model by the "mmpbsa.py" script in the amber package. table 1 shows a comparison of the rbd-ace2 binding free energies for 2019-ncov and sars-cov. it can be seen from the table that the binding free energy of the rbd-ace2 interaction for 2019-ncov is −50.43 kcal/mol, which is significantly lower than the binding free energy of the rbd-ace2 interaction for sars-cov (−36.75 kcal/mol). in other words, 2019-ncov binds human ace2 with a significantly higher affinity than sars-cov. this result is consistent with the current fact that 2019-cov is much more infectious than sars-cov. very recently, experimental studies also showed that 2019-cov could bind human ace2 with a higher affinity than sars-cov [22] . further examination of the binding free energy contributions reveals that the higher binding affinity of 2019-ncov than sars-cov is mostly attributed to the solvation energy contribution ∆g solv (674.97 vs. 696.56 kcal/mol), whereas 2019-ncov has a higher binding free energy in vacuum ∆g gas than sars-cov (-725.41 vs. -733.31). in other words, 2019-ncov tends to bind human ace2 better than sars-cov in the water, while sars-cov would bind to human ace2 better than 2019-ncov in the gas. further investigation is needed to confirm such binding differences.the spike protein on the coronavirus envelope is a trimeric protein. this protein is critical for the vitality of coronaviruses because it is not only an important component for the virus particle but also plays a crucial role in attaching host cells and fusing the membranes [21] . in addition, the spike protein also determines the solubility of coronavirus particles and thus the viral infectivity because the spike protein is the largest protein located on the membrane surface. therefore, the spike protein is directly related to the stability and functionality of coronaviuses. here, we have run a lengthy md simulation to study the trimeric spike proteins of 2019-ncov and sars-cov. table 2 gives a comparison between the free energies of the spike proteins for 2019-ncov and sars-cov. it can be seen from the table that the spike protein of 2019-ncov has a significantly lower total free energy (g total = −67303.28 kcal/mol) than the spike protein of sars-cov (g total = −63139.96 kcal/mol) ( table 2 ). these results suggest that 2019-ncov is more stable and can survive a significantly higher temperature than sars-cov. this may also partly explain the higher infectivity of 2019-ncov than sars-cov because 2019-ncov would have a higher virus vitality than sars-cov in the same temperature.the lower free energy of the 2019-ncov spike protein may result from the virus evolution of sars-cov because sars-like coronaviruses normally originate from bats that are known to have a higher body temperature than humans. in other words, 2019-ncov and other sars-like coronavirus would have evolved to achieve a lower free energy for their spike proteins by recombination or mutations so that they can survive in high-temperature animals like bats [1] . in addition, the free energy decomposition also shows that the lower free energy of 2019-ncov spike protein than sars- table 2 ). this may reflect an evolution trend for sars-like coronaviruses, i.e. favoring the internal interactions between residues instead of the solvation energy. this kind of evolution would be also beneficial because such kinds of coronaviruses would be more robust and able to survive in both the air and solvent.coronaviruses uses the spike protein to attach host cells by binding the host cell receptor. therefore, the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the spike protein is critical for coronaviruses to infect host cells.here, we have run lengthy md simulations to investigate the structural properties of the rbd proteins for 2019-ncov and sars-cov. table 3 shows a comparison between the free energies of the rbd proteins for 2019-ncov and sars-cov. similar to the findings in the spike protein as detailed in the last section (table 2) , the rbd protein of 2019-ncov also shows a significantly lower free energy than that of sars-cov (-4090.04 vs. -3617.73 kcal/mol) (table 3) , which may also be understood by the evolution pressure from the high-temperature host environment. however, unlike in the spike protein where the free energy difference between 2019-ncov and sars-cov is mostly attributed the inter-residue interactions in vacuum (g gas ), here in the rbd protein, the free energy difference between 2019-ncov and sars-cov comes from both the free energy in vacuum g gas (-2104.37 vs.-1703.66 kcal/mol) and solvation energy g solv (-1985.68 vs. -1914 .07 kcal/mol) ( table 3 ). the lower solvation energy of 2019-ncov than sars-cov in the rbd may be understood because the rbd must move up away from the spike protein and into the water in order to bind human ace2 [20] .in other words, 2019-ncov would have evolved to be more soluble so that it can move up and bind the ace2 more easily. the better solubility of the rbd of 2019-ncov than sars-cov may also contribute to part of the higher infectivity of 2019-ncov than sars-cov.protein flexibility is a critical factor in binding as it may not only change the binding interface between two proteins but also be an important contribution to the entropy penalty upon binding. (figure 2a ). that means that 2019-ncov must overcome much more entropy penalty than sars-cov when binding to human ace2. as we know, the binding free energy between two proteins can be expressed as, ∆g = ∆e − t ∆s, where ∆e is the interaction energy, ∆s is the entropy, and t is the temperature of the system. as ∆s is negative, the binding free energy will become higher and the binding will become weaker with the increasing temperature. therefore, the rbd-ace2 binding affinity for 2019-ncov is expected to decrease much faster than that for sars-cov when the temperature increases. in other words, 2019-ncov is much more temperaturesensitive than sars-cov. namely, 2019-ncov will decrease its infection ability much faster than sars-cov when the temperature rises. therefore, it is expected that 2019-ncov will become less infectious compared to sars-cov, and the disease prevention and control for 2019-ncov will get easier when the weather gets warmer/hotter, although the drug and vaccine development targeting the rbd protein will be more challenging because of the protein flexibility at the binding site.in this study, we have extensively studied the rbd-ace2 complex, spike protein, and free rbd protein systems of 2019-ncov and sars-cov through protein-protein docking and md simulations. it was found that 2019-ncov has a higher binding affinity with human ace2 than sars-cov, explaining the fact that 2019-cov is much more infectious than sars-cov. the spike protein of 2019-ncov also shows a lower free energy than that of sars-cov, suggesting that 2019-ncov is more stable and may be able to survive a higher temperature than sars-cov. this may also explain the bat origin of 2019-ncov, as bats have a higher body-temperature than humans. in addition, the rbd of 2019-ncov exhibits a significantly higher flexibility than that of sars-cov, especially near the binding site. that indicates that 2019-ncov must overcome a higher entropy penalty in order to bind ace2 and is thus more temperature-sensitive than sars-cov. therefore, with the rising temperature, 2019-ncov is expected to decrease the infection ability much faster and become much less infectious than sars-cov, which would make the disease prevention and control of 2019-ncov easier. taking the above results together, unlike sars-cov that is gone after 2003, 2019-ncov might survive the high-temperature environment like summer in which the virus is not active/infectious due to the high flexibility in the rbd, and then become infectious when the temperature is low in the winter. these findings will have a far-reaching implication for disease prevention and control as well as drug and vaccine development for 2019-ncov. the emergence of highly pathogenic novel coronavirus in 2019 (sars-cov 2) became pandemic and posed a global health emergency. the coronaviridae family viruses are mostly hosted by animals and are found pathogenic to humans. though these viruses were pathogenic to humans, most of them caused mild to moderate symptoms (lu et al., 2020) . however, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2002 and the mers (middle east respiratory syndrome) in 2012 caused by sars-cov (cov), infected larger populations and showed significant fatalities. in december 2019, another beta-coronavirus has been identified in a group of people admitted with severe pneumonia symptoms in wuhan, china named as sars-cov 2 (ncov) (lu et al., 2020; muralidharan et al., 2020; peeri et al., 2020; umesh et al., 2020; wahedi et al., 2020; . in a short span of time, the infection rate increased with $4.2 million people infected and 0.29 million deaths by 14 th may 2020 throughout the world (who, 2020) and continuing. many of the countries adopted social distancing and lock down precautions to decrease the rate of ncovid-19 infections from human to human but for the lack of vaccines and targeted therapies (aanouz et al., 2020; elfiky, 2020a; kumar et al., 2020) .the phylogenetic analysis states that sars-cov 2 (ncov) is closely related to bat derived coronavirus bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 (han et al., 2006; lan et al., 2020; lu et al., 2020) . it is known that, different coronaviruses can start an infection by binding spike glycoprotein subunit to specific receptors of the human cells. for instance, mers-cov binds to cd26 and n-terminal end of sars-cov spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd) binds to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors (abdelli et al., 2020; al-khafaji et al., 2020; hasan et al., 2020; khan, jha, et al., 2020; lan et al., 2020; peeri et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020) . the ace2 interaction promotes spike protein subunit s2 for membrane perfusion by dissociation of the receptor binding domain (rbd) of subunit s1 after interaction with ace2 (boopathi et al., 2020; hasan et al., 2020) . the cov structure includes, matrix protein (m-protein), small envelop protein (e-protein) (gupta et al., 2020) , spike (s) glycoprotein, nucleocapsid protein (n-protein) (elfiky, 2020b ) and other proteins like chymotrypsin (elmezayen et al., 2020) , papain like proteases (joshi et al., 2020; khan, zia, et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020) . the spike protein initiates binding with host cell receptor system and n-protein plays a crucial role of rna replication in the host cells (enayatkhani et al., 2020; lobo-galo et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020) . the structural similarity between sars-cov and ncov strengthens the binding of ncov spike protein with ace2 receptor possibilities (adeoye et al., 2020; lan et al., 2020) . however, the antibodies raised against sars-cov recovered people were not able to neutralize ncovid-19 symptoms (lan et al., 2020) . this signifies the structural differences of the ncov from cov.the recently published crystal structure (pdb id: 6m0j) elucidates the structural interactions of spike protein rbd of ncov. considering that there are extended mutations present in the ncov sequence, which comes under rbd (sinha et al., 2020) , it has been shown that more ace2 interacting residues were present in the ncov spike protein rbd than cov (lan et al., 2020; pant et al., 2020) . it is important to understand the hot spot amino acids and their interactions and how far these interactions are stable allowing the membrane perfusion of virus into the host cell. the current in silico study focuses on, highlighting the ace2 and spike protein rbd amino acid interactions. the strength of the hot spot amino acid interactions were studied through molecular dynamic simulations for a period of 100 ns. the deviations and fluctuations made by the ace2-rbd complex along with energies clarify in understanding the stability of the ncov spike protein rbd interaction with ace2 receptor in comparison to sars-cov.the entire computational work was performed using the schrodinger suite. the applications employed in the present study arethe mapping of s protein rbd sequences of both cov and ncov was performed using the multiple sequence viewer tool of the prime application of schrodinger suite. the crystal structures were retrieved from protein databank and prepared using protein preparation wizard tool. the parameters used in refining the structure are addition of hydrogen's, creating disulphide bonds, maintaining zero order bonds and selenomethionines to methionines conversion in the import and process tab. further, in refine tab, optimizing the hydrogen bonds to repair and finally minimized the structure through force field opls_2005. using superimposition tool of the maestro, both complexes (cov and ncov-ace2) and individual s-protein rbd of both cov and ncov were structurally superimposed and their rmsd (root mean square deviations) was calculated (jorgensen et al., 1996; sastry et al., 2013; .molecular dynamic simulations (mds) of the complexes were performed using desmond software. initially, the complex was imported into the system builder application of desmond module and with default parameters like spc (simple pointcharge) solvent model, orthorhombic periodic boundary box (box size; distances (å): a:10 â b:10 â c:10 and angles: a:900 â b:900 â c:900) and minimizing the volume, a model system was generated for simulations. continuing with the ions tab of system builder application, na þ ions were added based on the total charge and a salt concentration of 0.15 m was also added to neutralize the system. second step in the simulations protocol was minimization, the complex obtained from the system builder was relaxed by setting the maximum iterations number to 2000 and remaining parameters were set to default. finally, the minimized complex was subjected to molecular dynamic simulations by setting the ensemble parameter to npt [isothermal-isobaric ensemble, number of particles (n), pressure (p) and temperature (t)], 300 k temperature, 1 bar pressure, simulation run time was set to 100 ns (islam et al., 2020) and relaxed using the default relation protocol (guo et al., 2010; veeramachaneni et al., 2019) .protein binding analysis was performed using the protein interaction analysis application of the schrodinger suite.spike protein (s-protein) sequence of sars-cov (cov) and sars-cov 2 (ncov) were retrieved from the uniprot databank with sequence ids p59594 and p0dtc2 respectively. the multiple sequence alignment was performed using clustal omega web server of embl-ebi services. the alignment results displayed 75.9% identity ( figure 1 ) between the sequences. previous studies (aydin et al., 2014) reported the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the cov spike protein ranging from 306 to 527 and in specific the residues 424-494 related to binding motif played a crucial role in binding to the human ace2 receptor for viral admittance. in ncov, these residues were aligned at 319-541 and 437-508 positions respectively. the spike protein rbd of cov and ncov shared only 74% identity. the alignment displayed 26% mutations and 58 residues were found mutated in the spike protein rbd region of ncov. among these, 34 mutations related to the binding motif were predicted as the crucial amino acids based on the correlation analysis done with the spike protein binding motif of cov. considering this binding region as a major criterion, the cov and ncov receptor binding domains were further analyzed for any structural changes resulting out of these mutations.to continue the structural analysis of the receptor binding regions, reported pdb structures of sars-cov (pdb id: 3sci) and sars-ncov (pdb id: 6m0j) were retrieved from the protein databank. the f-chain in both the sequences relates to the spike protein rbd of the virus and the a-chain represents ace2 receptor. prior to the analysis, rbd sequences retrieved (pdb) were cross validated against their corresponding full length uniprot sequences. many structural modifications were observed in the ncov rbd of spike protein because of the mutations occurred during the course of time compared to the cov. the overview of the mutational changes in the secondary structure of both cov and ncov spike protein receptor binding region were aligned in figure  2 (a). in cov, the majority of the spike protein rbd 3d structure was made of loops with 2 helices and 5 sheets. while, the 3d structure of ncov spike protein rbd comprised of 4 helices and 10 sheets with interconnecting loops ( figure  2 (b)) (lan et al., 2020) . the detailed information regarding the residues involved in the helices and sheets of both the proteins were tabulated ( table 1 ). the major structural changes recorded were seen in the residues ranging from 306 to 382 of cov which were in the loop region while the corresponding residues of ncov i.e. 333-395 were framed into two helices and three sheets. the helix observed in the cov protein (426-429) was absent in the corresponding ncov (439-442 residues) and these residues were sited in loop region. extra sheets in ncov protein between tyr 473-gln 474, cys 488-tyr 489 and val 524-cys 525 were absent in cov and these residues were shaped into loops.the complex of the ace2 receptor with rbd of the cov and ncov spike protein crystal structures were retrieved and prepared using the protein preparation wizard application of the schrodinger suite through a series of steps as explained in the methodology part. the prepared complexes were subjected to protein interaction analysis application available in the suite to investigate the interactions occurring between the receptor and spike protein rbd. the superimposition of cov and ncov without ace2 receptor resulted in 7.37 å rmsd (figure 2(c) ) and in complex with ace2 receptor, the superimposed complexes were displaying 15.24 å deviations (rmsd) (figure 3(a) ). the cov rbd-ace2 complex was maintained with 7 hydrogen bonds, 1 pi-pi interaction and 1 salt bridge ( figure   3 (b)). concurrently, the ncov spike protein rbd-ace2 receptor complex displayed 11 hydrogen bonds and 1 salt bridge (figure 3(c) ). interactions like hydrogen bond, pi-pi stacking and salt bridge made by the cov and ncov spike protein with ace2 receptor were reported along with their closest residues, distance and also the solvent accessible surface area (sasa) ( table 2 ). in both the complexes, residues 473/ 487, 436/449 and 473/487 of virus rbd maintained hydrogen bond interaction profiles with the residues 24, 38 and 83 of the ace2 receptor respectively. prime/mm-gbsa based binding-free energy was calculated by considering ncov and cov as ligands against the ace2 receptor. the binding-free energies calculated were à126.5 kcal/mol for ncov and à100.2 kcal/mol with cov. comparing the two complexes binding interaction profiles, ncov was found binding more rigidly to the ace2 receptor than cov with more number of h bonds and the binding free energy calculations were also found inline supporting the interaction analysis results confirming ncov binding with more stringency to the human ace2 receptor when compared to cov. . molecular dynamic simulation analysis of ace2-cov s-protein rbd and ace2-ncov s-protein rbd a) deviations graph of ace2 receptor and cov s-protein rbd. b) rmsd graphs of ace2 receptor and ncov s-protein rbd. c) rmsf graph of ace2 receptor and cov s-protein rbd. d) ace2 receptor and ncov s-protein rbd residues fluctuation graph.both the crystal structures were subjected to molecular dynamic simulation studies over a period of 100 ns to understand the stability of the complexes. hydrogen bond interactions, root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) and root-mean-square fluctuation (rmsf) made by cov and ncov with the ace2 receptor in complex state and their binding profiles were analyzed. the average total energy and potential energy of the complexes were also calculated to evaluate the rigidity of the complexes.using the trajectories of the complex, the deviations made by the two spike proteins were reported individually. the deviations made by the ace2 receptor and spike protein rbd of cov complex (3sci) were displayed in the figure 4(a) . in the initial simulation period until 30 ns, the ace2 receptor deviations were found in the inclined state and thereafter the protein maintained stable deviations till the end of the simulation run time (100 ns). the deviation range was between 2.0 and 4.0 å while majority of the deviations were around 3.5 å. the spike protein rbd inclined deviations were observed throughout the simulation run time and the deviations were in the range of 3.0-5.0 å.in the ace2 -ncov spike protein rbd complex (6m0j), the ace2 receptor made deviations between 2.5 and 3.5 å and majority of the deviations were maintained around 3.0 å. from 20 ns of simulation run time, steady state in the deviations with small fluxes were observed till the end of 100 ns (figure 4(b) ). based on the acceptable deviation range i.e. 2-3 å, the deviations made by the ace2 receptor reflects the stability of the receptor in the complex form. the deviations made by the ncov spike protein rbd were low raging between 2.0 and 3.0 å only. the stability in the deviations figure 5 . hydrogen bond and energies reported by the ace2-cov s-protein rbd (3sci) and ace2-ncov s-protein rbd (6m0j) after simulations. a) hydrogen bonds graph maintained by the receptor and protein during simulation run b) ace2 receptor and s-protein rbd of ncov complex hydrogen bonds graph after simulations studies. c) average energy and potential energies graph of ace2-cov s-protein rbd complex and d) average energy and potential energies graph of ace2-ncov sprotein rbd complex.was attained from the 40 ns run time and maintained the pace till the end of the simulation run. comparing the two complexes based on the rmsd results, the ace2-ncov was found more stable compared to the ace2-cov complex. the spike protein rbd of cov and ncov deviations difference was 2.0-2.5 å which is higher when compared to the ace2 receptor with a change of around 0.5-1 å only. the receptor made deviations were almost similar in both the complexes while the difference in the deviations made by cov and ncov spike protein rbd could be attributed to mutations and structural changes.fluctuations made by the ace2 receptor and cov spike protein rbd were depicted in the figure 4(c) . the range of the ace2 receptor residues fluctuation with cov was between 0.5 and 3.0 å while the majority of the residues fluctuated between 1 and 2å. interestingly, the residues of the ace2 receptor in complex with ncov spike protein rbd also produced a similar type of fluctuation range i.e. 0.5-3.0 å (figure 4(d) ). cov spike protein rbd showed fluctuations ranging 0.5-4 å with average fluctuations around 2.0 å while ncov spike protein rbd fluctuations were reported between 0.5 and 2.8 å and the majority of the residues fluctuated around 1.5 å. the tail end residue fluctuations were also observed as expected. in conclusion, considering all the fluctuations made by the spike protein rbd in both the complexes, the ncov residues fluctuations range was low, leading to more stability and rigidity of the complex.using the trajectories and simulation event analysis, the number of hydrogen bonds formed between the complexes during the simulation runs was calculated. in ace2-cov spike protein rbd complex (pdb: 3sci) the hydrogen bond range was 1-11 and mean value (average number of hydrogen bonds) was 5 ( figure 5(a) ). similarly in ace2-ncov spike protein rbd complex (pdb: 6m0j) the range was 5-19 and the mean value was 11 ( figure 5(b) ). using the simulation quality analysis tool, the total and potential energies of the two complexes were calculated. the cov complex reported with à236309.88 and à288318.27 kcal/mol of total and potential energy whereas ncov showed à259769.80 and à316730.74 kcal/mol respectively ( figure 5(c, d) ). these values state that the ncov complex was more stable compared to the cov complex justifying the increase in the average number of hydrogen bond.the main aim of this interaction profile study was to elucidate the residues (hotspots) in both the receptor and s- table 5 . list of important residues identified in ace2 receptor and their hydrogen bond interactions sustained during the 100 ns simulation run time.mds run time (ns) ace2 receptor residues 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 glu 35 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 tyr 83 10, 20, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 asp 38 10, 20, 40, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 lys 31 20, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 glu 37 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 his 34 10, 20, 30, 40, 70, 90, 100 lys 353 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 100 asp 30 10, 30, 50, 60, 80 gln 24 30, 70, 80, 90, 100 gln 42 10, 20, 30, 40 thr 27 10, 20, 30tyr 41 20, 60ser 19 10 asp 355 50ala 387 table 6 . identified important residues in ncov s-protein rbd and their hydrogen bond interactions sustained during the 100 ns simulation run time.mds run time (ns) ncov spike protein rbd residues 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 gln 493 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 gln 498 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 80, 90, 100 asn 487 20, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 tyr 505 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 lys 417 10, 20, 30, 70, 80, 90, 100 thr 500 10, 20, 30, 40, 70, 100 tyr 489 10, 20, 40, 70, 90, 100 asn 501 40, 50, 60, 80, 90, 100 tyr 453 20, 30, 50, 60, 80 ala 475 20, 70, 90, 100 leu 492 10, 20, 30 gly 502 20, 40, 90 phe 490 20, 30gly 496 60, 80glu 484 30gly 446 50arg 408, tyr 449 protein and their interactions. using the trajectory file, at every 10 ns of simulation run time interval, poses were considered for the binding analysis study. a total of 10 frames were retrieved and the residues which were involved in hydrogen bond formation in both ace2 receptor and spike protein rbd of ncov were identified (table 3) . during the simulation run, some residues which were involved in the hydrogen bonding in the initial time intervals failed to continue the same bond in the succeeding intervals and were later found again retaining their interactions by the end of the simulation. simultaneously, some of the residues which failed to produce hydrogen bond in the initial time frames were later found establishing and continuing with the established hydrogen bond by the end of the simulation run. based on the results, 18 amino acids of ncov spike protein and 15 residues of the ace2 receptor were identified showing stable hydrogen bond formation ( table 4) .the hydrogen bonds were characterized into strong (2.2-2.5 å), moderate (2.5-3.2 å) and weak (3.2-4.0 å) based on the distance between the donor and acceptor (jeffrey & jeffrey, 1997; khan, jha, et al., 2020) . based on this, majority of the reported hydrogen bonds between ace2 receptor residues with ncov spike protein rbd were under moderate category. the interaction percentage (100% correlating to the hydrogen bond sustainability in all the selected 10 frames) of the ace2 receptor residues with ncov spike protein rbd were glu 35: 100% which preserved hydrogen bond interaction in all selected frames; tyr 83 and asp 38: 90%; three residues lys 31, glu 37 and his 34: 80%; followed by lys 353 and asp 30: 70%; gln 24 and gln 42: 50% and the remaining other five residues reported below 50% hydrogen bond sustainability (table 5) .the corresponding ncov amino acid residues involved in the hydrogen bonding with the receptor during the simulation studies were also identified (table 6 ). residue gln 493 showed 100% hydrogen bonding throughout the simulation. other residues hydrogen bond interaction percentage were gln 498: 90%; asn 487, tyr 505 and lys 417: 80%; followed by tyr 489, asn 501 and tyr 453:60% and ala 475:50%. apart from these, the remaining other nine residues reported below 50% hydrogen bonding interaction percentage.during simulations, some hydrogen bonds between ncov s-protein rbd and ace2 receptor residues were intact throughout the run time while certain residues showed shift in the hydrogen bonds. interestingly, top listed residue gln 493 of ncov s-protein and glu 35 of receptor were maintained hydrogen throughout the simulation. in addition, gln 493 also maintained another hydrogen bond with lys 31(70%) of the receptor and hence based on these observations gln 493 was reported as the crucial residue in ncov binding. residue gln 498 was seen maintaining an overall 90% hydrogen bond interaction shared with asp 38 (70%) and in some intervals shifted to lys 358 (20%).third residue in the ncov s-protein rbd was asn 487 which maintained its 90% of interaction profile with tyr 83. simultaneously, a shift in the h bond was also found among the residues like lys 31 of receptor forming hydrogen bonds with phe 490, leu 492 and glu 484 of the s-protein during the entire simulation period. these changes could be attributed to the flexibility nature of both receptor and s-protein during the course of the simulations run. cov s-protein rbd residues 436, 473, 475, 479, 481, 482, 486, 487, 488 and 491 were previously reported as hotspots in several studies (han et al., 2006; wan et al., 2020) . in the present study, comparing the hotspots of cov and ncov it can be stated that most of the hotspots of cov were replicated in ncov too. among them, two residues asn 479/thr 487 of cov were found mutated to gln 493/asn 501 in ncov. these mutated animo acid residues were found having h bond interactions gln493 (100%) and asn 501(60%) during the simulations and profoundly influenced the binding to s-protein rbd to ace2 receptor. the important hot spots identified in ace2 receptor and ncov s-protein rbd after simulation studies were displayed in the figure 6 . along with the hydrogen interactions, hydrophobic interactions between the ncov s-protein rbd and ace2 receptor were also analyzed in the time frames defined (tina et al., 2007) . based on the analysis, leu 79, met 82, tyr 83, phe 28of ace2 receptor and phe 486, tyr 489 of ncov s protein rbd were found involved in the hydrophobic interactions.in conclusion, this study reports the hotspot amino acid residues involved in the binding of the ncov spike protein rbd with human ace2 receptor. overall, the mutations identified in ncov spike protein receptor binding domain had led to structural changes with additional sheets and helices in the rbd structure facilitating more h bond interactions between the ace2 receptor and spike protein. the hotspot residues interactions were listed and the rmsd and rmsf of the 100 ns simulation run confirms the stability and rigidity of the interactions. the energy calculations reiterate the binding efficiency of the ncov in comparison to cov. further, considering these hotspot amino acid residues, blockers could be designed for inhibiting the binding of ncov spike protein rbd to human ace2 receptor and thereby stopping the entry of the virus into the host cells.the pandemic covid-19 caused by a highly transmittable pathogen sars-cov-2, has infected millions of people worldwide 1, 2 . to date, it has infected more than 3.8 million people resulting in ~265,000 deaths with varied incidence and mortality rates across the globe 5 . the usa and european countries recorded a large number of infections associated with higher mortality compared to asian countries. these variations could be due to differences in the virulence, pathogenicity of viral strains and host factors including genetic makeup.sars-cov-2 use spike glycoprotein for host cells adhesion. the n-terminal s1subunit interact with receptor ace2 it is also known that sars-cov-2 s-protein gets activated through host proteases 7, 8 . evidences have also shown that corona viruses s proteins are cleaved by host cell proteases such as furin at s1/s2 cleavage site exposing s2 to serine protease tmprss2 to activate fusion of membranes for viral entry 7, 12 . however, lack of structural and molecular studies concerning tmprss2 interaction with s-protein limits our understanding of key priming action of tmprss2 for the host cell entry of the s-protein, which has great therapeutic implications.here, with the aid of whole exome sequencing we discover and report the functionally relevant variants in ace2 and tmprss2 in human genome that contribute to differences in covid-19 infection rates. by employing structural mutation studies, molecular dynamics we show this variant v160m decreased stability, with a plausible role in viral entry. furthermore, for the first time we demonstrate the structural interactions between tmprss2 and s2 subunit of sars-cov-2 spike protein. we also report the structural interactions of clinically approved protease inhibitors to block the tmprss2 and its further interaction with s2 subunit of spike protein establish the specificity and precision.the study group were recruited after obtaining informed consent and the study protocol was approved by institutional ethics committee. whole blood (3ml) was collected from 547 healthy individuals from the general population of indian ethnicity. whole exome data was generated for 20 individuals. variants identified in ace2 and tmprss2 were replicated in 159 and 500 individuals respectively as shown in supplementary fig. s6 . the study subjects were considered healthy based on no self-reported disease, normal bmi, ultrasound, laboratory parameters and were found to be clinically healthy.analysis dna was isolated from whole blood and complete exonic regions were amplified and sequenced on the next generation sequencer (ion proton; life technologies, usa).functionally relevant variants were identified using polyphen and sift scores. genotypes were interpreted using genome lab gexp software (v10.2). all the protocols conformed to standard kit instructions and the methodology is given in supplementary information.to better understand the structure of tmprss2, including the position and organization of the catalytic site for substrate processing, we modelled the monomer structure of human tmprss2 employing swiss-model and i-tasser. the structure ensure all residues are placed in ramachandran favored positions using coot (www.mrc-imb.cam.uk/) and validated the model.we used a previously published and validated model structure of full length sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein 19 .molecular docking with haddock 2.2 and cluspro , interaction studies were performed with the activated form (post furin cleavage) of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein (s2 domain) and our modelled and validated tmprss2 (aa145-aa492) as template structures. the binding free energies were taken into consideration for selecting the best possible models. ensured the residues occupied ramachandran favored positions using coot (www.mrc-imb.cam.uk/). the final model of complex structure of activated sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein homotrimer and tmprss2 was visualized in pymol.tmprss2 and potent protease inhibitors (chemostat, upmoastat, nafamostat and bromhexine hydrochloride) were docked and simulated individually for molecular docking and dynamics studies. both protein and protease inhibitors were prepared for docking by ensuring the presence of all hydrogen atoms and water molecules at least 5 å around the binding site or catalytic pocket using the mastero package program 34 . binding is corroborated based on the solvent accessibility surface area (sasa), c-score (confidence score) and z-score (clash score). further jelly body refinement was done in the ccp4 program suite 35 and then coot (www.mrc-imb.cam.uk/) to ensure appropriate docking and no steric hindrance clashes in the side chain residues. binding free energies were taken into consideration for selecting the best possible docked site.whole exome sequencing on next generation sequencer yielded 6.5-7.5 gb data and ~56,000 variants per sample across the genome. we identified 3 variants in ace2 and 9 in tmprss2 applying relevant filters (fig. 1 ). of these 12 variants, rs971249 in ace2 and rs12329760 in tmprss2 genes were replicated. the minor allele frequency for the tmprss2 variant was 0.22, and ace2 variant was 0.3.to compare the allelic frequencies of indians with other ethnicities we sequenced the flanking regions of the variants in ace2 and tmprss2 in the study subjects. a representative electropherogram for tmprss2 genotypes is shown ( fig. 1 genes from whole exome sequencing data. the complete data was first filtered for quality, minor allele frequency and then for variants in both the genes. b representative electropherogram depicting the three genotypes for the variant rs12329760 in tmprss2 gene.t is the minor allele. sequence in forward strand and reverse strands with arrows indicate the variant. c. genotype frequencies in the healthy individuals.the overall structure of tmprss2 (aa145-aa492) (fig. 2a) measures 42 å in length and 24 å in diameter comprising an n-terminal (aa145-aa243) activation domain and c-terminal (aa256-aa492) proteolytic or catalytic domain. we mapped the catalytic site/pocket of tmprss2, where residues h296, s441, k432, w461 and q438 are found to be highly conserved with other ttps (type ii transmembrane serine proteases). based on available literature addressing the serine protease target sites we mapped two potential tmprss2 binding sites in s-protein (t1: aa837 to aa 845 and t2: aa 976 to aa986) located in the s2 domain region (fig. 3) . the structure of s-proteins with s1 and s2 domains are shown in (fig. 3b) . the tmprss2 variant (rs12329760) and the current epidemiological reports showing lower sars-cov-2 infection rate in the indian ethnic background raises an intriguing question about its correlation with the infection. valine 160 in the wild-type protein (v160) is located in the n-terminal srcs domain (scavenger receptor cysteine rich) and is paired with the three antiparallel β-sheets (aa145-aa170), structurally the replacement of v160m does not accommodate the met due to the topology and charge limit (fig. 4a,) . we performed molecular dynamics and simulation studies to know mutant protein characteristics and found undergone structural deformation due to the complete shift in the motif (fig.4c,) . this is corroborated with the overall increase in the b-factor (stability factor) of tmprss2 with v160m mutation. (fig.   4 e, f) . these observations reiterate that the v160m variant of tmprss2 decreases the stability of the protein. we have observed tmprss2 potentially interacting with the t1 and t2 sites of the s2 domain of spike glycoprotein. the overall complex structure shows that tmprss2 binds to t1 site of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein homo-trimer and adopts typical protease binding mode and interacts with a higher affinity (-250 kcal). this suggests a bonafide and tight interaction of tmprss2 protease with the spike glycoprotein. the active or catalytic pocket of tmprss2 is made of residues q276, h296, e299, k300, p301, k340, k342, e389, k390, l419, s441, q438 and w461. and the residues h296, s441, k432 and q438 are highly conserved among several serine proteases. the tmprss2 catalytic pocket of a cup-like architecture accommodates and interacts with the linker region connecting α1/α2 and α3/α4 of s2 domain of the spike protein fig. 5a , 5b. with respect to tmprss2 interaction with t2 site of activated s2 domain of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein, the extended and well-exposed loop region (g832 to n856) adopts the peptide binding mode with the tmprss2. the entire "s-shape" loop region of t2 site (k835 to i850) of s2 domain pass into the canyon-like crevice or cuplike structure of tmprss2 catalytic pocket (fig. 5d ) among them, residues k835, y837, d839, c840, l841, d843, i844, r847, r848 are the key interacting residues and also well positioned towards the catalytic pocket of the tmprss2 (fig. 5 e) . to explore the specificity and validate the precision of the catalytic pocket we performed molecular docking, refinement and dynamic studies with four potential tmprss2 protease inhibitors (chemostat, upamostat, nafmostat and bromhexine hydrochloride) (fig. 6 a-f ). as expected we observed the specific binding location of all drugs directed to the catalytic pocket of tmprss2. the main drug binding region is structurally linked with the binding of t1 and t2 sites of the s2 domain of spike glycol proteins with binding energy of -9 kcal. we identified a missense variant rs12329760 in tmprss2 gene that is shown to confer decreased stability of the protein. from the homology model of tmprss2 and its mutant v160m, we have identified its interaction sites with sars-cov-2 s-protein for the first time.binding of clinically proven protease inhibitors with precision and specificity at these interaction sites suggest that this site can be targeted for developing newer drugs in the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection and till then these drugs can be tested on patients therapeutically in current covid clinics.it is intriguing to note that, although the viral strain emerged from china and spread to various regions of the world, significant differences in the incidence and mortality rates cannot be we have also identified the interactions of tmprss2 with spike glycoprotein using the above model in complex with the validated model structure of full-length sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein 19 as the available structures with pdb lack furin and tmprss2 recognition and cleavage sites 11 . based on available literature on the target sites of other serine proteases 20, 21 along with sequence analysis, we identified two prime tmprss2 recognition sites in the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. the two identified sites span a part of heptad region1 (hr1) of six helix bundle of sars-cov-2 near the fusion peptide. recently it is reported that heptad regions hr1 and hr2 aid in bringing the fusion peptide in close proximity to transmembrane domain facilitating membrane fusion [22] [23] [24] . it is convincing to speculate that furin protease acts first on the spike glycoprotein at s1/s2 region and cleaves the spike protein to s1 (ace2 and cd26 binding region) and s2 (trimerization domain) resulting in the complete exposure of s2 domain and tmprss2 recognition sites as elucidated earlier 12 , 25 .while this model fits well for the normal genotype of tmprss2, whether genetic variant in tmprss2 protease has any physiological role in sars-cov-2 infection or activation of spike glycoprotein is elusive. insilico studies suggested decreased stability of the protein in variant, as the free energy change is less than -0.5 k cal/mol, and is present in an important domain of the protein 15, 26 . molecular dynamics simulation confirm structural distortions due to complete shift in the motif leading to changes in quaternary structure of the protein and concomitant increase in b factor with v160m variant. this reiterates the fact that although the v160m is not located in the catalytic pocket of tmprss2, decrease in the stability of the protein might hamper sars-cov-2 viral entry, however, this needs to be confirmed.in order to assess the binding efficiency of tmprss2 with identified cleavage sites on s2 subunit of spike protein, we tested the clinically proven protease inhibitors: camostat, nafamostat, upamostat and bromhexine hydrochloride (bhh). camostat used therapeutically, for unrelated clinical conditions was shown to inhibit influenza viral replication 27,28 while nafamostat is a potent inhibitor of mers s-protein mediated membrane fusion 29 . bhh on the other hand is fda approved mucolytic agent and a specific inhibitor of tmprss2 30, 31 .upamostat is another serine protease inhibitor under consideration for clinical trials 32 . all four drugs bind to the active site of tmprss2 with high precision and specificity ( fig. 5 and supplementary fig. s5 ). we demonstrate that camostat, upamostat and bhh preferentially bind to a specific location at the catalytic pocket of tmprss2, while nafamostat binds to 3 additional binding residues in two modes.furthermore, these potential tmprss2 inhibitors also share their interaction via several polar, charged and hydrophobic interactions ( supplementary fig. s5 ). the specific binding of these drugs with high precision confirms that they could potentially bind and impede the interaction between the spike glycoprotein and tmprss2. this study identified the interaction sites of the drugs with tmprss2 and therefore, this conserved epitope can be targeted for developing vaccines and therapeutic drugs.based on these findings we propose a model of interaction of tmprss2 with s2 subunit of spike protein of sars-cov-2 fig. 8 . limitation of this study is that we have not shown the association of v160m variant with infectivity in covid-19 patients and instability of the protein is shown by in silico approaches. further studies are needed in covid-19 patients to explore the association and functional assays to gain mechanical insights on the role of the variant. as in other human diseases, the incidence, severity, progression and therapeutic response have a genetic predisposition, susceptibility to covid-19 may also have a predisposition. although age, sex and comorbidities are shown to associate with varied incidence and severity of the disease, host genetic predisposition has not been explored. this study reports for the first time host factor genetics, molecular structure of tmprss2 and its cleavage sites on s2 subunit of spike glycoprotein. it is interesting to note that a significant proportion are variant carriers in india with lesser incidence of covid-19 as compared to other ethnicities including usa and european countries that have a lower variant carriers with higher incidence. while we report the importance of host genetic factors for the first time, covid-19 host genetics initiative (https://www.covid19hg.org/) reiterate the need to study the role of human genome in explaining covid-19 severity and susceptibility.coronavirus is commonly found in nature and infects only mammals and birds 1-3 , among 46 species, only seven of them are human-susceptible 4, 5 . aside from sars-cov and mers-cov that cause deadly pneumonia in humans by crossing the species barrier 3,6,7 , sars-cov-2 is now bringing a global pandemic of respiratory disease within six months after the first case has been confirmed in wuhan city of china 8 . it has been identified as a novel coronavirus that is a member of β-coronavirus in the family coronaviridae, which is a positive single-stranded rna virus with a protein envelope 2 . up to date, covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 results in more than six million people infected and over 380 thousand deaths worldwide. compared with sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 spreads more rapidly and being highly infectious to humans [8] [9] [10] . it is crucial to understand the origin of this coronavirus and its strategy in adapting to human hosts so efficiently, moreover, to apply this knowledge for controlling this pandemic and developing effective therapeutics and vaccines against covid-19.by reconstructing phylogenomic relationships among various coronavirus 11 , it showed around 70% genome sequence similarity with sars-cov 11 , and more closely related to bat coronavirus ratg13 in the spike (s) gene 1 . given closely related to sars-like coronaviruses, the genome structure of sars-cov-2 is similar to other beta-coronaviruses, which composed in order with 5'replicase orf1ab-s-envelope(e)-membrane(m)-n-3' with numbers of open reading frames (orfs) function resembles those of sars-cov 12 . it is noted that ratg13 is highly similar to sars-cov-2 especially between genes, while they differed in some crucial genomic structures, one of the most notable features is that a polybasic (furin) cleavage site insertion (prra residue) at the junction between two subunits (s1, s2) of s protein 1, 2, 12, 13 . although some studies show bats could be the reservoir host for many coronaviruses including sars-cov, the reservoir host of sars-cov-2 remains unclear 4, 10, 14 . given the global spread of this epidemic, it draws a lot of attention to reveal the origins of the pandemic event. the evolutionary of sars-cov-2 may explain its infectiousness and transmissibility among different animal hosts and provide evidence about whether this virus is natural or artificial.spike glycoprotein on the surface of sars-cov-2 is the key to enter the target cells, which forms homotrimers protruding from the surface to recognize host cell receptor and cause membrane fusion 15 . spike protein contains s1 and s2 subunits and the receptor-binding domain (rbd) exists on s1 which can bind to the peptidase domain (pd) of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), while s2 is responsible for membrane fusion during viral infection 14, 16 . in sars-cov, rbd in spike protein is the most diverse part of the whole genome, of which six amino acid (y442, l472, n479, d480, t487, and y4911) have been found to play a key role in binding to ace2 receptor and further in transmissibility across species boundary 16 . similar to sars-cov, rbd mutations acquired during adaption to different host cells along transmission have also been observed in sars-cov-2. thus, dissection of the key mutations in spike protein rbd that affect binding to the ace2 receptor would be important for understanding the molecular mechanism of how sars-cov-2 infect human cells. recent studies show the ace2 receptor in host cells would mediate the entry ability of sars-cov-2 by interacting with spike protein, and its binding capacity to spike protein of sars-cov-2 determines the transmissibility of this coronavirus across species particularly among humans 14, 17 .the present study intends to 1) reveal the phylogenetic relationship of sars-cov-2 identified in the different population at the genomic level, and provide genetic evidence based on the structural protein-coding genes (s, m, n, e) for identifying the nucleotide variations of sars-cov-2 collected from different regions amid covid-19 pandemic; 2) provide a prediction for revealing the adaptive mutations on spike protein of sars-cov-2 based on the specific variation of s gene, and finding the differences of stability of spike protein mutants and their affinities with the human ace2 receptors; 3) explore whether there are variants of ace2 in different populations which may affect the infectivity of covid-19. to this end, we analyzed the variants of ace2 in a large cohort including 1000 chinese local people and other human populations and identified polymorphisms that may influent on the binding between ace2 and spike protein of coronaviruses, furthermore, we predicted the affinities of spike protein to binding ace2 variants to understand whether those changes would render individuals resistant or susceptible to sars-cov-2 at the molecular level.herein our study could explain part of the origin of sars-cov-2 at a phylogenetic level based both on whole genome and multiple key genes, to allow the elucidation of population risk profiles and also help advance therapeutics such as a rationally designed soluble ace2 receptor for the management of covid-19. was carried out by kimura two factor correction method for nucleic acid level calculation. to avoid the prediction error caused by the selection of outgroups with a far evolutionary relationship, the complex outgroup was adopted in this study, and the sequence of mers-cov and sars-cov were selected as outgroups to predict the genetic relationship. the maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenic trees were constructed based on 2,147 genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with sars-cov and mers-cov were selected as the out-groups ( figure 1 ). after alignment, we merged identical sequences into one clade with labels kept as one.the genomic tree showed all sars-cov-2 was closely related to the sars-like virus found in the horseshoe bat from yunnan (ratg13), and a coronavirus from pangolin collected in guangdong province was the sister taxon with ratg13 which is closer to the virus from bat than to other pangolins from guangxi. sars-cov-2 is not related closely with sars-cov at the nucleic level australia, european countries and usa, and the case document showed this patient was confirmed after his seven-day trip to italy and he didn't show any symptoms before his journey. some branches were poorly supported by the bootstrap values and exhibited polytomies, which indicated sars-cov-2 was adapting the human hosts globally and it is hard to determine the origin of sars-cov-2 solely based on nucleic data. furthermore, same to the genomic tree, multiple genes sequences of sars-cov-2 are divergent from outgroups and we detected some mutations according to s gene sequences comparison ( figure 3 ).as shown in figure 3 , we extracted and aligned the s gene sequences from sars coronavirus in different hosts, the one from pangolin that closer to sars-cov-2 and ratg13 was from a horseshoe bat (rhinolophus spp) and we found no big fragment shift in s genes of pangolin and it was less similar to s in sars-cov-2 compared with ratg13, but the insertions exhibited in pangolin indicated potential recombination in spike protein of coronavirus would occur during its cross-species hosts manumission.according to s gene sequences in different strains, we found the similarity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-bat (98%) is higher than it compared with coronavirus from pangolins (85%). it showed more solved of the phylogenetic tree based on s gene (fig. 4) compared to the trees based on genomic sequences and multiple genes. nevertheless, the phylogeny reconstructed based on genome, s gene, and multiple genes, all indicate the sars-cov-2 is closely related to ratg13 and the virus isolated from pangolin.s gene has been studied as the key gene for sars-cov-2 binding to host cells' receptor, and this gene shows less conserved compared to the genome sequence of sars-cov-2, and some studies suggest that the high divergence found in spike protein rbd and specifically the direct bonding sites to ace2 receptor play an important role to sars-cov-2 adapting to different animal hosts or the populations in different regions. combined with the phylogeny based on the s gene, we also detected all mutationson the s gene and their binding capacity with ace2 receptor in human beings. 23 point mutations were predicted to significantly influence the affinity and stability of the spike protein (fig. 5) , among which 9 polymorphisms exhibited increased affinity and stability while 14 ones showed decreased affinity and stability (table 1 ). all analysis outcomes of over 3000 polymorphisms in spike protein were shown in supplementary table 1. figure 5 and table 1 showed the missense mutation in spike protein rbd that has significant changes (cutoff =3) of the affinity and stability with ace2 receptors. interestingly, residues l455, q498 and n501 would have two potential mutations that leading to contrary affinities, including increased affinity in leucine changed to methionine on aa455, glutaurine changed to tryptophan on aa498 and asparagine changed to tyrosine on aa501, reduced affinity in leucine changed to alanine, glutamine changed to alanine, asparagine changed to glycine. the polymorphisms on the same residue causing two opposite effects of affinity suggested that mutations on those positions may lead to different adaptation directions on sars-cov-2 to fit in different hosts. furthermore, phe456, gln493, and phe486 showed two mutations that both result in affinity reduction. the stability of spike protein with different mutations was showed in table 1 , we found only 5 mutants increased the stability of spike protein including g446w, g496a, q498w, n501y and g502y, which is not consistent with the affinity.to match the mutations of spike protein that reported by sars-cov-2 database of china national center for bioinformation (https://bigd.big.ac.cn/ncov) with our predictions, a total of 1,150 polymorphisms in spike protein were collected from the database and 643 missense variants were selected and run analysis about their affinity and stability binding to ace2 (supplementary table   2 ). we focused on 76 missense variants in region t333-c525 of spike protein and 9 variants bring significant changes on the affinity of it to ace2 ( figure 6a ), moreover, 13 variants cause structural stability changes in spike protein rbd ( figure 6b ).we calculated the population frequency of 388 missense variants in ace2 collected from gnomad (supplementary table 3 ) and the local population ( table 2 ). analysis of their stability and affinity to spike protein of sars-cov-2 were performed in this study, and the results showed no significant differences in both affinity and stability.revealing the evolutionary origin of sars-cov-2 is of great value to understand its transmission pathway cross-species and provide a guide to long-term infection prevention of zoonotic coronavirus. since it is a novel coronavirus, the extremely limited morphological information of sars-cov-2 could be used in the phylogenic analysis, genomic data of sars-cov-2 nowadays provide a helpful approach to identify its divergence along with the transmission among to most sars-coronavirus 5, 17 , and the s gene is more divergent in coronavirus at a genetic level relative to other genes 14 . along adapting to the human host cellular environment, mutations occur in spike protein in some of which enable to enhance the binding affinity and stability of spike protein-hace2 complex, and the enhancement would increase the transmissibility of sars-cov-2 among human and bring more severe disease 16 table 1 ). 23 variants of spike protein rbd that causing significantly higher or lower affinity to ace2 and stability were focused in this study, the cutoff we set up was three for determining significance (table 1) , among 9 of the mutations that highly enhance the binding between spike protein and ace2, the residue g446 (figure 7 ) was also reported cdc up to date combined 1,150 variants (634 missense mutations in total) in the spike protein of sars-cov-2 reported by cdc, we found their affinity and stability in our analysis outcomes. among 76 missense variants that locate in the region between t333-c525, five variants in spike protein enhance its affinity binding to hace2 (table 3 ) and only three of them increase the stability of spike-hace2 complex (table 4 ). additionally, we collected the genome sequences of sars-cov-2 that harbor those variants in spike protein and found the variants v483a occurs in 26 strains from the usa, v367f occurs in 12 strains from hong kong, australia, and other european countries, and a variant g446v that highly enhance the affinity were identified in a strain from australia (supplementary table 2 ). we mapped those strains onto our genomic phylogenetic tree and found they were dispersed distributed in the position close to the sars-bat and sars-pangolin. as covid-19 widespread globally, several studies tried to find where this novel coronavirus camefrom, but few reports analyze the origin of sars-cov-2 according to the divergent pattern in spike protein. in our study, the multiple variants in spike protein found in different countries and clustered in the ancestral direction on phylogeny which might suggest sars-cov-2 infection start to occur at multiple sites but not only in wuhan city. however, due to the limited detection capability and restricted availability of samples from infected animals, the variants available in the national database are uncompleted, more data needs to be collected for further studies.furthermore, since the sars-cov-2 strains have variants on spike protein relative to a reference sequence of sars-cov-2 (nc_045512.2) were found more divergence on the phylogenetic position that closer to sars-bat and sars-pangolin, it might indicate a consensus evolution occurred in s gene and enable sars-cov-2 to adapt to human hosts well. however, since it is difficult to determine the exact time the zero patient who got infected by sars-cov-2, the date of the sample collection and data extracted could mislead the results. we believe further clinical information from all the countries would be needed for research and this is a global concern that requires more cooperation and collaboration but not political games or constant blames. we shared all the analysis of over 3000 variants on spike protein in this study to help the world tracking the mutations of sars-cov-2 and also can be useful to select the potential druggable targets and neutral inhibitors to prevent the further damages may be brought by the pandemic of covid-19.aside from mutations in spike protein for adapting to new hosts, the hace2 also represents polymorphisms in the binding region, host-virus interaction over time makes a natural selection on both virus and host cells 30 . therefore, the variants in hace2 receptor would also play a role in sars-cov-2 infection. cao and his colleagues (2020) 31 researchers found three unique variants in hace2 in the italian population that might be corresponding to the high fatality including p389h, w69c, and l351v 33 .we compared the unique variants found in local and italian population by mapping them on the hace protein structure ( figure 8 ) and found the italian ones were closer to the binding region than local ones, but in silico simulation indicated that none of them change the affinity and stability of spike protein of sars-cov-2 and hace2 complex (table 2 ). generally, we did not find any variants in ace2 that would significantly increase or decrease the affinity and stability of spike the ml phylogeny tree of different strains sars-cov-2 from various region all around the world (partial, the full tree was found in supplementary figure 1) , the bootstrap values were mapped on the branch as long as the colors annotated for all clades.the ml phylogeny tree of s, n, m, n gene sequences of sars-cov-2 from various strains (partial, the full tree was found in supplementary figure 2) , the bootstrap values were mapped on the branch as long as the colors annotated for all clades.the alignment of s gene from different sars virus.phylogenetic tree based on s gene (partial, the full tree was presented in supplementary figure 3) ,the bootstrap values were mapped on the branch as well as the colors annotated for all clades.identified polymorphism in spike protein rbd mapped to the structure of spike protein in sars-cov-2 in complex with ace2 in humans. cyan = spike protein, orange=ace2 direct bounding to spike protein. 23 point mutations causing affinity significant change on direct bounding of spike protein of sars-cov-2, blue presents decreasing affinity while purple shows increasing.reported polymorphism in spike protein rbd mapped to the structure of spike protein in sars-cov-2 in complex with ace2 in humans. cyan = spike protein, orange=ace2 and blue presents decreasing affinity and stability while red shows increasing ones. a: affinity; b: stability.residue g446 variants in documents from cdc (g446v) and in our prediction (g446w)spike protein polymorphous points from local population and italy (citation), the italian ones are marked as green while local ones marked as red.the world health organization has now declared a global emergency and pandemic for the coronavirus disease (covid-19) that has been actively spreading around the globe. covid-19 which is caused by the virus sars-cov-2; can cause symptoms such as fever, cough, pneumonia, nausea, and fatigue. as of now sars-cov-2 has reached 24 countries around the globe, with more than 190,000 cases confirmed as of march 18, 2020 [1] .the epidemiological background of the virus was thought to stem from a seafood market in wuhan, china [2] . however, the true epicenter of the initial transfer to humans is still unknown. currently, there are > 100 complete genome sequences known in the ncbi genbank, from over 10 countries. the variation between these sequences is less than 1%.this virus is closely related to the sars-cov and this allows utilization of the known protein structures to quickly build a model for drug discovery on this new sars-cov-2 [3] . while traditional methods of drug discovery could take years, the approach taken here to search for possible medications for the sars-cov-2 is in silico docking models from the most variable proteins in the sars-cov-2, the spike glycoprotein, and the sars-cov-2 3cl main protease.the cov spike protein binds to a host cell membrane through a receptor-mediated interaction which allows entrance to the host cell. it has been computationally determined that the sars-cov-2 has similar mechanism to that of the sars virus and the receptor to which it has the highest affinity is ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) [4] . while there are structural similarities between the sars-cov-2 spike protein and the sars spike protein, the conservation is only 73% with most of the variability being in the host cell interaction region of the protein. currently, there is no crystal structure available for the sars-cov-2 spike protein, so we employed homology modeling of the sars-cov-2 utilizing the sars spike protein (pdb: 2ghv) as a template. the second in silico docking model is the 3cl pro main protease, which is responsible for controlling several major functions of the virus and has a highly conserved catalytic domain from the sars virus [5] . some of its functions include the replication processes of the virus which makes it an ideal target for drug development [6] . the sars-cov-2 main protease was determined by ref. [7] (pdb: 6lu7).both these proteins, spike and protease, are essential to the transmission and virulence of the virus. by inhibiting anyone of these two proteins or both for a higher active therapy, the severity of the infection will be reduced. our efforts have been placed in competitively inhibiting the binding of its natural substrates. a library of known bioactive compounds has been run against several sites on the spike protein and the catalytic site of the sars-cov-2 main protease. by utilizing an approved compound database, quick trials of these compounds, with minimal effort of approval by food and drug agencies, could be carried out. we have chosen to run the zinc15 database which is classified by zinc15 [8] as "approved drugs in major jurisdictions, including the fda, i.e drugbank approved". this database covers all major bioactive pharmaceutical compounds utilized around the globe, and currently has 3447 entries.molecular docking calculations were completed using schrodinger® docking suits (schrödinger maestro, new york, ny, usa. version 11.9.011, mmshare version 4.5.011, release 2019-1, platform windows-x64) using a virtual screening workflow. this workflow utilized three docking precisions, htvs, sp, and xp, which yielded the top 10% of hits for each binding site. both proteins were prepared by restrained minimization using force field opls3e. the grid sites were created using glide® receptor grid generator with docking length of 20 å. grids centers were determined from active resides on target protein. ligands were prepared using force field opls3e and possible states were generated from ph 7.0 ± 2.0. docking scores are reported in kcal/mol, the more negative the number, the better binding.the surface glycoprotein [wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus] (sequence id: yp_009724390.1) structure was modeled using modbase [9] which utilized modeller [10] for the structural modeling. the sequence (ncbi accession: yp_009724390) was uploaded to the modbase interface and was run with the template being sars spike protein receptor binding domain (pdb: 2ghv, chain e). the sequence identity was found to be 73% (fig. 1a) . the calculation was completed and imported into schrödinger maestro®. the structure was then minimized using the force field opls3e, the overlay of the pre and post minimized structure can be seen in fig. s2 .sequencing has revealed that the sars-cov-2 is similar to that of the sars-cov virus which allows for genomic and proteomic homology comparison. using the homology modeling we have been able to develop a model of the spike glycoprotein (fig. 1) . this model has allowed us to perform docking calculations utilizing a database of known bioactive and approved compounds.the modeller and modbase programs were able to use a homologue sars spike protein (pdb: 2ghv) and the original sars-cov-2 sequence (genbank: mn908947) and construct the sars-cov-2 spike protein. the protein was then run through a restriction minimization process utilizing schrodinger docking suits® protein preparation which allows side chains to be placed in the most energetically favorable conformation (fig. 1b) .in an effort to stop the spike-ace2 interaction, several sites have been determined and targeted on the spike protein for docking studies. three of these sites are located at the interaction points specifically where hydrogen bonding is calculated as the main intermolecular force of the spike-ace2 interaction and a fourth allosteric site has been determined by surface mapping of the protein.the locations of the binding sites have been chosen as these would cause the most destruction in ace2 interactions. the sites are labeled as site 1-4 and information on the sites can be seen in supplemental (table s1 , fig. s1 ). the results from the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein are reported in table 1 .structural alignments have revealed that the sars-cov-2 protease is highly conserved for that of the sars (pdb: 1lvo) main protease at 98% id [11] . the 3cl pro main protease was run through a restriction minimization process utilizing schrodinger docking suits® (fig. s3a) . previous studies have revealed in the sars protease mutation of the residue his162 renders the enzyme inactive. the sars-cov-2 homologous residue is his163 (site 1 center: x = −17.59, y = 15.81, z = 63.53) (fig. s3b ) which has been used as the central point for molecular docking calculations. the active site also revealed a second histidine (center: his41 site 2 center: x = −13.81, y = 19.72, z = 71.91) (fig. s3c ) that seems to play a role in the interactions of the bound ligand in the 6lu7 structure, so this was targeted as a second center point for the molecular docking calculations. the results from the sars-cov-2 3cl protease are reported in table 2 . molecular docking has been employed for the search of possible medications that are contained in the approved bioactive compound database. the hit compounds reported here have potential to inhibit the sars-cov-2 spike protein and the 3cl pro main protease but are not guaranteed to have any activity; however, this lays the groundwork for computational drug discovery for new compounds to reduce transmission and symptoms of sars-cov-2. we have used structural homology modeling to determine a dock-able target for the sars-cov-2 spike protein and have utilized the newly characterized 3cl pro main protease in our docking models.we have several exciting hits on the 3cl pro main proteinase. zanamivir is an approved medication for the treatment of influenza a and b viruses [12] . indinavir and saquinavir have been shown to treat and prevent hiv. remdesivir is an antiviral compound in experimental stages that has shown activity against the sars-coronavirus, ebola virus, and possibly the sars-cov-2 [13] [14] [15] . it is also exciting to uncover that flavin adenine dinucleotide (fad) adeflavin, b2 deficiency medicine, and coenzyme a, a coenzyme, may also be potentially used for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infections. the novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is associated with the current pandemic outbreak of covid-19. the virus emerged in wuhan (china) and it can be transmitted from person to person. 1 the patients visited a local seafood market selling various live animals, from where this zoonotic disease was suspected to have spread. 2 were also suggested such as snake, 4 pangolin, 5 or some mammals and birds. 6 the genome of sars-cov-2 contains two open reading frames (orfs), orf1 and orf2 encoding two polyproteins, which are responsible for viral genome maintenance after cleavage. there is also a set of so-called structural proteins such as spike glycoproteins, an envelope protein, membrane proteins, and the nucleocapsid. one of the structural proteins, the spike surface glycoprotein ("spike glycoprotein"), is one of the primary therapeutic targets. this protein plays an important role in binding to receptors on the host cell, fusion of the host and viral membranes, and as a target for antibodies (reviewed in fung and liu 7 ).in this study, we examined 137 genomes to establish the relationship between spike glycoproteins from different coronaviruses. this was done with a combination of the phylogenetic tree analysis (reconstructed from the translated sequences) and a comparison of the structural models. the phylogenetic study has confirmed close relatedness of sars-cov-2 to bats' coronaviruses.in contrast, a comparison of the structural models has found yak (bos grunniens) betacoronavirus as the closest match.recently released complete genome sequences were downloaded for the analysis from ncbi (listed in table s1 ). furthermore, spike glycoprotein orfs (nucleotide and protein sequences) were retrieved from ncbi orffinder (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/orffinder/) and conserved domains were checked with cd-search (ncbi), respectively. complete translated orfs were used for multiple sequence alignments performed using muscle. the tests of substitution models and phylogenetic analysis were carried out using the mega x software. 8 the neighbor-joining method and jtt substitution models were selected assuming an estimated proportion of invariant sites and 4-gamma-distributed rate categories to account for rate heterogeneity across sites. the gamma shape parameter was estimated directly from the data. reliability for the internal branch was assessed using the bootstrapping method (1000 bootstrap replicates). two spike glycoproteins from the gammacoronaviruses were used as an outgroup.structural models of the spike glycoproteins (table s1 , marked with *) were built using swiss-model. 9 predicted structures were refined with an online tool 3drefine (http://sysbio.rnet.missouri.edu/3drefine/) and verified using qmean (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/qmean/). ipba web server was used for pdb structure alignment (https://www.dsimb.inserm.fr/dsimb_tools/ipba/index.php). the quality of the structure alignments was evaluated using root mean square deviation and normalized score. chimera software 10 was used for structure visualization. (table s1 ).four conserved domains were identified: spike glycoprotein n-terminal domain (pfam16451), spike receptor-binding domain (pfam09408), coronavirus s1 glycoprotein (pfam01600), and coronavirus s2 glycoprotein (pfam01601) (listed from n-terminal to c-terminal direction) ( figure s1) . surprisingly, none of the analyzed genomes exhibited such domain architecture, as is known, for example, for the viruses studied earlier (top line in figures s1 and s2) . as a common feature, we noticed that alphacoronaviruses and gammacoronaviruses share domain architecture represented by two domains: coronavirus s1 glycoprotein along with coronavirus s2 glycoprotein. in contrast, all analyzed betacoronaviruses have a full or partial spike receptor-binding domain. interestingly, only betacoronaviruses with humans and yaks as hosts have spike glycoprotein n-terminal domain, which is absent in all other analyzed hosts.to gain insight into the phylogenetic relationships between spike glycoproteins from alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses, and gammacoronaviruses of different hosts, a robust phylogenetic tree after multiple alignments of the 137 extracted sequences ( figure s3 furthermore, to better understand the relationships between spike glycoproteins on the structural level, we built protein models with homology-based server swiss-model 9 (table s1, marked with *).obtained models were evaluated and verified (table s2 ). in the next step, ipba web server, with a local backbone conformation comparison similarity algorithm, was used to match human hostdelivered sars-cov-2 and mers spike glycoproteins to models delivered from other coronaviruses and hosts (table 1) . mers betacoronavirus was used as a control data set as it is well-studied in both hosts (human and camel), and as their close genetic relationship is well-characterized. 11 as expected, human hostdelivered-mers showed the highest similarity to that from camels. sars-cov-2's spike glycoprotein, on the contrary, has shown the highest similarity to the yak-delivered betacoronavirus (table 1 and figure 1b ).proper domain classification and identification remain to be a matter of discussion. earlier papers refer to the spike glycoprotein as cleaved in the middle and forming s1 and s2 domains, further subdividing them into n-terminal and c-terminal domains in each. 12 based on the current conserved domain database (cdd) output, we concluded that n-terminal s1 corresponds to the spike glycoprotein we also wish to emphasize the importance of further investigations into the evolution of the spike glycoprotein. such work could render a positive impact on the current sars-cov-2 transmission and prevent zoonotic disease outbreaks of this type in the future.in late 2019, a novel, pathogenic coronavirus (sars-cov-2) entered the human population and has since spread throughout the world. the number of people suffering from the associated disease continues to rise, increasing the need for effective therapeutic interventions. sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 spike proteins are highly homologous (~76% sequence identity). similar to sars-cov-1, the interaction between the sars-cov-2 spike protein and the angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) on human cells is critical for viral entry into host cells (gralinski & menachery, 2020; tai et al., 2020; wu et al., 2020) . sars-cov-2 spike is an obligate trimer, while ace2 presents as a dimer on the cell surface (chen, liu, & guo, 2020) . several highresolution structures of sars-cov-2 spike receptor binding domain (spike-rbd) bound to ace2 have been published (lan et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020) . however, as of this writing, structures of sars-cov-2 spike trimer in complex with either the dimeric or monomeric form of ace2 have not been reported, resulting in an incomplete understanding of the nature of this interaction.structural studies of trimeric sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 spike protein demonstrate that each of the spike-rbds, as in other coronaviruses, can undergo hinge-like movements to transition between "up" or "down" conformations. the host ace2 receptor can only interact with an rbd in the "up" conformation, whereas the "down" conformation is inaccessible to ace2 (wrapp, vlieger, et al., 2020) . the rbds of sars-cov-1 spike can rotate away from the "down" position by different angles to an "up" position (gui et al., 2017) . several cryo-em structures report that approximately half of the sars-cov-1 and 2 spike particles are in the "three-down" closed conformation and half in the "one-up" open conformation (song, gui, wang, & xiang, 2018; walls et al., 2020) , while another cryo-em study on sars-cov-1 spike reported 39% of spike in the "two-up" conformation and 3% in the "three-up" conformation (kirchdoerfer et al., 2018) .the different conformations of spike observed by these cryo-em studies may be affected and/or limited by the properties of the grid and sample preparation conditions, and may also reflect differences between sars-cov-1 and 2. thus, it remains unknown how many rbds of sars-cov-2 are accessible within a trimeric spike to bind ace2 under physiological conditions, and thus the degree to which intra-spike avidity plays in the interaction of ace2 with sars-cov-2 spike. recombinant ace2 and an engineered dimeric ace2-fc fusion have been shown in several studies to neutralize sars-cov-2 virus (lei et al., 2020; li et al., 2020; monteil et al., 2020) .however, it remains unknown whether the dimeric form of ace2 offers any affinity enhancements through avidity compared to a monomer. understanding the role and mechanism of intra-spike avidity in binding is important for engineering tight binding antagonists to neutralize virus infection.to elucidate the nature of the interaction between dimeric ace2 and trimeric sars-cov-2 spike, we performed a thorough characterization of the binding interactions of the different multimeric forms of spike-rbd and ace2 ( figure 1a) . the results reveal that while both the ace2 monomer and ace2-fc dimer can bind the isolated spike-rbd, only the ace2-fc dimer can bind tightly to the trimeric spike ectodomain (fl-spike). interestingly, the affinity of the ace2-fc dimer is much higher to the rbd-fc dimer than to fl-spike, suggesting that although intramolecular avidity plays a role in both interactions, its effect is compromised in the context of fl-spike. consistent with this, we find that ace2 associates more slowly to fl-spike, which indicates that the rbds in fl-spike protein are not readily accessible to ace2. to further probe the conformational landscape of the rbds in fl-spike, we engineered ace2-fc as split-nanoluciferase (nanoluc) reporters. we found that a proportion of fl-spike can interact with multiple ace2-fc molecules simultaneously, indicating that more than one rbd domain in a spike trimer can adopt an "up" conformation. using pseudotyped and sars-cov-2 virus neutralization assays, we further show that ace2-fc dimer is much more potent at neutralizing virus than ace2 monomer. these findings extend our biochemical insight into how a spike trimer binds to an ace2 dimer, and have important implications for how multimeric therapeutic molecules, such as dimeric ace2 or antibody-based biologics, can effectively target sars-cov-2.to study the interaction between ace2 and sars-cov-2 spike, we constructed a panel of spike and ace2 proteins in various multimeric formats ( figure 1a) . trimeric sars-cov-2 spike ectodomain (aa 1-1213) (fl-spike) was expressed and purified as described (amanat et al., 2020) .the construct generously provided by the f. krammer lab has the furin cleavage site removed, a pair of stabilizing mutations and a c-terminal t4 trimerization motif followed by a 6xhis tag added.these modifications have been widely used for structural analysis (gui et al., 2017; kirchdoerfer et al., 2018; song et al., 2018; walls et al., 2020; wrapp, wang, et al., 2020) . we designed a dimeric form of the spike receptor binding domain (aa 328-533) (spike-rbd-fc) containing a tev-cleavable fc-fusion molecule with a c-terminal avi tag for biotinylation (czajkowsky, hu, shao, & pleass, 2012) . we also generated a monomeric form of spike-rbd (aa 328-533) (spike-rbd-monomer) with a c-terminal tev-8xhis-avi. the human ace2 ectodomain contains a nterminal peptidase domain (aa 18-614) and a c-terminal dimerization domain (aa 615-740). we designed the monomeric form of ace2 (aa 18-614) (ace2-monomer) with a c-terminal tev-8xhis-avi tag, and the dimeric form of ace2 (aa 18-614) (ace2-fc) as a tev-cleavable fcfusion molecule with a c-terminal avi tag (czajkowsky et al., 2012) . all of the ace2 and spike proteins were expressed in bira-er-expressing expi293 cells (howarth et al., 2008; martinko et al., 2018) .the fc-fusion molecules were purified by protein a affinity chromatography, and the spike-rbdmonomer and fl-spike by ni-nta affinity chromatography (figure 1b, 1c) . however, the ace2 monomer did not express but was generated instead by tev release from ace2-fc ( figure   1a , 1b). all these proteins, except the ace2 monomer were >95% biotinylated during expression to understand how oligomerization affects spike/ace2 interaction, we determined the affinity and binding kinetics of the different spike-rbd and ace2 proteins by bio-layer interferometry (bli) (figure 2) . spike-rbd-monomer, spike-rbd-fc and fl-spike were immobilized on streptavidin or ni-nta sensors, and allowed to bind ace2 monomer or ace2-fc in solution. a four-fold avidity effect was observed for the spike-rbd-monomer/ace2-fc interaction (kd = 5.5 nm, figure 2d ) compared to the spike-rbd-monomer/ace2-monomer interaction (kd = 22.4 nm, figure 2a ). in contrast, the spike-rbd-fc/ace2-fc interaction (kd < 10 -12 m, figure   3e ) showed >1000-fold increase in binding affinity compared to the spike-rbd-fc/ace2monomer interaction (kd =13.2 nm, figure 2b ). this dramatic increase in affinity is driven by a massive decrease in the off rate and little change in on rate, which indicates a strong intramolecular two-on-two avidity between spike-rbd-fc and ace2-fc.we next tested binding of ace2 monomer and ace2-fc to fl-spike to determine the affinity and avidity effect. surprisingly, we found that the binding interaction between ace2 monomer and fl-spike is very weak and could not be measured accurately ( figure 2c ). by contrast, the ace2-fc interacts with fl-spike with a kd of 5.9 nm, similar to the affinity for the isolated spike-rbd-monomer ( figure 2f ). this suggests that the presence of two ace2 molecules in close proximity in ace2-fc is essential for a productive interaction with fl-spike, and that a single ace2 monomer is not sufficient to bind an rbd on fl-spike. however, the affinity between fl-spike/ace2-fc interaction was substantially less than spike-rbd-fc/ace2-fc interaction (kd < 10 -12 m, figure 2e ), suggesting that the high-avidity two-on-two interaction is compromised in the context of fl-spike. this could be due to geometric/steric constraints or the unique conformations of the rbds in the fl-spike context. when fl-spike is loaded to a much higher density on the bli sensor (load to 2.0 nm) and probed with ace2-fc, we see that avidity can be recovered (supplementary figure s3a ). this indicates that if spike is presented at high density, the ace2-fc arms can engage two rbds if neighboring spike trimers are close enough.in contrast, monomeric ace2 did not bind fl-spike strongly even when fl-spike was loaded until saturation, further demonstrating the importance of ace2 dimerization for interacting with fl-spike (supplementary figure s3b) .interestingly, the kon of the fl-spike/ace2-fc interaction ( figure 2c and 2f) is ~10-fold lower than the interactions between spike-rbd-monomer or spike-rbd-fc with ace2 or ace2-fc (figure 2a , 2b, 2d, and 2e), while the koff is also ~10-to 20-fold lower. the decreased kon suggests that the rbds in fl-spike protein may have to undergo a conformational change for binding to ace2. previous cryo-em studies on sars-cov-2 fl-spike show that approximately half of the particles have the three rbd domains in the "down" conformation .of conformations between the "down" and "up" states, and any rbd with an angle lower than 52.2° from the body of the trimer are inaccessible to ace2 (peng et al., 2020) . our data supports that a significant proportion of the rbds in fl-spike protein are in a "closed" or partially "closed" state inaccessible to ace2, and the rbd has to open up to allow binding to ace2. the decreased koff, on the other hand, suggests that the presence of multiple rbds within the context of a fl-spike could slow down the dissociation of ace2-fc.to further investigate the rbd conformational landscape in fl-spike, we designed a split-nanoluc system to orthogonally probe the spike/ace2 interaction. split-nanoluc enzymes, in particular nanobit (promega), have been broadly used to detect protein-protein interactions and to study analyte concentrations (dixon et al., 2016) . the nanobit system is composed of lgbit and smbit. smbit is an 11 amino acid peptide which has a low intrinsic affinity to lgbit (kd = 190 µm), but when smbit and lgbit are in close proximity, the two subunits assemble to form an active luciferase enzyme. to interrogate the interaction between ace2 and spike, we engineered ace2-fc reporter molecules where smbit or lgbit were fused at the n-or c-termini ( figure 3a ). all constructs expressed at high yield and purity ( figure 3b , 3c).to functionally validate the split reporter system, we immobilized spike-rbd-fc on streptavidin magnetic beads at high-density. incubation with 1 nm of ace2-fc-smbit and ace2-fc-lgbit, or 1 nm of smbit-ace2-fc and lgbit-ace2-fc with substrate showed dose-dependent luminescence signal, consistent with an assembled functional split enzyme reporter and intermolecular proximity (figure 3d , 3e). we found the n-terminal fusion reporter pair showed higher sensitivity compared to the c-terminal fusion reporter pair (supplementary figure s4) suggesting that the increased entropy from the flexible linker and fc domain reduces productive luciferase reconstitution. we next used these split reporters to interrogate the soluble fl-spike trimer ( figure 3f , 3g).smbit/lgbit-ace2-fc, followed by the addition of substrate. the smbit/lgbit-ace2-fc reporters showed dose-dependent increase in luminescence signal with 1-10 nm fl-spike. this result suggests that although fl-spike cannot form a high-avidity two-on-two interaction with both arms of ace2-fc at a time, there is a proportion of fl-spike proteins with "two-up" or perhaps even "three-up" rbds that can simultaneously interact with multiple ace2-fc molecules.we cannot resolve if these "two-up" or "three-up" conformations are present prior to ace2 binding, or appear because ace2 binding induces a conformational change, which enables two or more of the rbd domains to engage in the binding to a second ace2-fc domain.to translate these studies to cells, we compared the ability of ace2 monomer and ace2-fc to neutralize sars-cov-2 pseudotyped virus to infect cells. pseudotyped hiv-1 particles carry the wildtype sars-cov-2 spike protein and are capable of delivering a nanoluc luciferase reporter gene to ace2-expressing hek293t cells. cells and pseudovirus were pre-incubated with serially diluted ace2-fc or monomeric ace2, and luciferase activity was measured in cell lysates at 48 hours post infection. ace2-fc neutralized the sars-cov-2 pseudotyped particles at an ic50 = 0.96 µg/ml (4.75 nm), while ace2 monomer did not substantially neutralize at the concentrations we tested, up to 48 µg/ml (237.5 nm) ( figure 4a, 4b ). this stark difference in efficacy between monomeric and dimeric ace2 confirms that ace2 monomer binds poorly to spike.we further tested the ability of ace2-fc and ace2 monomer to neutralize sars-cov-2 virus. sars-cov-2 live virus was pre-incubated with 100 nm of ace2-fc or ace2 monomer prior to infecting veroe6 cells, a monkey kidney epithelial cell line broadly used for studying viral infectivity. 16 hours post infection, cells were lysed and intercellular viral and host rna was isolated, converted to cdna, and quantified by qpcr. consistent with the pseudotyped virus neutralization results, ace2-fc neutralized sars-cov-2 much more potently than ace2 monomer ( figure 5a , 5b).worldwide efforts are currently underway to develop effective and fast-acting clinical interventions to control the spread and mortality of sars-cov-2. while it is clear that the interaction between ace2 and spike-rbd plays a crucial role in viral entry, our current understanding is insufficient for the design of maximally effective therapeutic options. in this work, we systematically interrogated how an ace2 dimer interacts with sars-cov-2 spike trimer to understand the fundamental avidity properties of the spike/ace2 interaction.the results from the bli experiments, split reporter assays, and virus neutralization assays provide important insight into the conformational landscape of the rbds in sars-cov-2 spike and are summarized in figure 6a . the decreased kon of ace2-fc suggests the majority of rbds in fl-spike are in an ace2-inaccessible, "down" conformation, which requires opening up for binding ace2 ( figure 6a ). the poor binding of monomeric ace2 ( figure 6b ) and strong binding to dimeric ace2-fc ( figure 6c ) indicate intra-spike avidity and ace2 rebinding plays an important role in promoting this interaction. however, while we observed a highly productive avidity effect for the spike-rbd-fc/ace2-fc interaction, we did not observe the massive two-on-two avidity for the fl-spike/ace2-fc interaction ( figure 6d ). this weaker interaction could be due to rbd conformations in spike, or a sub-optimal geometry of the two proteins for high-avidity binding.nonetheless, we show that two or more of the rbd domains can be in the "up" conformation allowing binding of two ace2-fc on one spike trimer ( figure 6e ). this is evidenced in our bli experiment where once bound to fl-spike, the presence of the other rbds slows down the dissociation of ace2-fc ( figure 2f in comparison to 2d) . this is further shown in the split-nanoluc reporter experiments where ace2 domains from two separate ace2-fc split-reporters can simultaneously bind a spike trimer to generate an active luciferase (figure 3 ). together these results indicate that trimeric sars-cov-2 spike interacts with ace2 with limited but important intra-spike avidity.in addition to intra-spike avidity, inter-spike avidity could contribute to the improved affinity of ace2-fc especially in the intact virus. it is possible that ace2-fc could bridge two spike molecules on the viral surface and bind with increased avidity, similar to what we observed in the high-density loading bli experiment (supplementary figure 3a) . previous structural studies of sars-cov-1 shows the spike proteins are densely distributed (lin et al., 2004) , with ~100 spike molecules displayed on a viral particle with a diameter of ~100 nm (beniac, andonov, grudeski, & booth, 2006; neuman et al., 2006) . using values from these studies, we estimate an inter-spike distance of ~180 å. the structure of the native ace2 dimer (pdb: 6m17) shows that the two ace2 arms (~80 å apart) would not be able to span this predicted inter-spike distance. an ace2 monomer fused fc with flexible linker (ace2-fc) may be sufficient to only bridge two spikes that are <150 å apart. structural studies of iggs have shown the antigen binding sites in the fab arms on a flexible-hinge region of an fc to be roughly ~117-134 å apart (sosnick et al. 1992 ).this would still fall short of the inter-spike distance. however, these estimates are based on a rigid membrane where spike proteins are uniformly distributed and also do not account for heterogeneity in spike presentation across viral particles. this may not be the case as coronaviruses are an enveloped virus with a fluid lipid membrane that allows for spike protein mobility and clustering, and potentially enable inter-spike binding by ace2 dimers or iggs.indeed, cryo-em images of sars-cov-1 show irregularity and lack of symmetry of spike distribution on the coronavirus envelope (beniac et al., 2006) . as there are no direct reports of inter-spike avidity for dimeric ace2, further experiments are needed to thoroughly examine the spike/ace2 interaction on the viral surface.while all cryo-em structural studies to date on sars-cov-2 spike have identified only the "closed" or "one-up" rbd conformation (cao et al., 2020; pinto et al., 2020; walls et al., 2020; wrapp, wang, et al., 2020) , our split reporter assay identified a population of spike in "two-up" or "three-up" conformation. the relative population of these rbd conformers and whether they exist in an ace2-unbound state or emerge only upon ace2 binding remains unknown ( figure   6f ). previous studies have suggested that ace2 binding could lead to conformational change in sars-cov-1 or 2 spike (song et al., 2018; yuan et al., 2020) . molecular dynamic simulation of sars-cov-2 spike bound to ace2 found that there is significant flexibility in the rbd conformation (peng et al., 2020) , and an em study of sars-cov-1 spike reported that the distribution of the rbd conformers was very different in the ace2-bound structure compared to the unbound structure (kirchdoerfer et al., 2018) . in accordance with these studies, our results support the model that ace2 binding induces a conformational change in spike and enables two or more rbds to be in the "up" conformation ( figure 6f ). this complex and dynamic nature of the spike/ace2 interaction is likely to play a key role in the biology of sars-cov-2 infection.we anticipate that further characterization of the interaction between sars-cov-2 spike and native ace2 will elucidate the exact nature of this binding.furthermore, our findings have important ramifications in developing a successful protein therapeutic for covid-19. recombinant ace2 proteins or antibodies which can block the host ace2-viral spike interaction are promising as anti-sars-cov-2 therapeutics. the much higher potency of ace2-fc in comparison to ace2 monomer we observed in the live virus neutralization assays suggest that monovalent therapeutics such as ace2 monomers or fab domains will likely be much less effective than multimeric formats such as dimeric ace2 ectodomain (monteil et al., 2020) , ace2-fc (lei et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020) or igg ( figure 6g) . finally, our results highlight the importance of understanding the ace2-spike interaction in the context of the fl-spike trimer. we also hope that the spike and ace2 constructs generated here are useful tools to the greater research community to enable better understanding of sars-cov-2 biology.we thank members of the wells lab, particularly those working on the covid-19 project for their efforts and contributions. we also thank dr. john pak (chan zuckerberg initiative biohub) and the authors declare no competing interests.plasmids were constructed by standard molecular biology methods. the fl-spike plasmid was a generous gift from the pak lab (chan zuckerberg initiative biohub) and krammer lab (icahn smbit tag in the ace2-fc-smbit fusion plasmids was generated by overlap-extension pcr, which also has a 10-amino acid (n-terminal fusion) or 5-amino acid (c-terminal fusion) linker to the ace2 or fc domains. the c-terminal avitag was removed from all the ace2-fc reporter plasmids. complete plasmid sequences are available upon request.the ace2 and spike proteins were expressed and purified from expi293 bira cells according to established protocol from the manufacturer (thermo fisher scientific). briefly, 30 µg of pfuse (invivogen) vector encoding the protein of interest was transiently transfected into 75 million expi293 bira cells using the expifectamine kit (thermo fischer scientific). enhancer was added 20 h after transfection. cells were incubated for a total of 3 d at 37 °c in an 8% co2 environment before the supernatants were harvested by centrifugation. fc-fusion proteins were purified by protein a affinity chromatography and his-tagged proteins were purified by ni-nta affinity chromatography. purity and integrity were assessed by sds/page. purified protein was buffer exchanged into pbs and stored at -80 °c in aliquots. his-tagged recombinant tev protease and 1 mg purified ace2-fc protein were mixed, and the reaction tube was rotated at 4 °c for 30 minutes. the cleavage reaction was then incubated with the washed beads, rotating, at 4 °c for 30 minutes. while the incubation occurred, an additional 25 µl of magnetic protein a beads and 25 µl or ni-nta beads were prepared as described before.supernatant from the first bead clearance was transferred to the newly prepared beads and allowed to incubate for an additional 30 minutes at 4 °c. to remove beads from the protein supernatant, reaction mixture was spin filtered at 1000 g for 2 min and washed with an additional 250 ul of pbs-25 mm imidazole. the his-tagged tev, biotinylated fc, and the uncut ace2-fc remained on the beads while the monomeric ace2 was isolated in the flow-through. the purity of monomeric ace2 was confirmed by sds-page electrophoresis. purified protein was buffer exchanged to pbs and store at -80 °c in aliquots.to assess the stability of proteins, we measured the melting temperature (tm) by doing differential scanning fluorimetry (dsf) as the method described previously (hornsby et al., 2015) . briefly, purified protein was diluted to 0.5 µm or 0.25 µm in dsf buffer containing sypro orange 4x (invitrogen) and pbs. 10 µl of reaction mixture was transferred to one well of a 384-well pcr plate. duplicate was prepared as needed. in a roche lc480 lightcycler, the reaction was heated from 30°c to 95°c with a ramp rate of 0.3°c per 30 sec. the intensities of the fluorescent signal at an ~490 nm and ~575 nm (excitation and emission wavelengths) were continuously collected.the curve peak corresponds to the melting temperature of the protein. data was processed and tm was calculated using the roche lc480 lightcycler software.biolayer interferometry data were measured using an octet red384 (fortebio). biotinylated spike or spike rbd protein were immobilized on the streptavidin (sa) biosensor (fortebio).after blocking with biotin, purified ace2 proteins in solution was used as the analyte. pbs with 0.05% tween-20 and 0.2% bsa was used for all diluents and buffers. a 1:1 monovalent binding model was used to fit the kinetic parameters (kon and koff).for the spike-fc magnetic bead assay, magnetic beads were prepared by taking 100 µl of streptavidin magnesphere paramagnetic particles (promega) and incubated with 5 µm of spike-fc-avitag for 30 minutes, rotating at room temperature. following, the beads were blocked with 10 um biotin for 10 minutes. the beads were washed three times with pbs + 0.05% tween + 0.2% bsa. 10 µl of 10-fold dilutions of the beads were incubated with 10µl of premixed 2 nm ace2-fc-smbit and ace2-fc-lgbit fusions. the sample was incubated shaking at room temperature for 20 minutes. nanoglo lucfierase substrate (promega) diluted in nanoglo luciferase buffer was added to each well (15 µl) and luminescence was measured on a tecan m1000 plate reader after 10 minutes. for the fl-spike detection, 10 µl of fl-spike dilutions were combined with 10 µl of premixed 2 nm smbit-ace2-fc and lgbit-ace2-fc. samples were incubated with substrate and luminescence was detected as described above.hek293t cells overexpressing full-length ace2 carrying two inactivating mutations in the catalytic domain (h374n & h378n) were generated using standard lentivirus transduction. the cells were maintained in dmem (gibco) with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, gentamycin and 5 µg/ml blasticidin.pseudotyped hiv-1 particles expressing the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein and nanoluc luciferase as a reporter were generated by transfection of hek293t cells with pnl4-3denv-nanoluc and psars-cov2-strunc. pnl4-3denv-nanoluc was derived from pnl4-3 (adachi et al., 1986) by inserting a 940 bp deletion after the vpu stop-codon, resulting in loss of envexpression. the nanoluc luciferase reporter gene (nluc, promega) was inserted in place of bp 1-100 in the nef-frame. psars-cov2-strunc was generated by insertion of a human-codon optimized gene encoding for 19 aas c-terminally truncated sars-cov-2 spike (geneart) into pcr3.1.supernatants containing virus were harvested and filtered 48 hr post transfection and used for infection of ace2-overexpressing 293t cells. pseudotyped virus was pre-incubated with serially diluted ace2-fc or ace2 monomer at 37 °c for 1 hr before addition to cells., cells were washed twice with pbs 48 hr post infection and lysed with luciferase cell culture lysis 5x reagent (promega). relative luminescence units were normalized to those derived from cells infected with sars-cov-2 pseudotyped virus in the absence of ace2-fc/ace2 monomer. the half maximal inhibitory concentration (ic50) was determined using 4-parameter nonlinear regression (graphpad prism). each concentration of ace2-fc/ace2 monomer was tested in duplicate and reported as an average and standard deviation for each experiment. two biological replicates of ace2-fc treatment were obtained (exp #1, exp #2).all handling and experiments using sars-cov-2 was conducted under biosafety level 3 containment with approved bua and protocols. sars-cov-2 clinical isolate 2019-ncov/usa-wa1/2020 was obtained through bei resources (harcourt et al., 2020) . prior to experiments, virus was passed in vero e6 cells to create working stocks and titers were measured by plaque formation assay. for experiments, vero e6 cells were cultured in minimal essential media (mem), 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs), 1% pen-strep and seeded on 6-well culture plates at 3.8e5 cells/well the day prior. infection with sars-cov-2 was performed using moi of 0.1. virus was incubated in infection media (emem 0% fbs) containing 100 nm monomeric ace2, 100 nm dimeric ace2-fc, or no blocker for 1 hour at 37 °c. culture media was removed from vero e6 cells and 300 µl of the blocker/virus inoculum was added for 1 hour at 37 °c. subsequently, 1 ml of cell culture media was added and cells were incubated at 37 °c for an additional 16 hours before rna harvest. viral entry into cells and cellular transcription of viral genes was measured by qpcr. cellular rna was isolated and converted to cdna using rnaeasy rna extraction kit (qiagen) andquantitect reverse-transcriptase kit (qiagen) according to manufacturer instructions. qpcr reactions were prepared using sybr select master mix (thermo) and the following conditions: for n gene, e gene, and hgusb gene primer (cross reactive with cercopithecus aethiops) concentration was 400 nm and annealing temperature was 58 °c, and for hactb gene primer bio-layer interferometry (bli) data of ace2 monomer or ace2-fc dimer binding to immobilized spike rbd-monomer, rbd-fc dimer, or trimeric fl-spike ectodomain. spike variants were loaded onto sensors until binding was between 0.4-0.6 nm. ace2 monomer or ace2-fc were used as analytes in solution, with concentrations ranging from 100 nm to 3.125 nm. although ace2 monomer bound spike-rbd-monomer and spike-rbd-fc at kd of 18.5 and 12.0 nm, respectively, it did not bind fl-spike strongly (a-c). in contrast, the ace2-fc dimer bound to these forms with affinities of 5.5 nm, <1 pm, and 5.9 nm (d-f). although ace2-fc can bind spike-rbd-fc with strong intramolecular avidity, this 2-on-2 interaction is not present in the context of fl-spike, indicating that only one arm of ace2-fc can engage an rbd in fl-spike. the decreased kon and koff of ace2-fc in the context of fl-spike (f) compared to spike-rbdmonomer (d) indicates that conformational changes of the rbd in the context of the spike trimer are important in the interaction of ace2-fc to fl-spike. the n-terminal ace2 nanobit system is able to detect spike-rbd-fc bound magnetic beads with better sensitivity than the c-terminal fusions (supplementary figure s4) . (f) cartoon depiction of the n-terminal ace2 nanobit sensor system to detect fl-spike in solution. (g) the n-terminal ace2 nanobit system is able to detect fl-spike in solution, indicating that more than one rbd in a fl-spike trimer can be in the "up" conformation for two ace2-fc molecules to bind and reconstitute the split enzyme. for all assays, the luminescence signal is normalized to a no-bead control and the average and standard deviation is plotted (n=3). the majority of fl-spike proteins are in the "closed" or partially "closed" conformation and "opening up" of rbd on spike is necessary for ace2 binding. (b) monomeric ace2 binds poorly to trimeric spike, (c) ace2-fc binds much stronger to spike than monomer, indicating that rebinding and intra-spike avidity contribute significantly to the high-affinity nature of this interaction. (d) dimeric ace2-fc does not interact with fl-spike with a full two-on-two intramolecular avidity. (e) more than one rbd can be in the "up" conformation, enabling the engagement of separate ace2 molecules. for (b-e), only the "two-up" conformation is shown but other rbd conformations are also possible. (f) a proposed model where ace2 binding may induce a conformational change in spike, resulting in "two-up" or "three-up" rbd conformations. (h) dimeric molecules such as ace2-fc or igg will be more potent than a monomeric inhibitor for neutralizing sars-cov-2 virus. for all panels, rbd in the "open" conformation is colored in green and rbd in the "closed" formation colored in grey. viral infections constitute a serious public health and social problem worldwide, especially during the recent covid-19 pandemic caused by the betacoronavirus sars-cov-2 [1] . this virus utilizes a glycosylated spike protein to bind to the host angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and tmprss2 [2, 3] . during the initial and crucial infection steps, different carbohydrate-mediated interactions are playing key roles at the host-pathogen interface, as shown for many viruses such as hiv-1, influenza viruses, ebolavirus and sars-cov [4, 5] . the viral proteins, often highly glycosylated, can be recognized by different carbohydrate-binding proteins from the host, triggering simultaneously immune-responses that can facilitate or inhibit viral entry or dissemination [5] . in contrast to other pathogens and, with rare exceptions, viruses do not have a glycosylation machinery and exploit the host intracellular glycosylation machinery, during the viral intracellular replication. due to the high evolutionary pressure, the glycosylation profiles of various human-infecting viruses are very different from a classic host-glycosylated protein as described for example for surface proteins of hiv-1, ebolavirus, mers, sars-cov and siv [5, 6] . the glycans on viral proteins are important for proper folding and for modulating accessibility to host proteases and neutralizing antibodies [4] . virus have exploited the host-glycosylation machinery as camouflage strategy, hiding hypothetical immunogenic epitopes, as well as using the host carbohydrate binding receptors as entry mechanisms as, for example, described for ebolavirus [7] and hiv-1 [8] . in addition, low affinity antibodies against some viral glycoproteins have been reported to increase the viral infection [4] . in this scenario, the glycosylation profiles of the spike glycoprotein from sars-cov-2 have been recently described [9, 10, 11] . nglycosylation profile of the sars-cov-2 spike protein expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells (hek293) showed a combination of high mannoses and complex-type oligosaccharides, including highly processed sialylated complex-type glycans and fucosylated glycans on different glycosylation sites [9, 10, 11] . interestingly, the n-glycosylation profile of the sars-cov-2 spike protein shows also some difference compared with the sars-cov spike protein [11] . in addition, o-linked glycan residues have been predicted [12] and described [10] . apparently three adjacent predicted o-linked glycans seem to be unique for the sars-cov-2 spike protein.the host-immune system has an evolutionary conserved class of carbohydrate-binding proteins (lectins) able to sense these different glycan-epitopes, triggering innate responses in a carbohydrate-dependent manner [13] . in this frame, the c-type lectins dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (dc-sign) and langerin have been described as well-known receptor on dendritic cells used by many viruses as entry mechanism such as hiv-1 [14, 15] and ebolavirus [7] . the macrophage galactose binding lectin (mgl) and the mannose receptor (mr) play a role in influenza a virus infection [16] , and sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-type lectins (siglecs)-1 has been involved in hiv-1 trans infection and ebolavirus uptake [17, 18] .in the context of sars-cov-2 infection, we investigated the interactions between the glycosylated viral spike protein expressed in hek293 cells and the host immune lectins via solidphase immunoassays. we screened a library of different human c-type lectins expressed on myeloid cells such as the antigen-presenting cells like dendritic cells and macrophages (dc-sign, langerin, mgl, mr, dectin-1 and the macrophage inducible calcium dependent lectin receptor mincle) or soluble (mbl), to bind to the sars-cov-2 spike protein used as coating agent in elisa experiments. figure 1 clearly shows binding of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to human lectin receptors dc-sign and mgl. the binding to dc-sign (but not to langerin, mr and mbl) suggests the interactions with specific fucosylated glycans present at n343 (core α1,6 fucose, or with lex type of structures) [9] or a particular conformation of the high-mannoses able to discriminate between dc-sign and langerin. the binding of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to mgl fits with the presence of o-glycans at thr323 or ser325 on the spike protein [10] , as the specificity of mgl has been described for α or β gal/galnac containing glyco-conjugates [19] . surprisingly both mgl and dc-sign are receptors found on tolerogenic macrophages/dendritic cells and their carbohydrate-binding have been shown to hijack myeloid function keeping macrophages immune-silent by the induction of anti-inflammatory cytokines and induction of t cell apoptosis/exhaustion [20] . although the oligomannosides-content of the spike protein has been reported to be around 30% and man5glcnac2 has been described to be the predominant oligomannose-type glycan (n234 and n709) [9] , we did not see binding to langerin, mr and mbl being bona fide lectins able to recognize mannosides. despite the fact that the mr mannosebinding evolved separately from the other c-type lectins, mbl and mr have close similarity in their mannose-binding profiles [21] . however, these human lectins were able to bind the positive controls of our experiment, illustrating sensitivity of the assay for these lectins to bind their carbohydrate structures (see figure s1 ). the specific binding to dc-sign but not to langerin has been shown also for marburg virus (marv) [22] , while viruses like hiv-1 binds both receptors [15] . the fact that sars-cov-2 spike protein binds dc-sign but not langerin nor mr or mbl, may indicate that the high-mannoses are not accessible or that there is a preferential specificity for the different fucosylated residues in the context of core fucosylation or terminal lewis antigens on the spike protein. this is line with our finding that both lectins do not bind to the spike protein confirming poor accessibility of the spike protein high-mannoses to the immune system. as expected, the lectin mincle and dectin-1, recognising mostly mycobacterial glycolipids and betaglucans respectively, were used as control and did not bind to the spike protein. as full figure with all the positive controls is shown in figure s1 . binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein to human c-type lectins. human c-type lectins elisa results: wells were coated with the viral spike protein and the binding to different c-type lectins was evaluated in a calcium-containing buffer. the experiment has been performed three times in duplicate with similar results, and data were normalized over signal from bsa-coated wells. error bars indicate standard deviations. od: optical density.since the sars-cov-2 spike protein has been described to express highly processed sialylated complex-glycans at n165, n282, n801, n1074 and n1098 [10] we investigated whether these glycans could be a signature for the sialic-acid binding lectins (siglecs), a family of carbohydrate receptors with immune-receptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif (itim) and known immune inhibitory signaling properties [23] . using our solid-phase immunoassay screening-system, a library of different siglecs (siglec-3, siglec-5, siglec-7, siglec-9 and siglec-10) was explored for binding activity to sars-cov-2 spike protein. siglecs can be expressed on almost all immune cells, including b and t cells, monocytes, eosinophils, and macrophages [23] . although siglecs are bona fide sialic-acids binding proteins, the literature is not consistent in assigning a specific sialylated pattern to each siglec. notwithstanding this, human siglec-3 and siglec-10 have a prevalence to interact with α2,6 linked sialic acids while siglec-9 has a prevalence to interact with α2,3 linked sialic acids (in the context, in most of the cases, of fucosylated or sulfated oligosaccharides). siglec-3 is highly expressed on macrophages and monocytes; siglec-9 on monocytes, neutrophils, conventional dendritic cells, nk and t cells; siglec-10 on b cells, monocytes and eosinophils [24] . different siglecs have been implicated in t cell-mediated tolerance, alter b cell function and the inhibitory siglec-9 and siglec-10 were upregulated on tumor-infiltrating cd4+ and cd8+ t cells contributing to exhaustion of tumor t cell responses [23] . as shown in figure 2 we observed a specific interaction of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with siglec-3, siglec-9 and siglec-10. our results clearly suggest the presence of α2,6 and α2,3 linked sialic acids on the viral spike protein, as well as the roles of immunomodulatory siglecs during sars-cov-2 infection, probably by altering and modulating the b-cells, neutrophil, eosinophils, monocytes and macrophages function. as full figure with the positive controls is shown in figure  s2 . the experiment has been performed three times in duplicate with similar results, and data were normalized over signal from blocking buffer-coated wells. error bars indicate standard deviations. od: optical density.these data illustrate that the heterogeneous glycan-repertoire expressed on the sars-cov-2 spike protein modulate the binding to different carbohydrate-binding receptors expressed on host immune cells. in particular we speculate that the spike protein could target a repertoire of immune inhibiting glycan binding receptors, such as dc-sign, mgl, siglec-3, siglec-9 and siglec-10. this also illustrates the enormous potential of sars-cov-2 to modulate the host immune system on multiple levels.we next explored a different angle of carbohydrate-mediated interactions of sars-cov-2 studying the interactions with lung microbiota components that may contribute to the disease severity. various viruses such as influenza viruses, hiv-1, coronavirus oc43 and mers, have been described to interact with the host sialic-acids containing structures [25, 26] or to interact with sulfated glycosaminoglycans, suggesting a carbohydrate-recognition activity for different viral proteins [27] . in this context, recently the glycosaminoglycan heparin has been described to interact with the sars-cov-2 spike protein inducing conformation changes [28] and heparan sulfate showed binding to the spike protein in a length dependent manner [29] . starting from these evidences, we chose to study the interaction of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with different glyco-conjugates from the lung microbiota. the mechanism underlying the interactions between the lung microbiota and viruses are currently not fully understood. it is known that the lung resident microbiota modulates viral infections yielding beneficial outcomes, conferring protection against viral infection, or harmful outcomes since virus can use the resident bacteria to spread in the host by direct or indirect mechanisms [30, 31, 32, 33] . moreover, viruses can perturb the integrity of the commensal microbiota (modified by viral infections, age, and smoke), that in turn influences virus infectivity and morbidity [31] . looking closely to all the bacteria occupying the lung and upper-respiratory microbiota, they are covered by an extremely complex library of glyco-conjugates mostly in the form of bacterial capsular-polysaccharides (cps) and lipopolysaccharides (lps). this outer layer may contribute to the intimate interactions between sars-cov-2 and the lung microbiota, and could help not only in understanding mechanistically the viral entry, but also in supporting therapies and prognosis/diagnosis markers. from a clinical perspective, few data suggest that the microbiota composition of the upper-respiratory tract during acute respiratory syncytial virus infection differs from that of healthy controls [34] . during the covid-19 pandemic, as well as other past viral outbreaks, respiratory viral infections are associated with co-infections with streptococcus pneumoniae (sp). as recently reported, 50% of covid-19 patients who have died, also showed secondary bacterial infections, and fungal coinfections [35] . thus, as a proof-of-concept, we designed a solid-phase immunoassay coating the plates with a library of seven structurally different cps from s. pneumoniae (the seven most abundant serotypes worldwide as well as the ones included in pneumococcal conjugate-vaccines, pcv: sp1, sp5, sp06b, sp14, sp18c, sp19f and sp23f) and determined the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein as fc-construct in our assay to quantify potential interactions. surprisingly, when analyzing the binding of the spike protein to the structurally different sp cps with our assay, we observed a strong binding of the spike protein to sp19f and sp23f (figure 3 ). the spike protein was able to strongly recognize the cps from sp19f and sp23f, while a somewhat weaker interaction was observed with sp18c and sp06b. the cps from sp1 and sp5 poorly bound sars-cov-2 spike protein, while the csp from sp14 was not recognized. looking for a structural rationale, sp19f, sp23f and sp18c, sp06b have in common the presence of the following glycan epitope: glc (or gal) 1,2 (1,3 or 1,4) linked to rham (where rha stands for rhamnose, glc for glucose and gal for galactose). interestingly, sp1, sp5 and sp14 have no rhamnose in their structures. rhamnose is a deoxy sugar not present in humans but highly abundant for example in bacteria and mycobacteria. bacterial rhamnosylated glyco-conjugates have evolutionary conserved patterns that co-evolved with the host immune system, triggering for example, in mammals a conserved and abundant class on naturally-acquired anti-rhamnose antibodies [36] .despite the fact that we see differential binding of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to these different capsules, we are sure that an equal amounts is coated in the plates: increase of the concentrations of the different a cps showed no improvement of the binding, and different monoclonal antibodies against the reported cps have been tested in these experimental conditions showed equal coating of the different cps. following the observation of the binding of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to different sp cps, we aimed at studying also the interactions between other lung microbiota glyco-conjugates. we designed another elisa experiment to prove the spike protein binding to different lps expressed as surface antigens from different gram-negative bacteria. a small library of different lps (pseudomonas aeruginosa, salmonella typhimurium and shigella flexneri) was tested in an elisa assay against the spike protein. p. aeruginosa is a typical and widespread human opportunistic pathogen, it can cause severe and often deadly lung infections, particularly in immunocompromised patients, and increasingly resistant to a large number of antibiotics [37] . we chose to compare p. aeruginosa to two bacteria not interesting the lungs, namely s. typhimurium [38] and s. flexneri [39] , enteric pathogens both capable of invading and disseminating the intestinal epithelium. the specific interaction between the spike protein and the lps from p. aeruginosa, when compared to the lps from the gut-associated pathogens s. typhimurium and s. flexneri, is indeed clear and showed in figure 4 . the same structural considerations mentioned for the sp cps might be here done , that is the lps from the intestinal pathogens here tested (salmonella and shigella) do not express rhamnosylated-epitopes, while the p. aeruginosa strain here analysed. in addition to be an opportunistic pathogen able to occupy the lung ecosystem, p. aeruginosa expresses a lps containing in its core-antigen the glc 1,2-rha epitope [40] . also in this case, we proved with different parallel experiments (lectins binding) that the three tested lps are coating the elisa wells in a similar way.all together our results on bacterial glyco-conjugates suggest, in the context of sars-cov-2 infection, that some bacteria (and serotypes) in the lung, that harbor a rhamnosylated-epitopes, could facilitate the binding of the virus to the epithelial cells and its subsequent dissemination. these observations could trigger the design of new therapeutic approaches for the bacterial coinfections in covid-19 patients. these unreported results indicate that lung microbiota cps and lps, can play a role in accelerating the viral infection. in addition, due to the very high prevalence of bacterial pneumonia in covid-19 patients, these results could also help in evaluating the impact of pcv vaccination on covid-19 patients (as already suggested of other viral infections [41] ), as well as to identify specific sp serotypes able to modulate the viral infection. in conclusion, we identified different carbohydrate-mediated interactions of the sars-cov-2 spike protein. these interactions could impact and drive the infection severity and the corresponding uncontrolled immune responses and inflammation processes [42] .here we proved that the glycan-heterogeneity on the sars-cov-2 spike protein is the cause of the multiple interactions with the host lectins. we showed that the spike protein is recognized specifically by c-type lectins (dc-sign and mgl) and by different siglecs (siglec-3, siglec-9 and siglec-10). interestingly this connects to new, ace2 independent, infection pathways, with the hypothetical immune suppression of monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells and b cells. the binding to dc-sign, mgl, siglec-9 and siglec-10, indicates the presence and accessibility of the immune system, to fucosylated and sialylated structures as well as the clear presence of oglycans on the spike glycoprotein. we also proved a totally unexplored behavior for viral proteins, showing the specific binding of the sars-cov-2 to different glyco-conjugates expressed by the bacteria able to colonize the lungs. these results may have implications to control and understand the bacterial co-infections, to have a better understanding on the disease severity and to add risk factors in covid-19 patients.together these data aim at adding different carbohydrate-mediated interactions in the complex and holistic picture of the sars-cov-2 infection and its implications. and the optical density (od) was measured at 450 nm in an elisa reader. were added to the wells. after 2h at room temperature, under gentle shaking (150 rot/min), the wells were washed with hbss (2x150µl) and then 100 µl of anti-human horseradish peroxidase (0.3 µg/ml, goat anti-human igg-hrp from jacksonimmuno) were added. after 30 min at room temperature, the wells were washed with hbss (2x150µl). finally, 100 µl of substrate solution (3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine, tmb, in citric/acetate buffer, ph=4, and h2o2) were added and after max 15 min incubation at room temperature the reaction was stopped with 50 µl of h2so4 (0.8 m) and the optical density (od) was measured at 450 nm in an elisa reader. the experiment was performed three times with similar results, in duplicate and data were normalized over the signal at 450 nm from the carbo-free blocking solution-containing wells. polyacrylamide polymers (paa), functionalized with different glycans were purchased from lectinity, mw approx. 20 kda, carbohydrate content around 20% mol. neu5acα6`lac-c2-paa 0063a-pa (paa-sia 2,6), neu5acα3`lac-gly-paa 0060-pa (paa-sia 2,3), and galβ-och2ch2ch2nh2 0024-pa (paa-gal). we used a concentration of 40μg/ml paa-glyco-conjugates to coat the elisa wells.spike protein bacterial glyco-conjugates elisa: a solution of 50 µl of different bacterial glycoconjugates (s. pneumoniae cps were provided by the finlay vaccine institute, cuba. the lps from pseudomonas aeruginosa serotype 10, shigella flexneri strain m90t, salmonella typhimurium sh2201, were provided by the department of chemical sciences, university of naples federico ii, italy) at 40 µg/ml (cps) or 20 µg/ml (lps), in pbs (10mm, ph=7.4), were used to coat the nunc maxisorp plate 2h at 37°c. after discarding and washing (2x150µl) with pbs (10mm, ph=7.4), the wells were blocked with 100 µl of carbo-free blocking solution (vector laboratories, catalog no.nc9977573) at 37°c for 30 min. the blocking solution was discarded and 50µl of sars-cov-the earliest coronavirus isolates were identified from mammalian and avian sources in the 1930s and 1940s (beaudette and hudson 1937; doyle and hutchings 1946; cheevers and daniels 1949) . at this time, electron microscopy revealed prominent large spikes on the surface of virions, whose resulting crown-like appearance gave rise to the name coronavirus ( fig. 3.1) . coronaviruses have 4-5 structural proteins including the spike protein (s), envelope protein (e), membrane protein (m), nucleocapsid protein (n), and members of the coronavirus phylogenetic subgroup 2a have a shorter s protein called hemagglutinin esterase (he). the sars-cov genome is unusually large at~29.7 kb, and encodes 14 open reading frames for several proteins, (marra et al. 2003; rota et al. 2003) . on the interior, the lipid envelope of sars-cov appears to have a gap observed as a low density in three-dimensional (3d) structures ( fig. 3. 2) and then a more dense layer, which is presumably the surface of the nucleocapsid comprising mainly the n protein.details of how this nucleocapsid is organized are not clear; however, the n protein is presumably anchored to the cytoplasmic side of the virion envelope via the m protein, which is a low abundance protein and may account for the "gap" of low density between the envelope and the nucleocapsid. electron microscopic examination shows no evidence for supercoiled rna such as that seen in paramyxoviruses and the interior appears amorphous by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em); hence the arrangement whereby the rna may be bound to the nucleocapsid protein is not clear.a striking feature of the sars-cov spike is its huge mass (~500 kd per trimer). however, despite the size differences, the sars-cov spike performs the same fundamental task in viral entry to the host cell as other smaller type 1 viral fusion proteins, such as the influenza hemagglutinin (ha) (~220 kd per trimer). the sars-cov spike can be subdivided into four structural domains (from n to c terminus); two large external domains s1 and s2 are largely responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion, respectively. in most type 1 viral fusion proteins the analogous peptides are generated by proteolysis of the spike precursor during the maturation process in the host cell, yielding two peptides with the fusion peptide on the n terminus of s2. in sars-cov the s1/s2 assignment is given based on sequence homology to other viral fusion proteins, although there appears to be no peptide cleavage. the final two small domains are comprised of a transmembrane domain, and a carboxyterminal cytoplasmic domain. the cell-surface molecule angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is the receptor for the sars-cov s protein which is a relatively large macromolecule with a diameter of 70 å . by comparison, the receptor for influenza ha, sialic acid, is much smaller with a 10 å diameter.one of the challenges of achieving structural molecular studies with native sars-cov is that it is classified as a biological safety level 3 organism, requiring handling in containment. however, once it was shown that specimens could be g-irradiated with a sufficient dose (2 mrad) for viral inactivation, while still preserving protein structure, it was possible to carry out cryo-em of intact virions and to obtain the 3d structure of the native, unfixed virions and the spike, using single particle image processing and averaging from multiple images containing (booth et al. 2005; beniac et al. 2006) . immunolabeling showed that these virions were intact antigenically as well as structurally (fig. 3.1) and still able to bind to the sars-cov receptor, ace2.cryo-em coupled with 3d single-particle image analysis has been used to determine the structure of the sars-cov spike, and positioning of the binding of ace2 to the spike (beniac et al. 2006 (beniac et al. , 2007 . spikes on the surface of virus particles are readily imaged by cryo-em in the frozen-hydrated native state (fig. 3.1e ). 3d image processing was carried out on selected spikes using single-particle image processing (penczek et al. 1994; frank et al. 1996; beniac et al. 2006) . the structures of both the spike and the spike-ace2 complex have been solved to 18.5 å resolution (figs. 3.2 and 3.3; beniac et al. 2006 beniac et al. , 2007 . the spike shows a striking structure, being about 180 å in diameter and with three distinct lobes or domains 50 å thick on each subunit of the trimer (similar in appearance to the blades of a propeller), and a thin stalk connecting the spike to the viral envelope. the blades are twisted at an angle of~30 to the axis of symmetry, and are almost certainly composed of the spike s1 domain. the atomic resolution structures were docked within the sars-cov spike-ace2 3d reconstruction; pdb id code: 2ajf (ace2, blue; receptor-binding domain, red), and 2fxp (yellow). the arrow points to the c terminus of ace2. color scheme: ace2, violet; spike, green; stalk, blue; envelope, beige; nucleocapsid, red. scale bar: 100 å ace2 binding does not result in a fundamental structural unfolding of the spike. however, the overall height of the spike was reduced from 160 å to 150 å following binding. when viewed end-on, the spike undergoes a rotation of~5 o following binding, and the mass at the center of the axis of symmetry on the distal end of the spike redistributes itself. these redistributions of mass were further identified in difference maps between the two reconstructions ( fig. 3.4) . upon ace2 binding the spike undergoes a decondensation of mass around the central axis (fig. 3.4b, g; blue) . this region is the putative location of the s2 domain. the difference map for the bound spike ( fig. 3 .4d,i) shows changes in both the ace2 component (purple) and the outer edges of the three "blades" of the s1 domain (green).the precise location of ace2 binding on the distal end of the spike is centered at 70 å from the central axis of the spike, with a 30 å gap between the axis of symmetry and ace2. one ace2 molecule can bind to each of the three propellerlike blades of the spike, making a structure 220 å high ( fig. 3 .3b). binding of more than one ace2 to each spike (on one or both of the other two propeller blades of each trimer) is possible, hence binding of one ace2 molecule does not stearically hinder binding of additional ace2 molecules.the cryo-em 3d structures of the spike and the spikeàace2 complex, when combined with the atomic resolution structures of the sars-cov spike receptorbinding domain -ace2 complex (li et al. 2005a ) and the heptad repeat pre-and postfusion cores (supekar et al. 2004; hakansson-mcreynolds et al. 2006) , show that the receptor-binding domain docks to the distal end of the spike with ace2 fig. 3.4 the cryo-em reconstruction of the sars-cov spike (a,f) was subtracted from the sars-cov spike-ace2 complex (e,j). the positive component attributed to the sars-cov spike in (b,g) indicates a rearrangement in the s2 core, and the positive component attributed the sars-cov-ace2 complex shows the addition of ace2 and an exterior rearrangement in s1 (d,i). the net difference map is presented in (c,h). the structures are presented from a side perspective (a-e) and end-on perspective (f-j). the arrows in (f) and (j) illustrate the mass reorganization that occurs in the central axis of the spike where one small central blob splits into three nubs. in (a,f) the region on the spike adjacent to ace2 which corresponds to the receptor-binding domain has been highlighted with a dotted line and is colored purple. the color scheme is the same as in fig. 3 .3. scale bar: 100 å filling the extra mass on the spike (shown by the color violet in fig. 3 .3). the empty upper region of the mass appears to be components of the second ace2 and the fc component of the chimeric protein, and the location of the c-terminus of the docked ace2 was consistent with this interpretation.viral membrane fusion proteins are responsible both for binding to cellular receptors, and the subsequent fusion of viral and cellular membranes. the paradigm for type 1 fusion proteins consists of two heptad repeat regions, and a hydrophobic fusion peptide (dutch et al. 2000) . this motif is present in sars-cov (hakansson-mcreynolds et al. 2006 ) and other coronaviruses (xu et al. 2004) , as well as the hemagglutinin (ha) of influenza (skehel and wiley 2000) , gp21 of human t-cell leukemia virus type 1 (kobe et al. 1999 ), gp41 of hiv (weissenhorn et al. 1997 ), gp2 of ebola (weissenhorn et al. 1998; malashkevich et al. 1999) , and the fusion protein of paramyxovirus (zhao et al. 2000; chen et al. 2001) . type 1 viral fusion proteins can also be divided into two subtypes: those whose fusion mechanism is low ph-dependent such as influenza ha, and those that are ph-independent like the retroviral fusion proteins. in retroviruses, receptor binding itself can trigger fusion, with temperature and redox conditions also influencing the fusion mechanism (hernandez et al. 1997; damico et al. 1998 ). the sars-cov spike appears to be insensitive to redox conditions (fenouillet et al. 2007 ). although the factors which trigger fusion (endocytosis, ph sensitivity, single receptor vs. primary and coreceptor binding, redox change) differ amongst diverse virus families, all viral fusion proteins are thought to share the same basic fusion mechanism (baker et al. 1999; skehel and wiley 2000; dutch et al. 2000; colman and lawrence 2003; dimitrov 2004; hofmann and pohlmann 2004 ).the precise mechanisms by which type 1 viral fusion proteins gain access to the host cell remain unknown. the hypothetical entry process includes several steps that take place in sequence: receptor binding, fusion core rearrangement, fusion peptide insertion in host cell membrane, refolding of heptad repeats, membrane fusion, and finally viral nucleocapsid transfer (earp et al. 2005 ).in most proposed models of membrane fusion it is postulated that the s1 domain or analogous receptor-binding domains dissociate from the spike during the membrane fusion process. this dynamic process was demonstrated for influenza ha by kemble et al. (1992) in their investigation where they engineered intermonomer disulfide bonds between the ha s1 subunits. the result of this was that fusion activity was impaired; however it could be restored under reducing conditions. it is probable that the sars-cov spike shares a similar mechanism, with the structural changes detected by cryo-em representing the initial step in this process.by analogy with other type 1 viral fusion proteins, the fusion core of the sars-cov spike is thought to undergo similar structural rearrangements during fusion. the receptor-binding domain is localized in a position on the distal end of the molecule, closer to the 3-fold axis than anticipated, yet still in a position that would not impede these structural rearrangements. putative mechanisms by which type 1 viral fusion proteins achieve membrane fusion have been proposed (baker et al. 1999; skehel and wiley 2000; dutch et al. 2000; colman and lawrence 2003; dimitrov 2004 ), but complete structural evidence for the role of intermediate structures in these mechanisms has yet to be obtained. the structural biology of this process has been best characterized for the influenza ha, and paramyxovirus fusion protein (f) for which the prefusion and membrane fusion ph structures have been determined by x-ray crystallography (sauter et al. 1992; bullough et al. 1994; skehel and wiley 2000; yin et al. 2005 yin et al. , 2006 (fig. 3 .5, inset). all of the subsequent models for type 1 viral fusion proteins are based on the structural data of these two fusion proteins. a drawback in all of these models is that they are based on recombinant ectodomains that are not proven to exist as a component in the complete molecule, and they lack both membrane-interacting residues and lipids (skehel and wiley 2000) . the cryo-em structures of intact sars-cov spike bound to native virion lipid envelopes are very instructive when atomic resolution fragments are docked within the overall molecule, especially as the entire sars-cov spike has proven to be a difficult subject for x-ray crystallography, and atomic resolution data exist for only a few fragments of the sars-cov spike. this structural data has been modeled into a scheme to propose a mechanism for sars-cov spike-mediated membrane fusion (figs. 3.5 and 3.6). in the initial step the receptor-binding domain of the spike attaches to its human receptor ace2. at this point the fusion core is in the prefusion configuration with the three heptad 2 repeats (hr2) forming a coiled-coil symmetric trimer at the center of the stalk of the spike (hakansson-mcreynolds et al. 2006) .during the next step of the membrane fusion process the virus is internalized in the cell by endocytosis and is exposed to a low ph environment, and may undergo proteolytic cleavage between the s1 and s2 domains (simmons et al. 2005) . the next step is fusion core rearrangement, so that the fusion peptide (fp) inserts into the host cell membrane. in fig. 3 .5 this initial process is illustrated with models m0-m3, based on the atomic structure of the hr2 prefusion core, which begins to collapse upon itself in model m3 in a manner similar to that which occurs with influenza ha (skehel and wiley 2000) . the inset in fig. 3 .5 illustrates this process in ha by coloring segments of s2 to illustrate the rearrangement from m0 to m3 that takes place. during this process we propose that the receptor-binding domain still holds on to ace2 so that the fully extended fusion peptide will be positioned to penetrate through the host membrane. our cryo-em results show that it is possible for the spike to attach to three ace2 receptors at once; this may serve to hold on to the host membrane like a tripod so as to accurately orientate the fusion core ( fig. 3.7) . in addition the 30 å gap between the axis of symmetry and ace2 provides sufficient space for fusion core rearrangement. damico et al. (1998) demonstrated that the kinetics of binding of the rous sarcoma virus envelope protein ectodomain to liposomes was not linear with respect to receptor concentration. this suggested that activation of the trimeric ectodomain favored binding to multiple receptor monomers. one can therefore infer that other structurally homologous viral envelope proteins can also bind multiple receptors, which may be a general adaptation that provides the correct temporal and spatial arrangement to bring about membrane fusion. the observation that the sars-cov spike could bind three soluble ace2 receptors provides three possible binding states with one, two or three membrane-bound receptors attached to the spike. in fig. 3 .7 we present these three states; with only one receptor bound the spike and virus have a wide range of movement possible, whereas with two receptors bound the movement is the cryo-em, docked ace2-receptor-binding domain, and prefusion core (m0) and postfusion core (m6) structures provided start and end points for modeling spike rearrangement. five intermediate models illustrate the "jack-knife" mechanism of the fusion core. the following color scheme was used: cryo-em surface: same as in fig. 3 .3. ribbon structures: ace2, white (c terminus blue; spike receptor-binding domain, red; hr1, pink; hr2, yellow. cylindrical models: fp, red; hr1, pink; hr2, yellow. scale bar: 100 å greatly restricted to motion in one plane only. only in the case of three bound receptors will the spike and its fusion core be arranged perpendicular to the cell surface with minimal movement possible. at present it has not been demonstrated that membrane fusion requires the fusion core to be oriented perpendicular to the host cell membrane to function. however, one can hypothesize this based on the orientation of ace2 on the distal end of the sars-cov spike. it is interesting to note that binding to three receptor molecules is the minimum number of binding events required to achieve this perpendicular orientation in 3d space. this observation matches up with the conserved trimeric structures of type 1 fusion proteins which are common amongst enveloped viruses, thus indicating that a possible conserved structural-functional relationship may exist. there are several steps involved in viral entry; they can be broken down into at least six components: (b) receptor targeting, (c) viral attachment, (d) fusion core rearrangement and fusion peptide insertion, (e) fusion core refolding, (f) membrane fusion, and (g) nucleocapsid transfer. in (b-g) the host membrane is represented using a shaded blue line. the color scheme used is the same as in figs. 3.3 and 3.5. scale bar: 100 å the next step in the membrane fusion process involves the refolding of the fusion core back upon itself to adopt the postfusion configuration (supekar et al. 2004) (fig. 3.5; models m4-m6) . in this configuration three heptad 1 repeats (hr1) form a parallel coiled-coil trimer, and the three hr2 pack in an antiparallel fashion in the hydrophobic grooves of the hr1 trimer. the result of this is that both the fp and transmembrane regions of the spike are brought in close proximity to each other, resulting in the host and viral membranes being in close contact. each sars-cov virion has an average of 65 spikes (beniac et al. 2006) . at this density, several spikes would be close enough together to act in concert to disrupt the plasma membrane and induce pore formation between viral and cellular membranes. opening of these pores would allow the sars-cov nucleocapsid to enter the host cell cytoplasm, as shown in our model in fig. 3 .6. multiple sars-cov spike trimers may be involved in formation of the fusion pore, similar to the situation in influenza, where it has been suggested that between three and six ha trimers may be involved in the production of each fusion pore (skehel and wiley 2000) . in figs. 3.5 and 3.6 we have presented the ace2-sars:s1 domains as they fig. 3.7 the binding of the sars-cov spike to multiple receptors is presented from three 90 o orthographic views (x, y, and z axes). when one receptor is bound there is a wide range of motion possible (a). by binding two receptors the freedom of movement is greatly reduced to motion in one plane (b). when three receptors are bound, the spike is positioned in such a way that movement is restrained and the fusion core is perpendicular to the host cell membrane (c). the host membrane is represented using a shaded blue surface (same as in fig. 3.6) , and the color scheme used for the sars-cov spike is the same as in fig. 3 .3. scale bar: 100 å were solved in this cryo-em investigation, for the model of membrane fusion that we present. for other fusion proteins like influenza ha1 and hiv gp120 it has been modeled that the rearrangements upon membrane fusion are dramatic involving a shedding of the above-mentioned domains. the cryo-em investigations have detected structural movement of s1 upon ace2 binding, which could represent the initial phase of this dramatic process that is postulated to occur in the course of membrane fusion.an analysis of the structure of the spike-receptor complex demonstrates how sars-cov can adapt to utilize receptors from different species and how they may evolve to gain specificity for new receptor types, in that there is redundancy and a great deal of protein mass that can accommodate evolutionary changes. rna viruses have a high rate of mutation and recombination (moya et al. 2004 ). in sars-cov the spike is able to retain specific binding affinity for the ace2 of more than one host species, and rapid evolution to gain specificity for novel ace2 species has been demonstrated (li et al. 2005b (li et al. , 2006 . the large size of the spike of coronaviruses may be related to the use of large host cell-surface molecules such as ace2 as specific receptors. amongst the coronavirus family, specific cellsurface receptors for the s protein are all in the range of 60-110 kd (wentworth and holmes 2001) . these large host receptor molecules are of course functionally constrained and, in turn, relatively well conserved across species barriers. in utilizing binding to a large receptor molecule, the spike s1 domain also acts as a "spacer arm" holding the receptor far enough away from the threefold axis of symmetry of the spike s2 domain to permit fusion core rearrangement and subsequent membrane fusion. such a property necessitates having a large spike molecule. moreover, multiple receptor binding can have functional significance, enhancing the binding and entry of viruses. cross-linking of adjacent host receptor molecules could increase the affinity of the virus for its target cell, as well as improving the kinetics of fusion. the sars-cov spike is a useful model system for the investigation of type 1 viral fusion protein dynamics. utilizing this system for further research may lead to the possibility of developing broad-spectrum antivirals that target conserved cell fusion mechanisms shared by diverse virus families.the outbreak of a new type of severe pneumonia covid-19 started in december 2019 1 has been going on world-wide, and caused over 15,000 fatalities, infected more than 350,000 individuals globally. although the earlier infected cases were mainly found in china before march, 2020, particularly in hubei province, the confirmed covid-19 cases have been reported in more than 160 countries or territories by the end of march, 2020, and still increasing rapidly. one urgent desire in coping with this global crisis is to develop or discover drugs that can treat the diseases caused by the novel coronavirus, the sars-cov-2 (also known as 2019-ncov)2. according to the genome comparative studies, the sars-cov-2 belongs to the genus beta-coronavirus, with nucleotide sequence identity of about 96% compared to the closest bat coronavirus ratg13, about 89% compared to two other bat sars-like viruses (bat-sl-covzc45 & bat-sl-covzxc21), and 79% compared to the sars-cov 3,4. furthermore, the sars-cov-2 spike protein has a protein sequence identity of 73% for the receptor binding domain (rbd) with the sars-cov rbd (denoted as sars-rbd in the following). the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 both utilize the human angiotensin converting enzyme 2 protein (ace2) to initiate the spike protein binding and facilitate the fusion to host cells 5-9. the 193-residue rbd of the sars-cov spike protein has been found to be sufficient to bind the human ace2 6. based on this fact, the rbd of sars-cov-2 becomes a critical protein target for drug development to treat the covid-19. when this study was started, neither the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein nor the rbd segment were determined, so the homology modeling approach was applied to construct the model of the sars-cov-2 spike rbd in complex with the human ace2 binding domain (denoted as cov2-rbd/ace2 in the following).similar approach has been applied to predict the complex structure and estimate the binding energies 3. because of the high sequence similarity between cov2-rbd and sars-rbd, the predicted structure was found to be highly consistent with the resolved crystal structures 10 (see another crystal structure at http://nmdc.cn/ncov entry:nmdcs0000001, pdbid: 6lzg). these structures laid the foundation for the dynamics investigation of the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex using computational simulation method. the predicted cov2-rbd/ace2 model was subjected to all-atom molecular dynamics (md) simulations to study the binding interactions.although the crystal structure and the predicted model of the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex provide important information about the binding interactions at the molecular interfaces, md simulations can extend the knowledge to a dynamics regime in a fully solvated environment. the importance of the ace2 residues was investigated by simulating the complexes with ace2 mutants, in which partial dissociation from the ace2 was observed within 500 ns simulations. the control simulations of the sars-rbd/ace2 complexes allowed the detailed comparison in receptor binding for the two different types of viruses.the results showed that the wild type cov2-rbd/ace2 complex is stable in 500 ns simulations, especially in the well-defined binding interface. on the other hand, the mutations on the helix-1 or k353 of the ace2 can alter the binding, revealing new binding poses with reduced contacts compared to those in the crystal structures. the analysis of the interaction energy showed that the binding is enhanced by adjusting conformations to form more favorable interactions as the simulation progressed, consistent with the increased hydrogen bonding patterns. furthermore, the analysis also showed that sars-rbd and cov2-rbd have comparable binding affinities to the ace2, with the former slightly stronger than the latter. the dynamic information obtained by this study shall be useful in understanding sars-cov-2 host interaction and for designing inhibitors to block cov2-rbd binding.the computer model of the sars-cov-2 spike rbd in complex with human ace2the spike rbd of sars-cov-2 (genbank: mn908947 2) comprises cys336-gly526 residues according to the sequence homology analysis with sars-cov spike rbd. the predicted three-dimensional structure model of these residues was obtained with the swiss-model server 11. this predicted sars-cov-2 rbd model was subsequently superimposed into the x-ray structure of sars-cov rbd in complex with human ace2 (pdb code:2ajf, chain d 7). finally, the computer model of sars-cov-2 rbd with human ace2 (cov2-rbd/ace2) was obtained for further simulations and analysis.based on the analysis of the predicted model, sequence alignment, and literature survey, two other systems containing mutations in the human ace2 were prepared and subject to md simulation studies. the mutant construct is based on the fact that rat ace2 markedly diminishes interactions with sars spike protein 12, and it was proposed that the rat ace2 likely has reduced binding affinity to the cov2-rbd 13. to investigate the roles of critical residues on the ace2, we created two mutants of the human ace2 (see table 1 ): (1) mutant mut_h1, with the ace2 n-terminal (residue 19-40) mutated to the residues of rat ace2; and (2) mutant k353h, in which the highly conserved k353 was mutated to histidine (the corresponding amino acid in rat and mouse ace2 proteins). to focus on the impact of these two binding sites, the rest of the ace2 were kept to be the same as human ace2.the predicted model of cov2-rbd/ace2 complex was used as the starting models for md simulations. the spike protein rbd domain is composed of 180 residues (323-502), while the ace2 protein contains 597 residues from the n-terminal domain. the simulation parameterization and equilibration were prepared for complex structures including the mutant systems, using the charmm-gui webserver 14. each system was solvated in tip3p water and sodium chloride ions to neutralize the systems to a salt concentration of 150 mm. approximately, each system was composed of about 220,000 atoms that were parametrized with the charmm36 force field 15. after energy minimization using the steepest descent algorithm, each system was equilibrated at human body temperature 310.15 k, which was maintained by nose-hoover scheme with three independent trajectories starting from random velocities based on maxwell distributions were simulated for both cov2-rbd/ace2 and sars-rbd/ace2 complex systems in their wild types. in all simulations, a time step of 2.0 fs was used and the pme (particle mesh ewald) 20 was applied for long-range electrostatic interactions. the van der waals interactions were evaluated within the distance cutoff of 12.0 å. hydrogen atoms were constrained using the lincs algorithm 21. the human ace2 mutants in complex with cov2-rbd were constructed as described previously. each mutant complex model was simulated in two independent trajectories. furthermore, as the crystal structure of the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex became available, two additional simulations were carried out using the crystal structure as the starting model to cross-validate the simulation results based on the homology model. each trajectory was propagated to 500 ns by following the same protocol as the wild type cov2-rbd/ace2 complex simulations.analyses were carried out with tools in gromacs (such as rmsd, rmsf, energy, and pairdist) to examine the system properties, such as the overall stability, local residue and general structure fluctuations through the simulations. the g_mmpbsa program 22 was applied to extract the molecular mechanics energy emm (lennard jones and electrostatic interactions) between ace2 and the rbd of spike proteins. vmd and chimera were applied to analyze the hydrogen bonds, molecular binding interface, water distributions, visualization and rending model images 23, 24 .the homology structure of the cov2-rbd/ace2 was compared to the sars-rbd/ace2 crystal structure and the newly resolved crystal structure of the cov2-rbd/ace2. the results indicated that the homology model is accurate, especially at the binding interface.the md simulations further refined the side chain orientations to improve the model quality. the simulation data revealed the stable binding between the cov2-rbd and the ace2, in spite of the conformational changes of the ace2. the relative movement between the cov2-rbd and the ace2 mainly exhibited as a swinging motion pivoted at the binding interface. simulations also revealed the roles of water molecules in the binding of the rbd to the ace2 receptor. the md simulation of complex with ace2 mutants suggested that mutation to the ace2 helix-1 and the k353 can alter the binding modes and binding affinity.the predicted cov2-rbd/ace2 complex structure is highly similar to the sars-rbd/ace2, as shown in figure 1 . the rbd domain has an rmsd of 0.99 å for the aligned residues (1.53 å for all 174 residue pairs), indicating that the homology model of the cov2-rbd is in good agreement with the sars-rbd. for ace2 residues near the binding interface (within 4.0 å of the rbd), the rmsd is smaller than 0.43 å compared to the sars-rbd/ace2 complex. the superposed structures revealed that the rbd/ace2 interfaces are almost identical in two complexes (figure 1c ).in a retrospective comparison, the predicted complex structure was superposed to the newly resolved crystal models (see figure 2d for a detailed comparison at the interface).the results indicated that the homology model is very accurate, especially for the binding interface. the residues near the cov2-rbd/ace2 interface (defined as the combined set of ace2 residues within 4.0 å of rbd and the rbd residues within 4.0 å of the ace2) exhibited a difference of 0.43 å rmsd, which is comparable to the difference between the two independently reported crystal models (an rmsd of 0.25 å for the same comparison).the rmsd is about 0.77 å for residues in an extended region within 10.0 å of the binding interface. the rbd domain of the spike protein showed an overall rmsd values less than 1.5 å, and the ace2 domain with an rmsd about 2.0 å between the predicted model and the crystal structures. in three simulations of the cov2-rbd/ace2 systems, the binding interface was highly stable, exhibiting very small conformational changes, especially for the interfacing residues of the ace2 protein. the rmsd for the residues at the rbd binding interface is 0.85å (+/-0.13å) on average. side chain atom positions were refined to form more favorable interactions (figure 2d) . one outstanding example is the k31 side-chain, which pointed in the wrong orientation in the predicted structure, was quickly refined to the correct orientation, consistent with the crystal structure (right panel of figure 2d ).in terms of collective conformational changes, the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex showed two interesting movements: (1) the loop (l67) between β6 and β7 (residues between s477 and g485 in particular) of cov2-rbd was found to expand its interactions with the nterminal helix (the helix-1) of the ace2 (figure 2a) , while it pointed away from the helix-1 in the predicted and the crystal structures (figure 2d, left) ; (2) a tilting movement of the rbd relative to the ace2 was observed, which can be depicted as a swinging motion with the binding interface as the pivot (see figure 4 for an illustration). in both predicted and the crystal structures of the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex, the l67 does not form close contacts with the ace2. the analysis of the crystal packing revealed that this loop participated in the interaction with another asymmetric unit (see supplemental information). interestingly, the simulation data suggested that the l67 could move towards the ace2 and form contacts with the helix-1. this can potentially enhance the binding, as reflected in the change of interaction energies. in the crystal structure, the c480 and c488 of the rbd are cross-linked via a disulfide bond that reduces the flexibility of the l67 region, limiting its access to the ace2. on the other hand, it has been reported that the binding of sars-rbd to ace2 is insensitive to the redox states of the cysteines to a high extend 26. based on the simulation results, we hypothesize that the reduced form of c480 and c488 can also exist during the virus invasion to host cells, and the reduced cysteines can potentially enhance the binding to ace2. in the other two simulation trajectories, we found that the l67 remained in conformations similar to that in the crystal structure and the cysteines (c480 and c488) were close enough for disulfide bond formation.by examining the binding interface of cov2-rbd and the ace2, we found the polar and charged residues account for a large fraction, therefore the electrostatic interactions play critical roles for the complex formation. based on the distances between the two proteins,the key residues at the binding interface were identified and summarized in table 2 for the three representative models (see figure 2 ). majority of these residues are conserved for these three models, except that the model#1 (figure 2a) has additional contacts to the ace2 from residues in the l67 region (highlighted with green color in table 2 ). as shown in figure 2 , the l67 remained in the starting position for the other two representative models (figure 2b,c) . the same simulations were carried out for the sars-rbd/ace2 complex, serving as a comparative system. interestingly, the sars-rbd counterpart of the l67 in cov2-rbd did not form close contacts with the ace2 in three simulations. it is worthwhile to mention that the sequence identity between cov2-rbd and sars-rbd is low in this loop region, suggesting the loop region might be partially responsible for the difference in the receptor binding.the hydrogen bonds between the cov2-rbd and ace2 were extracted using vmd based on the statistics of three simulation trajectories, the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex has 2.7 hydrogen bonds between the subunits on average with stringent criteria. in comparison, the sars-rbd/ace2 has 3.2 hydrogen bonds on average (see supplementary   information ). the statistics of hydrogen bonds suggest a slightly weaker binding between the cov2-rbd and the ace2, relative to the sars-rbd/ace2 complex.it is also noteworthy to point out the important roles of water molecules at the complex interface for cov2-rbd/ace2 complex. at any instant time, there are approximately 15 water molecules at the binding interface, simultaneously located within 2.5 å of both the cov2-rbd and the ace2 (figure 6 ). these water molecules can function as bridges by forming hydrogen bonds with the residues from the rbd or the ace2. the dwelling time of water molecules at the interface can be a few nanoseconds, as revealed by the md simulations. this results is also consistent with the crystal structure, which has 12 water molecules at the interface (figure 6c ). these discoveries emphasize the role of the water molecules, which desires detailed quantification to understand the interactions between the rbd and the ace2.it has been demonstrated that the ace2 from several mammalian species possess high sequence similarities, yet their binding to the sars-rbd differs significantly. in particular, the binding of sars-rbd to the rat ace2 is much weaker as discovered in experiments 12. inspired by these information, two mutants of the cov2-rbd/ace2 were constructed: (1) ace2-mut-h1 by mutating n-terminal helix-1 to that of the rat ace2; (2) ace2-k353h by mutating k353 to histidine (the amino acid in wild type rat ace2).two 500ns md simulations were carried out for each mutant system. the simulation showed that the mutations in ace2-mut-h1 reduced the interaction between the cov2-rbd and the helix-1, and the ace2-k353h showed weaker binding between the cov2-rbd and the β-hairpin centered at the h353. using the clustering analysis, the representative structures were identified from each simulation trajectory (figure 7) .although the overall topology is very similar to the wild type complex structure, there are pronounced differences. for the ace2-mut-h1 system, the cov2-rbd tilted further away from the ace12 helix-1 in one simulation (figure 7a) ; and the cov2-rbd lost its contact with helix-13 (g326 to n330) in another simulation for the ace2-k353h (figure 7c ). in the wild type ace2, the k353 is a hydrogen donor, and its mutant h353 cannot form the hydrogen bond with the cov2-rbd as in the wild type cov2-rbd/ace2 complex. the number of contacting residue pairs was significantly reduced in the ace2-k353h mutant system. this is in line with the report that k353 is more critical than the other residues, as its hydrophobic neighborhood enables this positively charged residue high selectivity to the rbd 27,28. the physical interactions between the rbd and the ace2 were quantified for the simulated structures. we considered the molecular mechanics energy emm , which is composed of the van der waals and the electrostatic interactions. furthermore, the number of residue contacts (nc) between (rbd and ace2) was extracted from simulated structures. both the emm and nc indicate that the rbd interactions with the ace2 are comparable for cov2 and sars spike proteins (figure 8) . from the simulations, the we would like to point out that the energy emm is the physical interaction between the rbd and the ace2, rather than the binding energy, which requires accurately incorporating solvation energy and entropy. furthermore, the standard deviations of emm are 70.2 kj/mol and 65.5 kj/mol for the two complexes. therefore, we infer that the binding affinities are comparable for cov2-rbd/ace2 and sars-rbd/ace2. the simulations started from the predicted and crystal models yielded very similar results (purple triangles). this is in line with a recent study, in which the authors showed similar binding affinity to human ace2 for both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike proteins 29. they found the association rate constants kon to be the same at 1.4x105 m-1s-1, while the sars-cov spike protein showed a faster dissociation, with the rate constant koff to be 7.1x10-4 s-1, about 4.4 times larger than the sars-cov-2 spike protein koff =1.6x10-4 s-1.similar kon values and the equilibrium dissociation constants kd in nanomolar range were reported in other studies for sars-cov-2 spike protein (or rbd) binding to human ace210,30.more interestingly, the mutation impacts were reflected in the emm and nc analysis: the ace2-mut_h1 is likely to reduce the binding to the ace2 due to the tilting movement of cov2-rbd, making it further from the ace2 helix-1 (the blue triangle symbol at lower right, see figure 7a for the representative structure). in the other simulation trajectory for the cov2-rbd/ace2-mut_h1 complex (blue triangle at the left upper corner), the largest nc was observed among all simulations. for simulations of the complex with ace2-k353h mutants (green diamonds), the number of contacts were both reduced compared to the wild type system. in one simulation, the contacts between the cov2-rbd and the helix-13 of the ace2 were completely lost (see figure 7c) , consistent with the less favorable interactions reflected on an increase of emm. for the sars-rbd interaction with the ace2-mut_h1, both simulations revealed fewer contacts compared to the wild type sars-rbd/ace2 complex (purple stars in figure 8 ).the homology modeling of the cov2-rbd/ace2 complex yielded highly consistent models compared to the crystal structures. all-atom molecular dynamics simulations were carried out to study the dynamic interactions of cov2-rbd with human ace2, the results were compared to the sars-rbd/ace2 system. the human ace2 mutants were also constructed to mimic the rat ace2 to investigate the roles of critical residues, and possible binding modes in other mammals. it is observed that md simulations improved the structure at the binding interface and strengthened the interactions between the subunits.the structure of the complex interface is highly stable for all simulations of cov2-rbd/ace2 complex in the wild type. the loop region between β6 and β7 can potentially form more contacts with the ace2 as observed in one simulation trajectory. the simulations results also reveal that the interactions between cov2-rbd and the ace2 are mediated by water molecules at the interfaces, stressing the necessity of accounting for the explicit water molecules when quantifying the binding affinity.the interactions between the rbd and the ace2 were quantified by physical interaction energies (molecular mechanics energy) and the number of contacting residues. the detailed comparison results suggest that the cov2-rbd and the sars-rbd bind to human ace2 with comparable affinity. the comparison between the sars-rbd/ace2 and the cov2-rbd/ace2 complexes, with the former forms fewer contacts than the latter (figure 8 ), yet exhibiting stronger interactions. the decomposition of the emm to the van der waals and the electrostatic interactions revealed that the major difference is attributed to the electrostatic interactions. furthermore, we compared the major contacting residues and found that the sars-rbd has two charged residues (r426 and d463) and the cov2-rbd has only one charged residue (k417) at the complex interface. the polar and hydrophobic residues are comparable in the two rbds. this is consistent with the statistics of hydrogen bonds at the complex interfaces.this study was started with a structure predicted using homology modeling method, which later found to be highly consistent with the crystal structure, demonstrating the potentiality of structure prediction and dynamics simulation in revealing molecular details before the availability of high resolution experimental information. furthermore, the interactions between cov2-rbd and the ace2 mutants mimicking rat ace2 protein were investigated. the results provide valuable information at the atomic level for the reduced binding affinity. the recent report on the sars-cov-2 infection to a dog 31 remark  mut_h1  t20l, q24k, k26e,  t27s, d30n, h34q, f40s l20, n30, q34, and s40 are conserved between rat and mouse. k353h k353h h353 is conserved between rat and mouse table 2 . contact residues between the cov2-rbd and the ace2. green color denotes new interaction not observed in crystal structure.model#2 t27  f28  d30  k31  h34  e35  e37  d38  y41  q42  m82  y83  n330  k353  g354  d355  r357   k417  y453  l455  f456  q474  a475  g476  s477  t478  g485  f486  n487  y489  q493  y495  g496  q498  t500  n501  g502  y505   s19  q24  t27  f28  d30  k31  h34  e35  d38  y41  q42  l45  m82  y83  n330  k353  g354  d355  r357   k417  g446  y449  y453  l455  f456  a475  f486  n487  y489  q493  y495  g496  q498  t500  n501  g502   y505   q24  t27  f28  d30  k31  h34  e35  e37  d38  y41  q42  m82  y83  n330  k353  g354  d355  r357   k417  g446  y449  y453  l455  f456  a475  f486  n487  y489  q493  y495  g496  q498  t500  n501  g502   y505  table s1. contact residues at the sars-cov-rbd/ace2 interface   traj 1  traj2  traj 3  ace2  cov  ace2  cov  ace2  cov  s19  q24  t27  k31  h34  e37  d38  y41  q42  l45l  l79l  m82  y83  q325  e329  n330  k353  g354  d355  r357   r426  y436  y440  y442  l443  d463  l472  n473  y475  n479  g482  y484  t486  t487  g488  i489  y491   q24  t27  d30  k31  h34  e37  d38  y41  q42  l45l  l79l  m82  y83  q325  e329  n330  k353  g354  d355  r357   r426  y436  y440  y442  l443  p462  d463  g464  l472  n473  y475  n479  g482  y484  t486  t487  g488  i489  y491   q24  t27  k31  h34  e37  d38  y41  q42  l45l  l79l  m82  y83  q325  e329  n330  k353  g354  d355   r357   r426  y440  y442  l443  p462  d463  g464  p470  l472  n473  y475  l478  n479  g482  y484  t486  t487  g488  i489  y491   m82   t27  k31  k353   y41   e329   m82   t27  k31  k353   y41 e329 fig.1 cov2-rbd/ace2 sars-rbd/ace2 superposed a. b. c. fig.2 a. b. c.the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in late 2019 and rapidly spread, causing a global pandemic of a severe acute respiratory syndrome . the sars coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) utilizes a heavily glycosylated spike (s) protein to bind its host receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), and mediate cell entry and fusion (1). the s protein is a trimeric class i fusion protein composed of two functional subunits responsible for receptor binding (s1 subunit) and membrane fusion (s2 subunit) (2, 3) .the surface of the virally encoded s protein is covered by host-derived glycans with each trimer encoding 66 n-linked glycosylation sites (4) .viral fusion proteins such as the spike proteins of diverse coronaviruses, the hiv-1 envelope (env) and influenza hemagglutinin (ha), are typically covered with high mannose and complex glycans (5, 6) . viruses rely on host glycosylation machinery to synthesize and express glycans, which cover the surface of proteins exposed on the virus and shield conserved neutralization epitopes from immune surveillance. while genetic and somatic diversities can preclude targeting protein epitopes for broad-spectrum neutralization, viruses may display common carbohydrate moieties that can be targeted by glycan binding agents. indeed, targeting glycan moieties has been proposed as a general strategy for broad-spectrum virus neutralization (7) (8) (9) . while one concern with this general concept is that the glycan targeting agents may have unfavorable cross-reactivity with human tissue by binding host carbohydrate moieties, heavily glycosylated viral proteins, of which hiv-1 env is an example, have significant population of unprocessed oligomannose-type glycans that are not usually observed at high abundance on secreted mammalian glycoproteins (10, 11) . this divergence from host cell glycosylation and the 'non-self' nature of these oligomannose glycans represent immunogenic targets, and indeed a number of anti-hiv-1 broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnabs) have been isolated that specifically target gp120 glycans as part of their epitope (12) (13) (14) .site-specific glycan analysis of the sars-cov-2 spike protein demonstrated 28% of oligomannose-type glycans on the s protein surface (4) . here, we raised the hypothesis that the glycan shield of the sars-cov-2 spike protein can be targeted by hiv-1 glycan-reactive antibodies. we tested sars-cov-2 s protein for binding by hiv-1 bnab 2g12 that binds a glycan-only epitope on the hiv-1 env (12, 15, 16) , as well as by a panel of fab-dimerized glycan-reactive (fdg) antibodies. we have recently demonstrated that fdg antibodies are common in the hiv-1 uninfected b cell repertoire, and they bound high mannose glycans on hiv-1 env, yeast and other environmental antigens (17) .in a companion manuscript (17), we described highly prevalent fdg antibodies that target the high mannose glycan shield of the hiv-1 env. here, we test members of this category of antibodies for binding to the sars-cov-2 spike (s) protein. a sars-cov-2 s protein ectodomain construct incorporating residues 1-1208 of the sars-cov-2 s protein and harboring two stabilizing proline mutations in the s2 domain, a foldon trimerization domain, as well as c-terminal twin streptactin and his tags, were expressed and purified as described previously from hek-293f cells ( figure s1 ) (2) . we tested three different groups of fdg antibodies -(1) fdg antibodies that were isolated from shiv-infected macaques and shown to broadly neutralize hiv-1 isolates (dh851.1 -dh851.3, and dh1003.2); (2) fdg precursor antibodies that were isolated from a hiv naïve human (dh1005), and shiv infected (dh898.1 and dh898.4) or hiv env vaccinated (dh717.1 -dh717.4, and dh501) macaques; and (3) antibody 2g12 that forms a subcategory on its own as the only variable heavy (vh) domainswapped fdg antibody known to date. antibody 2g12 is a bnab that neutralizes heterologous hiv-1 isolates and binds to a conformational glycan cluster on hiv-1 env (15, 18, 19) .to test whether the fdg antibodies that bind the hiv-1 env glycan shield can also recognize the sars-cov-2 spike we performed elisa and spr assays (figures 1 and s2-s8 ). as a positive control in the elisa assays we included antibody d001 (see methods) that binds the receptor binding domain (rbd) of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2, and as a negative control, antibody ch65 (20) that binds the influenza hemagglutinin. we observed binding of the s protein to the rbd-directed antibody d001, whereas no binding was observed for negative control antibody, ch65. all fdg antibodies tested bound the sars-cov-2 spike to varying degrees (figures 1, s2 and s3) . to determine if these antibodies were targeting glycan epitopes on the sars-cov-2 s protein, we tested binding of the antibodies to the s protein in the presence of a high-mannose glycan (d-mannose) (figures 1, s2 to gain insight into the epitope on the sars-cov-2 spike ectodomain targeted by the fdg antibodies we chose 2g12 for structural determination in complex with the sars-2 spike ectodomain. while the non-domain-swapped fdg antibodies exist as mixtures of y-and ishaped forms (17) , the vh domain-swapped 2g12 presents a 100% i-shaped population that can be separated from its intermolecular dimer form by size exclusion chromatography (21) and digested using papain to yield a stable domain-swapped fab dimer amenable to structural studies ( figure s7 ) (12, 15, 18, 19) . the 2g12 fab obtained by papain digestion of the 2g12 igg ( figure s7 ) bound to sars-cov-2 spike with affinity of ~313 nm (figure s8) , and on-and off-rates of 3.5 x 10 4 m -1 s -1 and 1.19 x 10 2 s -1 , respectively.the fdg antibodies in figure 1 as well as the hiv-1 bnab 2g12 were tested in a sars-cov-2 plaque reduction neutralization assay and were all negative starting at 50 µg/ml (data not shown). importantly, in none of the assays were enhanced numbers of viral plaques seen with the addition of fdg antibodies.to visualize the epitope of 2g12 bound to the sars-cov-2 spike we determined a cryo-em structure of the 2g12 fab bound to a stabilized sars-cov-2 ectodomain construct (2) (figures 2-6, s9 and s10; table s1 ). the cryo-em dataset obtained from 6804 micrographs showed considerable compositional heterogeneity, revealing populations of unliganded spike, as well as spike bound to 2g12 at 1, 2 or 3 of it binding sites ( figure s9) . the 2g12-bound spike was ~15% of the total population. we obtained cryo-em reconstructions of the sars-cov-2 s protein bound to a single 2g12 fab at 3.3 å from ~ 108,000 particles, and s protein bound to two 2g12 fabs at 3.2 å resolution from ~110,000 particles. (figure s9) . we also observed a smaller population (~42,000 particles) that showed occupancy at all three binding sites, although the 2g12 density at one of the sites was substantially weaker than at the other two. even upon extensive 3d classification of this population, the weaker density at the third site remained suggesting that this weak density was due to flexibility of the bound 2g12 rather than partial occupancy. to maximize the resolution of the 2g12 interface with the sars-cov-2 spike, we performed 3d refinement by combining all 2g12-bound particles and using a mask that focused the refinement on the s protein and one 2g12 fab. on doing so, we obtained a 3.1 å reconstruction of 2g12 fab bound to the sars-cov-2 spike (figures 2 and s9 ; table s1 ).fitting this map with the coordinates for the sars-cov-2 spike (pdb 6vxx) (3) and 2g12 fab2 (pdb 6n35) (12), followed by iterative coordinate refinement and model building (22, 23) yielded a model for 2g12 fab2 bound to the sars-cov-2 spike that was used for further analysis.the local resolutions of the cryo-em reconstruction spanned a range from 2. the vh domain swapped configuration of the 2g12 fab-dimer (fab2) was well-defined in the electron density of the bound 2g12 (figure 2a and b) . this unique domain-swapped architecture that has been described previously in a number of high-resolution structures solved using x-ray crystallography or cryo-em (12, 19, (24) (25) (26) (27) , results in the creation of two secondary binding sites on either side of the vh/vh interface, in addition to the primary binding site at the vh/vl interface (19) . the cryo-em reconstruction of the fab2 fragment of 2g12 bound to the sars-cov-2 spike revealed a quaternary epitope for 2g12 in the s2 subunit of the sars-cov-2 spike with glycans from different protomers clustered together to form the 2g12 epitope (figures 2-4) . three s protein glycans were the primary contributors to the 2g12 binding epitope -glycans 717 and 801 from one protomer and glycan 709 from the adjacent protomer (figures 3-5) . the 2g12 fab2 interaction with the sars-cov-2 spike buried a 1,500 å 2 area at its interface with the epitope composed entirely of n-linked glycans with the primary binding sites; each at one of the vh/vl interfaces, contacting glycans at positions n709 and n717 ( figures 1a-1c ; see figure s2 for glycan nomenclature). one of the two secondary binding sites created as a result of the vh/vh domain swapping contacted the glycan at positions n801 ( figures 3 and 4 ).because glycan-only epitopes are expected to be more mobile than a protein epitope we investigated the extent of disorder and motion in the position of the 2g12 bound to the s protein. heterogeneous 3d classification performed on the cryo-em dataset using a mask including the 2g12 density and s2 density, and excluding the s1 and the hr2 regions, revealed two distinct 2g12 orientations that were related by a 9-degree angular displacement about a hinge at glycan 709 ( figure 5a and b) . to test the importance of this residue that appeared to be a pivot point for the bound 2g12, a n709a glycan deletion mutant was expressed and purified, and confirmed by nsem to contain well-dispersed and properly folded spike particles ( figure s1 ). deletion of the glycan at position 709 resulted in abrogation of 2g12 fab binding, thus confirming that glycan 709 is critical for the binding of 2g12 to the sars-cov-2 spike ( figure 5c ).we next tested the binding of the panel of non-domain-swapped fdg antibodies to the n709a glycan-deleted mutant in an spr assay. the n709 glycan deletion either abrogated or substantially reduced the binding of the fdg iggs tested (figures 5d and s11 ), thus suggesting a common epitope on the sars-cov-2 spike that is recognized by fdg antibodies.the vh domain-swapped 2g12 has been shown to bind isolated man9 glycans, and to hiv-1 env. in this study we demonstrate that 2g12 can also bind the sars-cov-2 s protein ( figure 6a -d) (12, 19) . while 2g12 can recognize free mannose in its non-domain-exchanged form, it only binds the hiv-1 glycan shield if domain-exchanged, thus highlighting the importance of avidity for its interactions with glycan clusters (27) . the structure of 2g12 bound to hiv-1 env revealed binding sites for 4 hiv-1 env glycans on 2g12 (15, 18) , one each at the two primary binding sites at the vh/vl interface and the other two at the secondary sites at the vh/vh interface created as a result of domain-swapping (figures 6b). consistent with its glycan-only epitope, 2g12 binding to a soluble hiv-1 env construct is inhibited by d-mannose ( figure 6d ). in the structure of 2g12 fab2 bound to the sars-cov-2 s protein, only 3 of these glycan binding sites on 2g12 were occupied by spike glycans ( figure 6c ) and, while 2g12 showed robust glycan-dependent binding to the sars-cov-2 s protein, the binding was weaker than for the hiv-1 env ( figure 6d ). another noteworthy difference between the binding of 2g12 to hiv-1 env versus is binding to sars-cov-2 s is that on the hiv-1 env all the binding glycans come from a single gp120 monomer in the hiv-1 env trimer, whereas in the sars-cov-2 s protein the binding site is quaternary and the 2g12-binding glycans at each site are contributed by two of the three protomers, making this one of the first examples of a quaternary epitope spanning multiple protomers on the sars-cov-2 s protein (28) , and the first in the s2 domain.in this paper we demonstrated that a category of prevalent glycan-reactive antibodies, termed fdg antibodies, can bind to high mannose glycans on the surface of the sars-cov-2 spike protein. fdg antibodies can bind to isolated high mannose glycans (17, 29) as well as high mannose glycans on hiv-1 and on fungal pathogens such as candida albicans and cryptococcus neoformans (17, 30) . with hiv-1 infection in humans or shiv infection of macaques, fdg antibodies can be affinity matured to achieve heterologous breadth. while the 2g12 hiv-1 broadly neutralizing antibody has vh domain swapped architecture (12) , this architecture was so unique that 2g12 was the only antibody of its kind known for a long time.however, we recently discovered non-domain-swapped fdg antibodies that dimerize without vh domain swapping and are capable of broad hiv-1 broad neutralization, as shown for the dh851 igg clonal lineage antibodies (17) . here we show, in addition to 2g12 binding, that vh domain swapping is also not required for fdg antibody recognition of the sars-cov-2 spike protein as demonstrated by its binding to the non-domain-swapped fdg antibodies. while the hiv-1 env-reactive fdg antibodies tested in this study do not neutralize sars-cov-2, the demonstration that a common epitope for fdg antibodies exists on the surface of the sars-cov-2 spike, raises the hypothesis that sars-cov-2 infection may enjoin fdg precursors and select for fdg affinity matured antibodies that evolve the capacity to neutralize sars-cov-2 via glycan recognition.that fdg precursors are common in the human b cell repertoire demonstrates that they are not deleted due to immune tolerance mechanisms (17) . it has been previously postulated that the 2g12 and other glycan-reactive hiv-1 antibodies are rare due to reactivity with selfglycans (31) . in this regard, select hiv-1 glycan reactive antibodies have been shown to react with the surface of immune cell subsets (32) . whether immune tolerance mechanisms will limit the affinity maturation of fdg antibodies to potently neutralize sars-cov-2 is yet unknown.these data along with the companion paper describing the category of fdg anti-hiv-1 antibodies raise the hypothesis that preexisting antibodies raised by high mannose-containing environmental antigens such as fungi or host molecules can be co-opted by hiv-1 env to become hiv-1 broadly neutralizing antibodies. here we propose this same set of fdg precursor antibodies might be able to be targeted by the s protein of sars-cov-2 in the setting of covid-19 disease or vaccination and induce sars-cov-2 neutralizing antibodies. it will be of interest to determine if fdg category of s-protein-reactive antibodies that can neutralize sars-cov-2 can be isolated from covid-19 infected or vaccinated individuals. in this regard, ng et al have demonstrated pre-existing s2 igg antibodies to sars-cov-2 s-protein likely induced by human covs that cause common cold syndromes. some of these sera were able to neutralize sars-cov-2 (33). however, it remains unknown if such pre-existing s2-protein antibodies are glycan reactive.in summary, we demonstrate the reactivity of a pool of glycan-reactive antibodies with a quaternary epitope on the sars-cov-2 spike protein.a key study will be to determine if fdg antibodies can be recruited by vaccination to develop into antibodies that can play a preventive role in protection from sars-cov-2 infection. the sars-cov-2 ectodomain constructs were produced and purified as described previously (2) . briefly, a gene encoding residues 1−1208 of the sars-cov-2 s (genbank: mn908947) with proline substitutions at residues 986 and 987, a "gsas" substitution at the furin cleavage site (residues 682-685), a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization motif, an hrv3c protease cleavage site, a twinstreptag and an 8xhistag was synthesized and cloned into the mammalian expression vector pαh. all mutants were introduced in this background. expression plasmids encoding the ectodomain sequence were used to transiently transfect freestyle293f cells using turbo293 (speedbiosystems). protein was purified on the sixth day post transfection from the filtered supernatant using streptactin resin (iba) ( figure s1 ). affinity purified protein was run over a superose 6/300 increase column. the purified protein was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80° c.rhesus fdg mabs dh851.1 -dh851.3, dh1003.2, dh898.1 and dh898.4, dh717.1 -dh717.4, and dh501 and human fdg antibody dh1005 were expressed as previously described (17) . antibody 2g12 was obtained from three sources, either produced from two sources as described from the original sequence (17) sugar. sars-cov-2 trimeric spike protein was captured by streptavidin to individual wells of a 384-well plate, and serially diluted mabs were tested for binding. elisa binding assays were optimized to use sars-cov-2 spike protein that was aliquotted and frozen upon production; desired aliquots of frozen spike protein were thawed once at 37 o and stored overnight at room temperature. sars-cov-2 spike protein, and man9-v3 and aglycone v3 peptides were captured via streptavidin on nunc-absorb elisa plates using pbs-based buffers and assay conditions as previously described (34, 35) . hiv-1 ch505tf sosip trimer and commerciallyobtained constructs of sars-cov-2 spike ectodomain (s1+s2 ecd, s2 ecd and rbd) (sino biological inc cat# 40589-v08b1 and 40590-v08b respectively and rbd from genescript cat# z03483) were captured using mouse anti-avi-tag mab (avidity llc, aurora, co). in brief, we coated 30ng of streptavidin in 15µl at 2µg/ml or 30 ng of mouse anti-avi-tag mab in 15µl at 2µg/ml per well of a 384-well nunc-absorb elisa plate, sealed and incubated overnight at 4 o c.sars-cov-2 spike protein (2µg/ml) were added to streptavidin in 10µl per well of a 384-well plate for one hour at room temperature to facilitate protein capture. hiv-1 ch505tf sosip trimer and sars-cov-2 s1+s2 ecd, s2 ecd and rbd spike proteins (2 µg/ml) were added to anti-avi mab in 10µl per well of a 384-well plate for one hour at room temperature to facilitate elisas using superblock were previously described (36) . moreover, whereas the 2g12 from polymun bound to s protein in surface plasmon reasonance, it was less potent than the recombinantly expressed 2g12 antibodies, and did not bind well in elisa. commercial 2g12 from polymun is provided in a maltose (mannose) buffer.the neutralization assays were performed using sars-cov-2 isolate usa-wa1/2020, rvu lot: nr52281-20200314. source material supplied by bei resources, catalog number nr-52281. data are reported as prnt50 or 50% reduction in foci count relative to back titer input verification. endpoint titer of a given dilution series is reported as the concentration of the lowest continuous dilution with a foci count less than or equal to the 50% neutralization cutoff. all experimental samples were assayed as at least duplicate dilution series. virus input and internal assay controls were within accepted tolerances.a 100 µg/ml final concentration of the spike was made in 1:1 ratio of 0.15% glutaraldehyde in hbs ph 7.4 (20mm hepes, 150mm nacl) to 10% glycerol in hbs, ph 7.4. after 5 min incubation tris ph 7.4 was added from a 1m stock to a final concentration of 0.075m to quench the glutaraldehyde and incubated for 5min. the carbon coated grids (cf300-cu, ems) were glow discharged for 20sec at 15ma. a 5 µl of sample incubated on grid for 10-15 sec, blotted and then stained with 2% uranyl formate. the antibodies were diluted in 0.02% ruthenium red in hbs ph 7.4. after 5-10min incubation, a 5 µl droplet loaded on a glow discharged carbon coated grid, briefly rinsed with dh2o and then stained with 2% uranyl formate. images were obtained with a philips em420 electron microscope operated at 120 kv, at 82,000× magnification and a 4.02 å pixel size. the relion program was used to perform class averaging of the single-particle images.the binding fdg antibodies to sars-cov-2 spike was assessed by surface plasmon resonance on biacore t-200 (ge-healthcare) at 25°c with hbs-ep+ (10 mm hepes, ph 7.4, 150 mm nacl, 3 mm edta, and 0.05% surfactant p-20) as the running buffer. binding was measured in two different formats. in the first format ( figures s4 and s5a) , sars-cov-2 spike was captured on a sa chip and binding response was measured by flowing over igg solutions.the surface was regenerated between injections by flowing over 1m nacl in 50mm naoh solution for 10s with flow rate of 100µl/min. in the second format ( figure s5b the data were fit to a 1:1 langmuir binding model.purified sars-cov-2 spike preparations were diluted to a final concentration of ~1 mg/ml in 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3, were mixed with 6-fold molar excess of 2g12 fab and incubated for 2 hours at room tempearture. 2.5 ul of protein was deposited on a cf-discharge cleaning system. after a 30 s incubation in >95% humidity, excess protein was blotted away for 2.5 seconds before being plunge frozen into liquid ethane using a leica em gp2 plunge freezer (leica microsystems).cryo-em imaging was performed on a fei titan krios microscope (thermo fisher scientific) operated at 300 kv. data were acquired with a gatan k3 detector operated in counting mode using the leginon system. the k3 experimental parameters are 2500 ms exposure with 50 frames at 50 ms framerate with a total dose of 66.43 e-/a2 and a pixel size of ~1.058å/px. this system was also energy-filtered with a slit width of 20 ev. a total of 6804 images were collected.cryo-em image quality was monitored on-the-fly during data collection using automated processing routines. individual frames were aligned and dose-weighted using motioncor2 (37) implemented within the appion pipeline (38) . data processing was performed within cryosparc (39) including particle picking, multiple rounds of 2d classification, ab initio reconstruction, heterogeneous and homogeneous map refinements, and non-uniform map refinements.heterogenous classifications were performed within relion (40) using masks produced in chimera.structure of the all 'down' state (pdb id 6vxx) the previously published sars-cov-2 ectodomain, and a structure of the 2g12 fab bound to man1-2 (pdb id 6n35) were used to fit the cryo-em maps in chimerax. coordinates were then fit manually in coot (23) following iterative refinement using isolde (22) and subsequent manual coordinate fitting in coot.structure and map analysis was performed using pymol and chimerax (41) .the cryo-em maps and fitted coordinates are in the process of being deposited to the electron microscopy database (emdb) and the rcsb protein data bank, respectively. the sequences of the fdg antibody heavy and light chain genes were deposited in genbank as previously described (17, 29) serially-diluted mabs were tested for binding (also see figure s2 and s3). mouse anti-rhesus or goat antihuman igg-hrp secondary antibodies were used to detect binding by rhesus or human mabs, respectively. binding was measured at absorbance of od 450nm , whereas binding titers as log area under the curve were reported in figure s1 . in principle, any new infectious agent that challenges a totally susceptible population with little or no immunity against it is able to totally infect the population causing pandemics. pandemics rapidly spread affecting a large part of people causing plenty of deaths with significant social disruption and economic loss. however, if we look at the even worst pandemics in the human history we can realize that ethnic and geographical differences in the susceptibility to disease actually exist, in spite of the infectious sources and transmission routes that are the same for all individuals 1 . the current sars covid-19 (a shortened form of "coronavirus disease of 2019") epidemic spread appears to be similarly influenced by ethnical and geographical factors. after its initial spread in china, the pandemic is now progressing at an accelerating rate in western europe and the united states of america 2 . in these regions, the causative agent, the severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus -2 (sars-cov-2) is spreading incredibly quickly between people, due to its newness -no one on earth has immunity to sars covid-19 -and transmission route. yet, in the other regions of the world, the kinetics of diffusion and mortality seem less impressive, although the world has become highly interconnected as a result of a huge growth in trades and travels 2 .a multitude of factors may concur to explain the ethnic and geographical differences in pandemic progression and severity, including cultural, social and economic inequality, as well as health care system organization, and climate also. mostly, considerable individual differences in genetic susceptibility to diseases may be involved 3 . genomic predisposition is a major concept in modern medicine, and understanding of molecular bases of genetic predisposition can help to find prevention and treatment strategies for the corresponding diseases 3 . in the sars covid-19, even subtle inter-individual genetic differences may affect both the sars-cov-2 viral life cycle and the host innate and acquired immune response.sars-cov-2 is an enveloped positive-stranded rna virus that replicates in the cytoplasm, and uses envelope spike projections as a key to enter human airway cells 4 . in coronaviruses spike glycoproteins, which forms homotrimers protruding from the viral surface, are a primary determinant of cell tropism, pathogenesis, and host interspecies transmission. spike glycoproteins comprise two major functional domains: an n-terminal domain (s1) for binding to the host cell receptor, and a c-terminal domain (s2) that is responsible for fusion of the viral and cellular membranes 5 .following the interaction with the host receptor, internalization of viral particles into the host cells is accomplished by complex mechanisms that culminate with the activation of fusogenic activity of spike, as a consequence of major conformational changes that, in general, may be triggered by receptor binding, low ph exposure and proteolytic activation 5 .in some coronaviruses spike glycoproteins are cleaved by furin, a golgi-resident protease, at the boundary between s1 and s2 domains, and the resulting s1 and s2 subunits remain non-covalently bound in the prefusion conformation with important consequences on fusogenicity 5 . notably, at variance with sars-cov and other sars-like cov spike glycoproteins, sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein contain a furin cleavage site at the s1/s2 boundary, which is cleaved during viral biogenesis 6 , and may affect the major entry route of viruses into the host cell 5 .productive entry of coronaviruses that harbor non-cleaved spike glycoproteins (such as sars-cov) rely on endosomal proteases suggesting that this entry is accomplished by hijacking the host endocytic machinery 5 . indeed, it has been reported that sars-cov infection is inhibited by lysomotropic agents because of the inhibition of the low-ph-activated protease cathepsin l 7 .however, sars-cov is also able to fuse directly to the cell membrane in the presence of relevant exogenous proteases, and this entry route is believed to be much more efficient compared to the endocytic route 8 . in fact, proteases from the respiratory tract such as those belonging to the transmembrane protease/serine subfamily (tmprss), tmprss2 or hat (tmprss11d) are able to induce sars-cov spike glycoprotein fusogenic activity 9,10,11,12 . the first cleavage at the s1-s2 boundary (r667) facilitates the second cleavage at position r797 releasing the fusogenic s2' subdomain 5 . on the other hand, there is also evidence that cleavage of the ace2 c-terminal segment by tmprss2 can enhance spike glycoprotein-driven viral entry 13 . notably, it has been very recently demonstrated that also sars-cov-2 cell entry depends on tmprss2, and is blocked by protease inhibitors 14 .sars-cov-2 and respiratory syndrome corona virus (sars-cov) spike proteins share very high phylogenetic similarities (99%), and, indeed, both viruses exploit the same human cell receptor namely angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a transmembrane enzyme whose expression dominates on lung alveolar epithelial cells 6, 15, 16 . this receptor is an 805-amino acid long captoprilinsensitive carboxypeptidase with a 17-amino acids n-terminal signal peptide and a c-terminal membrane anchor. it catalyzes the cleavage of angiotensin i into angiotensin 1-9, and of angiotensin ii into the vasodilator angiotensin 1-7, thus playing a key role in systemic blood pressure homeostasis, counterbalancing the vasoconstrictive action of angiotensin ii, which is generated by cleavage of angiotensin i catalyzed by ace 17 although ace2 mrna is expressed ubiquitously, ace2 protein expression dominates on lung alveolar epithelial cells, enterocytes, arterial and venous endothelial cells, and arterial smooth muscle cells 18 .there is evidence that ace2 may serve as a chaperone for membrane trafficking of an amino acid transporter b0at1 (also known as slc6a19), which mediates the uptake of neutral amino acids into intestinal cells in a sodium dependent manner 19 . recently, 2.9 å resolution cryo-em structure of full-length human ace2 in complex with b0at1 was presented, and structural modelling suggests that the ace2-b0at1 can bind two spike glycoproteins simultaneously 20, 21 . it has been hypothesized that the presence of b0at1 may block the access of tmprss2 to the cutting site on ace2 20, 21 . b0at1 (also known as slc6a19) is expressed with high variability in normal human lung tissues, as shown by analysis of data available in oncomine from the work by weiss et al 22 .notably, a wide range of genetic polymorphic variation characterizes the ace2 gene, which maps on the x chromosome, and some polymorphisms have been significantly associated with the occurrence of arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cerebral stroke, coronary artery disease, heart septal wall thickness and ventricular hypertrophy 23, 24, 25 . the association between ace2polymorphisms and blood pressure responses to the cold pressor test led to the hypothesis that the different polymorphism distribution worldwide may be the consequence of genetic adaptation to different climatic conditions 25, 26 . in this study we have used a combination of in silico tools to analyze the possible impact of ace2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) on the interaction with sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. results seem to suggest that ace2 polymorphism can contribute to ethnic and geographical differences in sars covid-19 spreading across the world. 27 , 6lzg (sars-cov-2 spike rbd /ace2 complex) 28 , 6m0j (sars-cov-2 spike rbd /ace2 complex) 29 , 6vw1 (chimeric sars-cov/sars-cov-2 spike rbd /ace2 complex) 30 , and 6m17 (sars-cov-2 spike rbd /ace2/b0at1 complex) 20,21 (fig. 1a) . clustalo alignments of human ace2 amino acid sequences, in all models, similar to sars-cov rbm, sars-cov-2 rbm forms a concave surface that houses a convexity formed by two helices on the exposed surface of ace2. strong network of hbond and salt bridge interactions mediate the receptor-ligand binding. global energy and several distinctive features of the 3d models with and without glycosylation are reported in supplementary   table 1 . contact residues are classified as: "permanent" (predicted as binding residues in all 10 models), "stable" (predicted as binding residues in 6 or 7 out 10 models), "unstable" (predicted as binding residues in 6 or 7 out 10 models), "hyper-unstable" (1 or 2 models out of 10). twenty-seven substitutions were predicted to influence the ace2/spike interface in at least one of the different 3d pdb models. fifteen and seventeen were predicted to affect the ace2/b0at1 and ace2/ace2 interfaces, respectively. some residues, which are described in uniprot database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/q9byf1) as important for the interaction between spike and ace2, are permanent contact residues (predicted as binding) but all of these are non-polymorphic ( fig. 1b) . in contrast, polymorphic residues are stable, unstable or hyper-unstable. a list of 18 snps from dbsnp (s19p , i21t, i21v, e23k, a25t, k26e, k26r, t27a, e35d, e35k, e37k, s43r, e75g, m82i, g326e, e329g, g352v; d355n), which were predicted to affect the ace2/spike interface, was used for further analysis.snps possibly affecting ace2 glysosylation. supplementary table 1 illustrates amino acid glycosylation sites, and structure of the glycosidic chains as inferred from different ace2/spike complex pdb models. putative polymorphic sites (q60r, n103h, n546d, n546s) from dbsnp database that may affect ace2 glycosylation are also reported. one of these amino acid variations, n546d, is rather common in south asia (supplementary table 4 ).firedock 34 was used to estimate the effects of removal of glycosidic residues or chains on ace2 interaction with sars-cov-2 spike rbd by calculating δg values. the data indicated that removal of glycosidic chains results in either an increased or a decreased δg values, depending on the pdb model ( fig. 1c ). in particular, removal of glycosidic moieties apparently strengthened the ace2/spike interaction in sars-cov spike/ace2 in the 2ajf model, while it appeared to weaken the interaction between sars-cov-2 spike and ace2 in the 6vw1 model. in both cases, the effect was mostly due to removal of the terminal beta-mannose (bma) (fig. 1c) , which was predicted to decorate a glycosidic chain attached to aspartic amino acid residue at position 90 that maps in a helix that is involved in the interaction with spike, as shown in fig. 1d . noteworthy, in the 6vw1 model, bma is involved in two h-bonds and one pseudo-bond (fig. 1e ), and these bonds are lost in non-glycosylated models. in contrast, in the 2ajf model, the bma forms only one h-bond, and after removal of terminal bma, the thr-41 acquires more grads for binding thereby strengthening the interaction with ace2. these results seem to suggest that ace2 glycosylation may play a different role in modulating the interaction with sars-cov spike and sars-cov-2spike. were, among the most diffused snps worldwide, the only two snps that were able to potentially affect the interaction of ace2 with sars-cov spike and sars-cov-2 spike (supplementary table 3 ). in particular, the s19p snp is rather common in african people with a frequency about 0.3%, while k26r snp is frequent in european people with a frequency about 0.5% (supplementary table 4 ).firedock 34 results indicated that the s19p substitution decreased the affinity of ace2 with spike in 2ajf and 6vw1 models (fig. 2c ) and similar results were obtained with all other models.moreover, this amino acid substitution seems also to affect the ace2 n-terminal cleavage site (fig.   2d ), and when firedock 34 simulations were carried out on ace2 with the alternative cleavage site, the effects of s19p snp was much more impressive (fig. 2 c) .in contrast, the k26r and the less common k26e substitutions appeared to increase the affinity of ace2 with sars-cov-2 spike (2ajf model), and slightly decrease the affinity of ace2 with sars-cov spike (6vw1 and 6m17) models (fig. 3a) . as 6vw1 was generated with a chimeric sars-cov/sars-cov-2 spike, to support our results we performed an additional simulation by challenging the ace2 structure from 6vw1 with the spike structures that were generated by the different models (fig. 3b) , and the results confirmed those shown in fig. 3a . noteworthy, the receptor-ligand interactions was much weaker in 6m17 (sars-cov-2 spike rbd /ace2/b0at1 complex) with respect to the other models, confirming an inhibitory function of b0at1. however, in this model, at lower energy values, the effects of k26r/e substitutions were much more evident. shows that ace2 (computed by using 3d pdb model 6m17 as input file) is characterized by a high deformation tract that is located immediately upstream of the transmembrane domain (fig. 4b) ,whereas the c-terminal tail is characterized by high fluctuation (fig. 4c ). suggest that the hydrophobic domain alone is highly unstable in the membrane confirming that a chaperone is required for correct topology maintenance. this function was assigned to the moonlighting amino acid transporter b0at1 19 .to investigate dynamic properties of ace2 globular head, the trans-membrane helix and conserved domains were firstly mapped on a 3d structure. then, dynamut 36 simulation was carried out on ace2 by using 6wv1 pdb model (without the transmembrane domain) (fig. 5ab) . results indicate that some residues of the ace2 interface, which are involved in the interaction with sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein can actually fluctuate (fig. 5cd ).dynamic properties of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike proteins were also investigated. between the two helices and beta-sheet, and between the residues of the beta-sheet are illustrated in supplementary fig. 4d (fig. 6a, supplementary fig.   5 and supplementary table 7 ).all 197 amino acid residues that were reported as polymorphic in dbsnp were analyzed. in that women are probably more prone to infection but often present a less severe disease. although higher incidence of cardiac, respiratory and metabolic co-morbidities are probably responsible for more severe form of infection in men, estrogen-induced upregulation of ace2 expression would explain increased susceptibility of women to a less severe and often asymptomatic form of disease.furthermore, the ace2 gene is located on xp22, in an area where genes are reported to escape from x-inactivation, further explaining higher expression in females 45, 46 .on the other hand, it has been hypothesized that, regardless of sex, pharmacological (antihypertensive drugs, such as ace inhibitors and sartans) or environmental factors (no2 pollution), capable of inducing an overexpression of ace2 could be responsible of increased susceptibility to infection and/or greater severity 47 . ace2 plays an essential role in the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system, and its loss of function due to the massive binding of viral particles and internalization could constitute an essential element of the pathophysiology of pulmonary and cardiac damage during covid-19 infection 47, 48 . in this context it should be underlined that ace2probably plays a dual role in the dynamic of infection and disease course. while at beginning ace2 overexpression may increase the entry of the virus into the cell and its replication, its consequent viral-induced loss of function results in an unopposed accumulation of angiotensin ii that further aggravates the acute lung injury response to viral infection. indeed, in the rodent blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system limits the acute lung injury induced by the sars-cov-1 spike protein 49 , suggesting that if ace2 function is preserved (because of increased baseline expression, as especially seen in pre-menopausal women), clinical course of infection might be less severe.it has been suggested that polymorphisms in the ace2 gene could reduce the spike affinity, with subsequent lower susceptibility to infection: in this hypothesis, their geographical / ethnical distribution could explain the strong discrepancies in infection rate and/or lethality observed worldwide 47 . effectively, we showed by network plot and non-metric multidimensional scaling that most of the snps diffused worldwide did not affect significantly the interaction of ace2 with sars-cov-2 spike. s19p was one of the rare polymorphisms able to potentially affect this interaction, by lowering the affinity. this polymorphism is more frequent in african populations, but its diffusion (0.3%) remains too low to explain, except in minimal part, the reduced death toll . this allowed the authors to predict that hamsters could be infected, which was experimentally confirmed -underlining the reliability of in silico modeling-and could be subsequently at the origin of inter-animal transmission. however, hamsters, although developing clinical signs of the infection and relative histopathological changes, did not die 50 : we speculate that lethality may be related to spike/ace2 affinity. on the other hand, the lower affinity in bat could explain -besides a better immune control-why these animals are carriers without dying.in the same study, chan and colleagues 50 so, if modestly snp-determined lower affinity between spike and ace2 does not seem to explain the differences in the distribution and lethality of the disease in humans, we hypothesize that the question can be addressed in a specular way: perhaps polymorphisms responsible for higher affinity can be responsible of higher severity of disease, especially when very high affinity receptors are overexpressed because of the above mentioned environmental and pharmacological factors. obviously underlying diseases would contribute to an even more severe course of the disease, with an intense viral replication capable of infecting in turn a large number of persons, including some individuals with similar ace2 polymorphisms, and so on. our in silico models allowed us to identify k26r and k26e as snps with a possible increase in spike/ace2 affinity.k26r snp is relatively frequent in european people with a frequency about 0.5%, which would correspond to a potential target population of 2,230,000 people at the european union level.in addition to firedock 34, 35 simulations that led to predict the possible effects of s19p, k26rand k26e ace2 snps, dynamut 36 and encom 42 tools were used to compare dynamic features of ace2 and its polymorphic variants in order to analyze the possible indirect effects on binding interfaces of snps that are located outside these interfaces. snps i468v, v488a and a501t were identified as the most common snps that may produce these indirect effects in dynamic models.although the precise effects of these snps on the interaction between ace2 and sars-cov-2 or sars-cov spike proteins have to be determined in more detail, nevertheless, it is desirable to use dynamic modeling to unmask indirect effects of snps.it seems necessary to confirm in vivo that, among patients with serious disease and/or fatal outcome, polymorphisms responsible for a very high spike/ace2 affinity are more frequent than among patients with less severe/asymptomatic disease or even than in general population.obviously, the impact of these polymorphisms on severity of outcome should be weighted by appropriate demographic and clinical factors. if these differences were confirmed, this would pave the way for the identification, on a population scale, of healthy individuals whose molecular phenotypes would be responsible for more serious disease. apart from the usual social distancing measures, which could be reinforced for these cases, targeted drug prevention strategies could be evaluated. it could be logical to assess pharmacological prophylactic interventions, as proposed in categories of healthy people at particular risk of exposure such as care-givers. in particular, chloroquine, interfering with n-terminal glycosylation of ace2, could lower its affinity for spike, thus representing an interesting candidate. in our in silico model, we found that removal of glycosidic moieties weakened the interaction between sars-cov-2 spike and ace2. the serine protease inhibitor camostat mesylate, approved in japan to treat unrelated diseases, has been shown to block tmprss2 activity 54, 55 and is thus another interesting candidate.on the other hand, the identification of broader categories of people with lower risk of developing severe disease, could allow a safer exit from the lock-down phase, while facilitating the establishment of a faster herd immunity, and waiting reliable serological tests and, above all, effective vaccines.on the basis of our in silico study we speculate that infection and mortality are databases. 3d structures of proteins were downloaded from pdb (rcsb protein data bank 56 ).we focused our analysis on 2ajf for sars-cov 27 57, 58 was used to identity the ace2 receptor snps, and to select the most diffused ones.functional information was acquired by uniprot database 59 . chimera 60 was used as a tool for image generation, 3d mapping, pdb managing and to analyze the results.binding interface characterization. the selected pdb models were analyzed by a structural point of view using chimera software in order to identify the glycosylation sites and the secondary structures of proteins involved in the binding between ace2 and spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd). to estimate the effect of glycosylations we implemented a static model. chimera was used to remove glycosydic residues, while firedock 34,35 was used to compute the global energy scores between the native structures and the de-glycosylated models. on the other side, starting from the entire list of snps, ssipe (evoef) 32 was used to identify the residues involved in the binding interfaces. a second step, which was carried out with ssipe (ssipe) 33 , was aimed at estimating the effects of single snps, and to generate mutant models. different snps lists were obtained, which were compared, and used to identify the most stable binding amino acid residues.ssipe analysis performed with the pdb model 6m17 was used to map: the ace2/spike protein interaction interface, ace2 /ace2 dimerization interface, and b0at1/ace2 interaction interface.the model contains ace2 in the dimeric form (with the hydrophobic domains) and b0at1, while in all the others models the transmembrane domains, ace2 /ace2 interface and b0at1/ace2interface are absent. spike models reported in this study as ligands. in a similar manner, other static models from ssipe were used as models to estimate the variation in terms of free energy related to polymorphisms that map on the ace2 dimerization interface and ace2-b0at binding interface. legends to figures   fig. 1. 3d oscillation plot of the distance between ace2 amino acid residues mapping in the two helices that are involved in binding with spike proteins. b 3d images of regions containing the amino acid residues shown in panel a. c variance of the distance between ace2 amino acid residues mapping in the two helices that are involved in binding with spike proteins. d-e oscillation plot of the distance between the two helices and beta-sheet (d), and between the residues of the beta-sheet (e).f-g variance of the distance of amino acid residues between the two helices and beta-sheet (f), and between the residues of the beta-sheet (g). showing the results of snps that mapping outside the ace2 interfaces.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the causative agent for coronavirus disease 2019 , emerged in 2019 and rapidly spread, infecting millions, overwhelming health-care systems, and impacting economies worldwide cucinotta and vanelli, 2020) . to respond, a global effort has been initiated to develop vaccines and therapeutic agents. for covid-19 vaccine development (reviewed in callaway, 2020) , the trimeric sars-cov-2 spike -a type 1 fusion machine that facilitates virus-cell entry through interaction with the ace2 receptor (hoffmann et al., 2020; ou et al., 2020) -is a lead target, as antibodies against it can block virus entry . most of the sars-cov-2 neutralizing antibodies so far isolated target the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the spike protein (brouwer et al., 2020; cao et al., 2020; chen et al., 2020; chi et al., 2020; ju et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020; pinto et al., 2020; robbiani et al., 2020; rogers et al., 2020; seydoux et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020a; wrapp et al., 2020a; zeng et al., 2020; zost et al., 2020) , but there are other sites in the n-terminal domain and s2 stem domain that have also been associated with neutralizing activity against other betacoronaviruses (pallesen et al., 2017; wang et al., 2018b) . such virus-neutralizing antibodies are sought as therapeutic and prophylactic agents (cao et al., 2020; reviewed in graham et al., 2013; zhou and zhao, 2020) .biotin-labeled molecular probes, comprising the sars-cov-2 spike as well as its discrete domains, can accelerate development of both vaccines and therapeutic antibodies. for vaccine development, such probes can be used to track humoral responses longitudinally (liu et al., 2011; yongchen et al., 2020) and to quantify elicited responses against spike and its domains, as correlating such responses with neutralization should provide crucial insight into sites of spike vulnerability. for antibody identification, probes are used in b cell sorting to identify b cells 4 encoding antibodies capable of recognizing the spike or particular spike domains as well as characterization of antibody binding affinities through surface plasmon resonance (spr) or biolayer interferometry (bli) analyses.here we describe the structure-based design of molecular probes, encompassing sars-cov-2 spike and its domains. we first designed a construct that allowed for tag-based purification and on-column biotinylation. next, we incorporated the sars-cov-2 spike ectodomain, with prefusion stabilizing mutations and a c-terminal trimerization motif, which we expressed, biotinylated, purified, and characterized, including by cryo-em. based on the structure-defined spike-domain organization wrapp et al., 2020b) , we also created and characterized separate molecular probes comprising the n-terminal domain (ntd), the receptor-binding domain (rbd), and rbd with spike domain 1 (rbd-sd1). we also used the structure of rbd with ace2 (lan et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020b; yan et al., 2020a) to define mutations that could inhibit ace2 interaction, which we incorporated into mutant rbd probes with ace2-recognition ablated. finally, we characterized properties of the devised probes including degree of biotinylation, antibody-binding specificity, and use in sorting yeast cells expressing sars-cov-2 spike-binding antibodies or b cells from a covid-19 convalescent donor. overall, our findings demonstrate how structure-based design can be used to develop molecular probes of the sars-cov-2 spike.to facilitate purification and biotinylation, we devised a probe construct using the constant portion of an antibody (fc) as an n-terminal purification tag. fc expresses and folds 5 efficiently and can be effectively captured by protein a resins (jager et al., 2013) . to prevent intermolecular dimer formation of the fc-tag, we used a single chain-fc (scfc) with 'knob-inhole' feature (ridgway et al., 1996) , in which a "knob" comprising a protruding tyrosine (t366y) was incorporated into the n-terminal-half of the fc-interface, followed by a 20-residuelinker (ggggs) 4 and a "hole" comprising a recessed threonine (y407t) was incorporated into the c-terminal-half fc-interface [kabat antibody residue numbering (johnson and wu, 2000) ] ( figure 1a ).between the scfc and the target region of interest ( figure 1b ), we added a cleavage site for the human rhinovirus 3c (hrv3c) protease (cordingley et al., 1990) , a highly specific protease that recognizes the sequence levlfqgp, cleaving after q and leaving a gp dipeptide at the start of the target. this allowed us to remove the target protein from the protein a-capture resin by protease treatment, avoiding low ph elution that is known to alter the conformations of type 1 fusion machine and could potentially alter the conformation of the probe. after the target sequence of interest, we incorporated a 10-residue linker followed by a biotin ligase-specific sequence (10lnqq-avi). this construct design enabled capture by protein a and on-column biotinylation ( figure 1b ). as buffers for biotinylation and hrv3c cleavage are compatible, the entire process of biotinylation, hrv3c cleavage, and purification could in principle be accomplished with a single column, though we have generally added a polishing size exclusion chromatography step to ensure size homogeneity.to obtain a molecular probe of the sars-cov-2 spike, we incorporated stabilizing mutations into the spike target protein residues 14 to 1208 (wrapp et al., 2020b) , replacing 6 rrar at the s1/s2 cleavage site with gsas and kv between domains hr1 and ch with pp ( figure 2 and table s1 ) and adding the t4-phage fibritin trimerization domain (foldon) at the cterminus (efimov et al., 1994; miroshnikov et al., 1998 ) (this construct is hereafter referred to as s2p), and expressed it by transient mammalian cell transfection. we observed cleavage by hrv3c protease to be impeded with the glutathione-s-transferase-tagged, but not the his-tagged version of the protease, suggesting partial steric constraints on access to the hrv3c site; overall we could obtain ~0.5 mg of the purified s2p probe per liter cell culture after 24 h incubation at 4 °c with the his-tagged hrv3c.the protease-liberated probe sars-cov-2 s2p ran primarily as a single peak on sizeexclusion chromatography and a major band on sds-page ( figure 3a , b), appeared homogeneous by negative-stain em ( figure 3c ), and was recognized by the rbd-binding antibody cr3022 (tian et al., 2020; yuan et al., 2020) . we also characterized binding to three antibodies from a sars-1 convalescent donor s652: s652-109, which recognizes the rbd, s652-112, which recognizes an epitope in s2, and s652-118, which recognizes the ntd. all three of these antibodies bound well to the s2p probe, as did the ace2 receptor, but not to soluble cd4 (d1d2-scd4) or antibody vrc01 (wu et al., 2010) , which bound a control probe encompassing hiv-1 envelope glycoprotein trimer bg505 ds-sosip ( figure 3d ). we note that the iggs of cr3022, s652-109, s652-118 and s652-s112 showed stronger binding than corresponding antigen-binding fragment (fab), potentially due to avidity. all of these properties suggested the sars-cov-2 s2p probe to be a good biological mimic of the prefusion sars-cov-2 spike ectodomain.to provide atomic-level insight into the mimicry of spike by probe, we determined the cryo-em structure of the biotinylated sars-cov-2 s2p probe (figures 3e and s3; table s2 ).the cryo-em grids were frozen with the biotinylated sars-cov-2 s2p probe in pbs at ph 7.4.we observed two distinct conformations, one with all three rbds in the "down" position, displaying c3 symmetry, and the other with one rbd in the "up" position and the other two rbds in the "down" position, c1-symmetric. we observed more particles (43, 176) in the rbds down conformation, which contributed to a 3.45 å resolution map, whereas the 1 rbd up state (34, 223 particles) 3d reconstruction achieved an overall resolution of 4.00 å. the two final atomic models were very similar to published cryo-em spike-ectodomain structures wrapp et al., 2020b) . the c1-symmetric structure included residues 27-1147, while residues 27-1152 were modeled for the c3-symmetric structure; in both cases some regions could not be modeled because of their intrinsic flexibility. five additional residues at the cterminal region (1148-1152) were visible in the reconstruction density of the rbds down structure, but -similar to published structures wrapp et al., 2020b ) -the cterminal region of the s2 domain (and in our case the rest of the probe) were not sufficiently ordered to be modeled. the two structures were similar except for the single rbd that was in the "up" position in the c1 symmetry structure. excluding this single rbd, the rmsd was 0.95 å between the two probe structures for 2738 aligned cα atoms.the domain structure of the sars-cov-2 spike was clearly evident in our cryo-em structure and consistent with published accounts wrapp et al., 2020b) . based on these structures, we created constructs incorporating ntd, rbd and rbd-sd1 regions as 8 separate molecular probes ( figure 4 ). transient transfection yield for each of these constructs was greater than 5 mg/l. both ntd and rbd eluted as a single peak on size-exclusion chromatography and exhibited a single band on sds-page ( figure 5a ,b). rbd-sd1 eluted as two peaks on sec, a disulfide-bonded dimer and a monomer ( figure 5a ,b). we chose the monomeric form for further studies, as there is no biological basis for a higher association.receptor recognition of these domain probes was specific for each construct, with ace2 binding to rbd and rbd-sd1 probes, but not the ntd probe ( figure 5c , left). similarly, antibodies cr3022 and s652-109 recognized rbd and rbd-sd1, while the s652-112 showed no binding to these two probes ( figure 5c , right); and antibody s652-118 recognized only the ntd probe.these results indicate that the truncated domain probes folded properly and retained the native conformation as on the full-length s2p probe.structural information can define not only domain boundaries, but also biological interfaces. based on the structure of the rbd domain with ace2 (lan et al., 2020) (figure 6a ), we designed constructs with ace2-interface residues mutated to arg to knockout ace2 affinity ( figure 6b ). we expressed and purified two double-arg mutants (rbd-l455ra475r-avi and rbd-l455rg496r-avi) and one triple-arg mutant (rbd-l455ra475rg502r-avi). all three eluted in a single peak on size-exclusion chromatography and exhibited a single band on sds-page ( figure 6c ,d). all three mutants completely ablated ace2 binding as designed ( figure 6e , left). by contrast, cr3022 recognition by all three mutants was mostly retained as the epitope of cr3022 and ace2-binding site are located at different locations on rbd; s652-9 rbd-l455ra475rg502r-avi was reduced but at detectable level, indicating a potential epitope overlapping the g502 region. similar to observations with s2p-avi, rbd-avi and rbd-sd1-avi, s652-109 fab recognition by all three mutants was substantially reduced ( figure 6e , right). our results indicated that the ace2-interface-mutant probes can be used to specifically distinguish antibodies targeting the ace2-binding site and other epitopes on the rbd.to assess the molecular probes for their quality and function, we first performed kinetic analyses of ace2 receptor and antibodies binding to the probes by spr ( figure 7a ). purified biotinylated probes were immobilized on streptavidin sensor chip surface, and ace2 and antibodies were in the mobile phase. ace2 bound the full-length ectodomain probe s2p with a k d of 46.5 nm, and its affinity to the isolated rbd domain probe was somewhat lower with a k d of 121 nm. we found the s2p probe to be sensitive to chip regeneration required to remove antibody, so we used single-cycle kinetics to analyze the interaction with the fabs of antibodies cr3022, s652-109, s652-112 and s652-118. these all bound sars-cov-2 s2p probe with high affinity ( figure 7a , top row). interestingly, the binding on-rates for all three of the antibodies were comparable, but the off-rates varied. cr3022, an antibody known to bind rbd but not neutralize the sars-cov-2 virus , bound to sars-cov-2 s2p at a lower affinity than ace2 (91.4 vs 46.5 nm, respectively), although cr3022 had a higher affinity to the rbd probe (25.0 nm) than to s2p (91.4 nm). another rbd-binding non-neutralizing antibody, s652-109, bound to the rbd and s2p probes at 1.63 and 3.96 nm, respectively.antibody s652-112, also non-neutralizing, did not bind ntd or rbd probes ( figure 5c ), but 1 0 did bind s2p probe with a k d of 0.32 nm, consistent with it being s2 directed. an ntd-specific antibody, s652-118, which does have some neutralizing capacity, bound ntd and s2p probes at 1.74 and 1.46 nm, respectively. these results confirm that the biotinylated probes have the binding specificity for the receptor and antibodies and are functioning properly as expected.we next tested the probes for sorting antigen-specific yeast cells displaying sars-cov- depending on the initial level of antigen-specific antibodies present, just one or two rounds of sorting and enrichment could increase the antigen-specific cells by several orders of magnitude, indicating substantial utility of the probes for cell sorting.to further demonstrate the utility of the probes in sorting of human b cells, we obtained overall, the designed probes were found to be functional in spr and in sorting yeast cells or b cells with spike-reactive antibodies.molecular probes comprising key targets such as the sars-cov-2 spike and its domains can be of broad utility. for vaccine development, such probes can be used to define and monitor the elicited responses, and for antibody characterization, such probes can serve as critical molecular tags, facilitating the identification of the highly effective antibodies which could be used for passive therapy (cao et al., 2020; reviewed in casadevall et al., 2004; graham and ambrosino, 2015; walker and burton, 2018) . in diagnostics, they can be employed to assess sera reactivity and to provide sensitive markers of infection (perera et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020b; zhao et al., 2020) . in pathogenesis, they can assist in delineating susceptible cells that virus might infect or in tracking viral variants, including those that might have selective advantages (korber et al., 2020) . here we show how structure-based design coupled to incorporation of (i) a purification-tag based construct, (ii) a sequence-specific protease, and (iii) a sequence-specific biotin ligase, enable streamlined probe development. 1 2 for probe construction, we used a process incorporating the 'cut-and-paste' assembly of necessary components, employing an n-terminal purification tag and sequence stretches targeted by sequence-specific enzymes: the hrv3c protease and biotin ligase. other sequence-specific cleavage sites such as thrombin could be incorporated, to further control the presence of components surrounding the target protein of interest. such protease-specific cleavage, however, can lead to the addition of residual amino acids at resultant n-and c-termini after protease cleavage; we note in this context that an n-terminal hrv3c site appends only a dipeptide, gly-pro, to the n-terminus of the liberated target. importantly, structure of the target protein can define domain boundaries, allowing for separate probes of specific domains or domain combinations.the structure-based methods we describe here for probe construction may allow for the assessment of immune responses of other type 1 fusion machines. we previously created hemagglutinin trimer probes with a y96f mutation (whittle et al., 2014) and used them to identify broadly neutralizing antibodies against influenza (joyce et al., 2016) . we also created ebolavirus trimer probes that could be used to identify protective neutralizing antibodies against sudan outbreak ebolavirus strain gaudinski et al., 2019; misasi et al., 2016) .and we previously used a biotinylated envelope 'sosip' probe to identify broadly neutralizing, fusion peptide-directed antibodies against hiv-1 (kong et al. science 2016). overall, the cutand-paste structure-based design described here should be easily adapted to the streamlined development of molecular probes against not only these pathogens, but also emerging pathogens, as shown here for sars-cov-2. the authors declare no competing interest. 1 5 • key resources further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by peter d. kwong (pdkwong@nih.gov).plasmids for the sars-cov-2 probes with avi tag generated in this study are available upon request for non-commercial research purposes.cryo-em maps of the biotinylated sars-cov-2 s2p have been deposited to the emdb with accession codes emd-22161 (rbds down) and emd-22162(1 rbd up), and fitted coordinates have been deposited to the pdb with accession codes 6xf5 and 6xf6, respectively. expi293f and freestyle 293-f cells were purchased from thermo fisher scientific. the cells were used directly from the commercial sources following manufacturer suggestions as described in detail below.construction of expression plasmids for sars-cov-2 probes dna sequences coding for the sars-cov-2 spike or its domains were cloned into a pvrc8400-based expression vector by geneimmune. the gene of interest was placed after the dna sequence encoding a n-terminus single chain human fc with knob-in-hole mutations, a "ggsggggsgg" linker and an hrv3c protease cleavage site for purification with protein a column and on-column cleavage. dna sequence encoding a c-terminus "ggglvpqqsg" 1 9linker named10lnqq and an avi tag was placed after the gene of interest for biotinylation (table s1 ).for the scfc-sars-cov-2 s2p-avi construct, the cloned insertion included the spike protein residues 14 to 1208 with gsas replacing the rrar at the s1/s2 cleavage site and k986p and v987p stabilization mutations, a gsg linker and the t4-phage fibritin trimerization domain (foldon) as described by wrapp and colleagues (wrapp et al., 2020b) . a model of the 10lnqq linker and avi tag was obtained on the pep-fold server (shen et al., 2014; thevenet et al., 2012) to show the location of this c-terminal addition in figure s1 .single chain fc tagged sars-cov-2 probes were produced by transient transfection of 293 freestyle cells as previously described (wrapp et al., 2020b) . one liter of cells was transfected with 1 mg of sars-cov-2 probe plasmid, pre-mixed with 3 ml of turbo293 transfection reagent. the cells were allowed to grow for 6 days at 120 rpm, 37 °c, and 9 % co 2 , after which the supernatant was harvested by centrifugation and filtered. the cleared supernatant was incubated with 5ml of pbs-equilibrated protein a resin for two hours, after which the resin synthesized and subcloned into the pvrc8400 vector, as described previously (wu et al., 2011) .expi293f cells (thermo fisher) using turbo293 transfection reagent (speed biosystems). on day 6 post transfection, the culture supernatant was harvested and loaded on a protein a column.after washing with pbs for 3 column volumes, igg was eluted with an igg elution buffer (pierce) and immediately neutralized by addition of one tenth volume of 1m tris-hcl ph 8.0.the fab fragments were generated by overnight endoproteinase lysc (new england biolabs) digestion at 37 o c with a lysc:igg ratio of 1:2000 (w/w) and passed through a protein a column to remove uncut igg and fc fragments.a fortébio octet htx instrument (fortébio) was used to analyze biotinylation level, antigenicity, and receptor recognition of the molecular probes. assays were performed at 30°c in tilted black 384-well plates (geiger bio-one) in pbs + 0.02% tween20, 0.1% bsa, 0.05% sodium azide with agitation set to 1,000 rpm. biotinylated sars-cov-2 spike (80 μg/ml), ntd (40 μg/ml), rbd (5 μg/ml), rbd-sd1 (5 μg/ml), rbd-l455ra475r (5 μg/ml), rbd-l455rg496r (80 μg/ml), rbd-l455ra475rg502r (15 μg/ml) and hiv env (20 μg/ml) were loaded on to streptavidin biosensors for 150 seconds. binding to biotinylated probes was measured by dipping immobilized probes into solutions of receptors and antibodies at 500 nm for 180 seconds. receptor and antibody binding were assessed in triplicate. parallel correction to subtract systematic baseline drift was carried out by subtracting the measurements recorded for a loaded sensor dipped into buffer only control well. the reference corrected response values are reported as averages of maximum signal during the association step.surface plasmon resonance spr binding experiments were performed using a biacore t200 biosensor, equipped with either a series s sa chip for the fab binding assays, or a series s cm4 chip immobilized with neutravidin, for the ace2 binding assays. all measurements were performed at 25°c in a running buffer of 10 mm hepes ph 7.4, 150 mm nacl, and 0.05% (v/v) tween-20.biotinylated spike, rbd, and ntd were captured over independent flow cells at 1000-1100 ru, 300-500 ru and 260 ru, respectively. ace2-analyte samples were prepared in running buffer at a concentration range of 300-1.2nm using a three-fold dilution series. binding over the spike and rbd or ntd surfaces as well as over a neutravidin reference surface was tested for 180s followed by a 300s dissociation phase at 50μl/min. blank buffer cycles were performed throughout the experiment by injecting running buffer instead of ace2 to subtract systematic noise from the binding signal. the data was processed and fit to 1:1 binding model using scrubber 2.0 (biologic software).to avoid the need for surface regeneration that arises with the low off-rate fabs, we used single-cycle kinetics for the fab binding experiments. each fab was tested at analyte concentrations 180-6.66nm prepared in running buffer using a three-fold dilution series. binding over the spike or rbd surface or the ntd surface for s652-118, was monitored for 120s, followed by a dissociation phase of 120s-900s depending on the interaction. four blank buffer single cycles were performed by injecting running buffer instead of fab to remove systematic noise from the binding signal. the data was processed and fit to 1:1 single cycle model using the scrubber 2.0 (biologic software).negative-stain electron microscopy 2 3 purified sars-cov-2 s samples were diluted to approximately 0.02 mg/ml with a buffer containing 10 mm hepes, ph 7, and 150 mm nacl. a 4.7-µl drop of the diluted sample was applied to a glow-discharged carbon-coated copper grid. the grid was washed with the same buffer, and adsorbed protein molecules were negatively stained with 0.75% uranyl formate.micrographs were collected at a nominal magnification of 100,000x (pixel size: 0.22 nm) usingserialem (mastronarde, 2005) on an fei tecnai t20 electron microscope operated at 200 kv and equipped with an eagle ccd camera. particles were picked automatically using in-house written software (y.t., unpublished). reference-free 2d classification was performed with relion 1.4 (scheres, 2012) .biotinylated sars-cov-2 spike probe was diluted to a final trimer concentration of 0.33 mg/ml in pbs, ph 7.4. the sample (2 µl) was applied to a glow-discharged carbon-coated copper grid (cf 1.2/1.3) and vitrified using a vitrobot mark iv with a wait time of 30 seconds and a blot time of 3 seconds.data were collected using the leginon software (suloway et al., 2005) installed on a titan krios electron microscope operating at 300 kv, equipped with a gatan k3-bioquantum direct detection device. the total dose was fractionated for 3 s over 60 raw frames. motion correction, ctf estimation, particle picking and extraction, 2d classification, ab initio model generation, 3d refinements and local resolution estimation were carried out in cryosparc 2.14 (punjani et al., 2017) . the 3d reconstructions were performed using c3 symmetry for the rbds down map while c1 symmetry was applied for the 1 rbd up map. local refinement (beta) with c1 symmetry was performed on the rbds down map using a mask focused on the c-terminal 2 4 helices, which included the bottom of the s2 subunit spanning from residue 1070 to the c terminus. the overall resolution was 3.45 å for the rbds down map, 4.00 å for the 1 rbd up map, and 4.28 å for the rbds down local refinement map, confirmed by providing the half maps to resolve cryo em in phenix (adams et al., 2004) .the coordinates of sars cov-2 spike ectodomain structures, pdb entries 6vxx and 6vyb , were employed as initial models for fitting the cryo-em map of the rbds down and the 1 rbd up conformation respectively. in both structures, the rbds in the "down" position were modeled using the crystallographic structure of rbd in complex with cr3022 fab (pdb entry 6w41) as a template. for the rbd in the "up"position the map quality did not allow visualization of most side chains which were then modeled as poly-ala, consistent with what observed for 6vyb . manual and automated model building were iteratively performed using coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) and real space refinement in phenix respectively, in order to accurately fit the coordinates to the electron density map. half maps were provided to resolve cryo em tool in phenix to support manual model building. emringer (barad et al., 2015) and molprobity (davis et al., 2004) were used to validate geometry and check structure quality at each iteration step. ucsf chimera (pettersen et al., 2004) was used for map-fitting cross correlation calculation (fit-in-map tool) and for figure preparation.probe conjugation 2 5 biotinylated sars-cov-2 spike probes were conjugated using either allophycocyanin (apc)-, phycoerythrin (pe)-, bv421-, bv711-, or bv786-labeled streptavidin. reactions were prepared at a 4:1 molecular ratio of protein to streptavidin, with every monomer labeled. labeled streptavidin was added in increments, with incubations at 4°c (rotating) for 20 minutes in between each addition.yeast display analysis using monoclonal yeast were created, expressed and analyzed as previously published (wang et al., 2018a) . briefly, vh and vl regions of s652-109, s652-112 and s652-118 were codon optimized for yeast expression, synthesized and cloned into pct-vhvl-k1 or pct-vhvl-l1 yeast expression vectors (genscript). yeast display vectors were linearized and saccharomyces cerevisiae strain awy101 (matα aga1::gal1-aga1::ura3 pdi1::gapdh-pdi1::leu2 ura3-52 trp1 leu2δ1 his3δ200 pep4::his3 prb1δ1.6r can1 gal) was transformed. yeast cells were maintained in ypd medium (20 g/l dextrose, 20 g/l peptone, and 10 g/l yeast extract); after library transformation, yeast cells were maintained in sdcaa medium (20 g/l dextrose, 6.7 g/l yeast nitrogen base, 5 g/l casamino acids, 8.56 g/l nah2po4·h2o, and 10.2 g/l na2hpo4·7h2o). fab display was induced by incubating yeast in sgdcaa medium (sdcaa with 20 g/l galactose, 2 g/l dextrose). two days after induction, 1x106 yeast were incubated in staining buffer (phosphate buffered saline + 0.5% bsa + 2mm edta) containing anti-flag fluorescein isothiocyanate antibody (2 µg/ml; clone m2, sigma-aldrich) and the probes for 30 minutes on ice prior to washing 2 times in ice cold staining buffer.fab expressing yeast (flag+) were analyzed for their capacity to bind to the indicated probes using a facs aria ii (bd biosciences). for single probe stain experiments yeast were incubated kapa biosystems) to generate ~850-bp vh:vl products for library cloning into yeast display.100 ng of natively paired cdna was amplified with primers containing not1 and asci restriction sites for cloning into bidirectional yeast display plasmids (wang et al., 2018a) . libraries were transformed for amplification in e. coli, followed by plasmid dna extraction and subcloning of a galactose-inducible bidirectional promoter. the resulting native fab display libraries were cotransformed into electrocompetent awy101 with asci/noti digested pct vector into yeast cells, and passaged twice before screening (wang et al., 2018a) . samples were collected on a bd facs-aria iii and analyzed with flowjo v10.6.1.the statistical analyses for the bli assessment of probe-antibody binding were performed using graphpad prism. the spr data were processed and fit to a 1:1 binding model using scrubber 2.0 (biologic software). (mwm) was run alongside the probe. (c) negative stain em of the sars-cov-2 s2p probe. the 2d-class averages were shown below the wide-field raw em image in 5-fold magnification. (d) biotinylation, antigenicity and receptor recognition of the sars-cov-2 s2p probe. the level of biotinylation was evaluated by capture of probes at 40 μg/ml onto the streptavidin biosensors. a biotinylated hiv-1 env stabilized in prefusion closed conformation by ds-sosip mutations and containing the same 10lnqq-avi tag at the c-terminus was used for comparison. binding was assessed using 80 μg/ml s2p probe, 20 μg/ml hiv env and receptors, or antibodies at 500 nm. error bars represent standard deviation of triplicate measures. low level non-specific binding of fab s652-112 to the hiv-1 env was observed. (e) cryo-em structures of biotinylated sars-cov-2 s2p probe. domains are colored as in figure 2c sequence. the c-terminal residues 1153-1208 plus the foldon, 10lnqq-avi tag, and biotin were not visible in the electron density. see also figure s3 and table s2 . (b) sds-page of ntd, rbd and rbd-sd1 molecular probes. rbd-sd1 peak 1 appeared to be partially disulfide linked, and was therefore removed from further analysis; rbd-sd1 thus refers to the monomeric peak 2. (c) receptor binding (left) and antibody binding (right). both rbd and rbd-sd1 probes bound to the ace2 receptor and antibody s652-109 while the ntd probe interacted with antibody s652-118 only. binding was assessed using 5 μg/ml probe and 500 nm receptor or antibody. error bars represent standard deviation of triplicate measures. low level non-specific binding of s652-112 fab to rbd and rbd-sd1 was observed. see also figure s2 . (e) receptor and antibody binding of mutant rbd probes. all the knockout mutations abolished rbd binding to the ace2 receptor while retaining binding to both cr3022 and s652-109 antibodies. binding was assessed using 7.5 μg/ml rbd-l455ra475r, 80μg/ml rbd-l455rg496r, or 15μg/ml rbd-l455ra475rg502r to account for varying biotinylation levels among the mutants. receptor or antibodies were at 500 nm. error bars represent standard deviation of triplicate measures. see also figure s2 and table s1. pre-sort round 1pre-sort round 2conversion to the post-fusion form where the s2 subunit engages the host membrane whilst dispensing with s1 2,3 .neutralising human monoclonal antibodies that recognise the ace2 receptor binding site for sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 are generally not cross-reactive between the two viruses and are susceptible to escape mutation 6-10 (indeed a natural mutation y495n has already been identified at this site (gisaid 11 : accession id: epi_isl_429783 wienecke-baldacchino et al.)). in contrast cr3022 (derived from a sars-cov-1 patient) cross-reacts strongly with sars-cov-2 (methods, fig. 1 ) and has been shown to recognise a cryptic, conserved epitope on the rbd distinct from the binding epitope of ace2 7, [12] [13] [14] . that this is not uncommon for sars-cov-1 antibodies is suggested by similar observations for 47d11 15 .to isolate sars-cov-2 spike-reactive monoclonal antibodies, we cloned antibody genes from blood-derived plasmablasts of a covid-19 patient in the convalescent phase. one of these, ey6a was shown by elisa to bind s1 of sars-cov-2 and cross react with sars-cov-1 (fig. 1) . binding of ey6a to sars-cov-2-infected cells was detected by immunofluorescence ( fig. 1 ). surface plasmon resonance (spr) measurements for ey6a fab showed high affinity binding to immobilised sars-cov-2 rbd (kd = 2 nm, although the value for immobilised ey6a igg was somewhat higher) as derived from the kinetic data (methods, extended data fig. 1 , extended data table 1 ). spr studies showed that there was some interdependence of ey6a and cr3022 binding, which varied depending on which component was immobilised on to the sensor chip; ace2 blocking assays confirmed a somewhat asymmetric blocking effect (extended data fig. 2 ). with rbd stably expressed on 5 mdck-siat1 cells (mdck-rbd), ey6a did not block binding of ace2 to the rbd, whereas with ace2 stably expressed on mdck-siat1 cells (mdck-ace2) ey6a blocked the interaction of rbd with ace2. in this assay, ey6a exhibits around 7 times stronger ace2 blocking than cr3022 13 (ey6a, ic50 = 54 nm; cr3022, ic50 = 347 nm) and has equivalent ace2 inhibition compared to ace2-fc (ic50 = 54 nm) and vhh72-fc (ic50 = 69 nm) 2 . these observations are suggestive of an indirect effect by ey6a once bound to the rbd, consistent with an allosteric or weak direct interaction. this was supported by an spr competition assay with immobilised cr3022, which binds distant from the ace2 binding site (extended data fig. 2 ) 12 . this showed complete competition with ey6a for rbd binding suggesting they recognise the same or overlapping epitopes, and indicated that ey6a binds the sars-cov-2 rbd more tightly.two independent neutralisation tests, both using live wild type sars-cov-2 showed strong neutralisation. a neutralisation test for ey6a based on quantitative pcr detection of virus in the supernatant bathing infected vero e6 cells after 5 days of culture, showed a ~1000-fold reduction in virus signal (methods, extended data fig. 3 ) indicating that it is highly neutralising. this was further corroborated by a plaque reduction neutralisation test (prnt) at phe porton down (methods and extended data table 2 ) using sars-cov-2 virus and ey6a which gave an nd50 of ~10.8 µg/ml (70 nm) (calculated according to grist 16 ) . a separate prnt implementation at oxford gave a slightly higher nd50 of ~30 µg/ml, consistent with a shorter incubation time of antibody with virus at lower temperature (extended data fig. 4 ).to elucidate the epitope of ey6a, we determined the crystal structures of the deglycosylated sars-cov-2 rbd in complex with ey6a fab alone and in a ternary complex incorporating a nanobody (nb) which has been shown to compete with ace2 (for data on a closely related nb see huo 2020, submitted), as a crystallisation chaperone. the crystals of the binary complex diffracted to 3.8 å resolution (methods, extended data table 3 ) and those of the ternary complex to 2.65 å. the interaction between ey6a and the rbd was identical in both complexes (extended data fig. 5 ). the higher resolution ternary complex, which showed that there was no interaction between ey6a and the nb, permitted a full interpretation of the detailed interactions (figs. 2 and 3) and has been refined to give an rwork/r-free of 0.216/0.262 and good stereochemistry (methods, extended data table 3 ).residues 333-527 of the rbd, 1-136 and 141-224 of the heavy chain and 1-215 of the light chain of ey6a and 2-126 of the nb are well defined fig. 2a ,b. the nb recognises an epitope adjacent to and slightly overlapping the ace2 receptor binding site and binds the rbd orthogonally to ey6a (fig. 2b,c) . ey6a binds essentially the same epitope as cr3022 12, 13 but with a different pose corresponding to a rotation of 73° about an axis perpendicular to the rbd α3 helix (central to both epitopes) (fig. 2d,e) . the fab complex interface buries 564 and 361 å 2 of surface area for the cdrs of the heavy and light chains respectively. the ey6a interaction is mediated by the cdr loops h1, h2, h3, l1 and l3 contacting predominantly α3 but also α2 and the β2-α3, α4-α5 and α5-β4 loops of the rbd (fig. 3 and extended data fig. 6 ). a total of 16 residues from the heavy chain and 11 from the light chain participate in the interface together with 31 residues from the rbd. for the heavy chain these form potentially 6 hydrogen bonds and a single salt bridge between d99 (of h3) and k386 of the rbd and the light chain interface residues contribute an additional 6 hydrogen bonds. hydrophobic interactions further increase the binding affinity (fig. 3) . of the 31 residues involved in the interaction 21 are conserved between the cr3022 and ey6a epitopes ( fig. 3 and extended data fig. 6 ). conformational changes are introduced into the rbd by binding to ey6a at the α2 (residues 365-371) and α3 (residues 384-388) helices (extended data fig. 6 ), similar to those seen for the cr3022 complex 12 . comparison of the epitope residues for ey6a, cr3022 12 and vhh-72 17 shows that there is a very substantial overlap (extended data fig. 6 ), although the bulk of the molecules extend in different directions, such that vhh-72 directly blocks ace-2 binding 17 .in the first pre-fusion spike structures (pdb ids: 6vsb 2 , 6vxx, 6vyb 4 ), where residues 986 and 987 in the linker between two helices in s2 were mutated to a pro-pro sequence to prevent the conversion to the post-fusion helical conformation, the rbds were found in either one 'up' two 'down' or all three 'down' configuration, and in both cases the epitope is inaccessible. in the 'down' position it is packed against another rbd of the trimer and the nterminal domain (ntd) of the neighbouring protomer. a recent publication for the wild type spike identifies a more closed form 18 where the s1 portion of the spike is tightened up. the structure is not yet deposited however, and so we have looked at the role of the epitope in the down rather than fully closed form, which will be broadly similar. here the ey6a epitope packs down tightly against the s2 'knuckle' bearing the pro-pro mutations, forming a buried protein-protein interface and making the epitope completely inaccessible. we assume that in the closed form this interaction will be even tighter and is probably responsible for maintaining the spike in the pre-fusion state. even when the rbd is in the 'up' configuration, the epitope remains largely inaccessible and substantial further movement of the rbd would be required to permit interaction unless more than one rbd was in the up conformation 12 .to investigate how the fab insinuates itself into the spike, we performed cryo-em analysis.spike ectodomain was mixed with a 6-fold molar excess of ey6a fab and incubated at room temperature (21 °c) with an aliquot taken at 5 hours, applied to cryo-em grids and frozen (methods). unbiased 2d class averages revealed three major particle classes with over onethird comprising a trimeric spike/ey6a complex (some of which are self-associated) (methods, extended data table 4 and 121°. in addition, the orientations of the vh domains relative to their associated rbds differ slightly from that of the crystal structure (by 5°, 2° and 7°, respectively). the quality of the density suggests that these likely samples selected from a continuous distribution (extended data fig. 10 ).the majority of the remaining particles form either a roughly 2-fold symmetric structure or a triangular association (methods, extended data table 4 and figs. 7-11). reconstructions of these particles were anisotropic due to a preferential orientation of the particles on the grid which was somewhat mitigated by collecting data with 30° tilt to yield reconstructions at 4.4 å and 4.7 å, respectively, in the plane of the grid but significantly worse resolution perpendicular to the grid (extended data fig. 10 ). the reconstructions were sufficiently clear to allow the unambiguous fitting of ey6a-rbd complexes (extended data fig. 11 ), however the density for what we assume are the n-terminal domains is poor in both reconstructions and we did not attempt to fit a model. these structures likely represent a residual well-structured fragment from the unfolding of the pre-fusion state of the spike (sds page analysis shows that the spike polypeptide remains largely uncleaved, extended data fig. 12 ). the 'dimeric' and 'trimeric' structures are formed by different lateral associations and these also differ from that seen for similarly structurally degraded spike-cr3022 complexes 12 (extended data fig. 11 ).convalescent serum has shown promise in patients severely ill with covid-19 19, 20 , thus immunotherapeutics have potential for treating covid-19 even at a relatively late stage in the disease. to this end, it is desirable to find a combination of antibodies that neutralise the virus by different mechanisms to mitigate against immune evasion and antibody dependent enhancement. one neutralisation mechanism is blocking receptor attachment. we propose that attachment at the ey6a epitope is a further major neutralisation mechanism. in support of this, the epitope recognised by ey6a has been reported for several antibodies 12, 13, 21, 22 and nanobodies 17,23 raised against sars-cov-2, sars-cov-1 and mers. for sars-cov-1, cr3022 has also been shown to neutralise synergistically with ace2 blocking antibodies 7 .despite the spatial separation of the ey6a and ace2 epitopes we find some cross-talk between the two binding events.the ey6a epitope is extremely unusual, since it is completely inaccessible in the pre-fusion spike trimer. this raises the question of what the mechanism of neutralisation might be. in the pre-fusion state the ey6a/cr3022 epitope rests down upon the upper end of the helixturn-helix between heptad repeat 1 (hr1) and the central helix (ch) of s2, essentially putting a lid on the spring-loaded extension of the helix which occurs on conversion to the postfusion state in the vicinity of the mutations designed to prevent conversion between the preand post-fusion conformation 24 (fig. 5 ). the residues of the epitope are crucial to these protein-protein interactions, and therefore highly conserved, explaining why it has, to date, proved impossible to generate mutations that escape binding of the antibody 7,12 . ey6a binding to the isolated rbd is tight (at ~2 nm it is roughly an order of magnitude tighter than cr3022) and, remarkably, the binding pose on top of the spike allows three fabs to bind simultaneously around the central axis (whereas cr3022 fab cannot be accommodated). in line with this, a major portion of spike molecules incubated for 5 h with ey6a are still in the intact pre-fusion state, with only about 1/3 being converted. simple modelling suggests that a similar packing could occur for intact antibodies (extended data fig. 13 ). in general, we would expect binders at this epitope to neutralise by displacing the 'lid' on the hr1/ch turn, reducing the stability of the pre-fusion state and therefore reducing the barrier to conversion to the more stable post-fusion trimer. this conversion is hindered in the construct we have used by the presence of the proline mutations at the turn between the helices. premature conversion would prevent later attachment to the cell and block infectivity. the kinetics of this process will determine the effectiveness of the antibody in neutralisation and ultimately protection. since the rbd is a relatively small domain there might also be an interplay between separate epitopes, thus we saw allosteric effects between ey6a and ace2 binding and similarly vhh-72, which binds an overlapping epitope to ey6a, strongly inhibits ace-2 binding by virtue of its different angle of attack 17 . the reason for the cross-talk betweenthis study was designed to isolate sars-cov-2 antigen-specific human mabs from peripheral plasmablasts in humans with natural sars-cov-2 infection, to characterize the antigenic specificity and phenotypic activity of sars-cov-2 spike-reactive mab, and to determine the structure of antibody in complex with viral antigen. fresh peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) were separated from whole blood by density gradient centrifugation and cryopreserved pbmcs were thawed. pbmcs were stained with a mix of fluorescent-labelled antibodies to cellular surface markers, including anti-cd3 (bd biosciences, usa), anti-cd19 (bd biosciences, usa), anti-cd27 (bd biosciences, usa), anti-cd20 (bd biosciences, usa), anti-cd38 (bd biosciences, usa), anti-igg (bd biosciences, usa) and anti-igm (bd biosciences, usa). plasmablasts were selected by gating on cd3-cd20-cd19+cd27hicd38hiigg+igm-events and were isolated in chamber as single cell as previously described 26 . sorted single cells were used to produce human igg monoclonal antibodies as previously described 26 . expression vectors that carry variable domains of heavy and light chains were transfected into the 293t cell line for expression of recombinant full-length human igg monoclonal antibodies in serum-free transfection medium.to determine the individual gene segments employed by vdj and vj rearrangements and the number of nucleotide mutations and amino acid replacements, the variable domain sequences were aligned with germline gene segments using the international immunogenetics (imgt) alignment tool (http://www.imgt.org/imgt_vquest/input).ey6a igg used for neutralisation and making fab: antibody was expressed using nanobody: this was derived from a naïve library followed by affinity maturation as described deglycosylation of rbd:10 µl of endoglycosidase f1 (~1mg/ml) was added to rbd (~2 mg/ml, 3 ml) and incubated at room temperature for two hours. rbd was then loaded to a superdex 75 hiload 16/60 gel filtration column (ge healthcare) for further purification using buffer 10 mm hepes ph 7.4, 150 mm nacl. purified rbd was concentrated using a 10 kda ultrafiltration tube (amicon) to 12 mg/ml.the neutralization activity of monoclonal antibody-containing supernatant was measured using a sars-cov-2 (strain cdc-4) infection of vero e6 cells 27 . briefly, vero e6 cells were preseeded in a 96 well plate at a concentration of 2 x 10 4 cells per well. on the following day, monoclonal antibody-containing supernatant were mixed with an equal volume of 100 tcid50 virus preparation and incubated at 37 °c for 1 hour. the mixture was added into seeded vero e6 cells and incubated at 37 °c for 5 days. the cell control, virus control, and virus back-titration were setup for each experiment. at day 5, the culture supernatant was harvested from each well and the viral rna was extracted by the automatic labturbo system (taigen, taiwan) following the manufacturer's instructions. for the most part, except that the specimen was pretreated with proteinase k prior to rna extraction. real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed in a 25-µl reaction containing 5 µl of rna 28 sars-cov-2 (australia/vic01/2020) 29 plaque reduction neutralization tests were performed using passage 4 of sars-cov-2 victoria/01/2020 29 . virus suspension at appropriate concentrations in dulbecco's modification of eagle's medium containing 1 % fbs (d1; 100 µl) was mixed antibody (100 µl) diluted in d1 at a final concentration of 50 µg/ml, 25 µg/ml, 12.5 ug/ml or 6.125 µg/ml, in triplicate, in wells of a 24 well tissue culture plate, and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. thereafter, 0.5 ml of a single cell suspension of vero e6 cells in d1 at 5 x 105/ml was added, and incubated for 2 h at 37 o c before being overlain with 0.5 ml of d1 supplemented with carboxymethyl cellulose (1.5 %). cultures were incubated for a further 4 days at 37 o c before plaques were revealed by staining the cell monolayers with amido black in acetic acid/methanol.purified and deglycosylated rbd and ey6a fab were combined in an approximate molar ratio of 1:1 at a concentration of 6.5 mg/ml. nb was also combined with ey6a-6his fab and rbd in a 1:1:1 molar ratio with a final concentration of 5.7 mg/ml. these two complexes were separately incubated at room temperature for one hour. initial screening of crystals was performed in crystalquick 96-well x plates (greiner bio-one) with a cartesian robot using the nanolitre sitting-drop vapour diffusion method as previously described 31, 32 . crystals were soaked in a solution containing 25% glycerol and 75% reservoir solution for a few seconds and then mounted in loops and frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to data collection. diffraction data were collected at 100 k at beamline i03 of diamond light source, uk.diffraction images of 0.1° rotation were recorded on an eiger2 xe 16m detector with an exposure time of 0.01 s per frame, beam size 80×20 µm and 100% beam transmission. data were indexed, integrated and scaled with the automated data processing program xia2-dials 33, 34 . the data set for the binary complex of 360° was collected from a single frozen crystal to 3.8 å resolution with 20-fold redundancy. the crystal belongs to space group p3121 with unit cell dimensions a = b = 166.6 å and c = 270.8 å. the structure was determined by molecular replacement with phaser 35 using search models of antibody cr3022 fab and the rbd of the rbd/cr3022 fab complex (pdb id 6yla; 12 ). there are three rbd/ey6a complexes in the crystal asymmetric unit, resulting in a crystal solvent content of ~75%. for the ternary complex, a data set of 360° rotation with data extending to 2.6 å was collected on beamline i03 of diamond with exposure time 0.008 s per 0.1° frame, beam size 80×20 µm and 100% beam transmission). the crystal also belongs to space group r3 but with unit cell dimensions (a = b = 178.1 å and c = 87.8 å). there is one rbd/ey6a/nb complex in the asymmetric unit and a solvent content of ~61%.one cycle of refmac5 36 was used to refine atomic coordinates after manual correction in coot 37 to the protein sequence from the search model. for both the binary and ternary complexes the final refinement used phenix 38 resulting in rwork = 0.219 and rfree = 0.259 for all data to 3.8 å resolution for the binary complex and to rwork = 0.216 and rfree = 0.262 for all data to 2.64 å resolution for the ternary complex. there is well ordered density for a single glycan at the glycosylation site n343 in the rbd.data collection and structure refinement statistics are given in extended data table 3 .structural comparisons used shp 39 , residues forming the rbd/fab interface were identified with pisa 40 , figures were prepared with pymol (the pymol molecular graphics system, version 1.2r3pre, schrödinger, llc).spike protein, following sec purification, was buffer exchanged into 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl, 0.02 % nan3 buffer using a desalting column (zeba, thermo fisher). a final concentration of 0.18 mg/ml was incubated with ey6a fab (in the same buffer) in a 6:1 molar ratio (fab to trimeric spike) at room temperature for 5 hrs. control grids of spike alone after incubation at room temperature for 5 hrs were also prepared.each grid was prepared using 3 µl sample applied to a freshly glow-discharged on high for 20 grids were screened on a titan krios microscope using serialem operating at 300 kv (thermo fisher). movies were collected on a k3 detector on a titan krios operating at 300 kv in super resolution mode, with a calibrated super resolution pixel size of 0.415 a/pix at both 0° and 30° tilt. to compensate for the poorer contrast with tilted data, it was necessary to use a higher dose rate for the latter dataset.alignment and motion correction was performed using relion3.1's implementation of motion correction 41 , with a 5-by-5 patch-based alignment. all frames were binned by two, resulting in a final calibrated pixel size of 0.83 å/pixel. contrast-transfer-function (ctf) of full-dose and non-weighted micrographs was estimated within a cryosparc wrapper for gctf-v1.06 42 . images were then manually inspected and those with poor ctf-fits were discarded.particles were then picked by unbiased blob picking in cryosparc v.2.14.1 43 and subjected to rounds of 2d classification.for the spike-ey6a dataset (structure a), 2,096,246 spike-like particles were used to make a template to pick particles from the untilted dataset, which were then filtered by 2d classification to 110,096 particles and then further refined by 3d classification with an ab initio model set. for the 30 ° dataset, 124,194 particles were used as a template, and filtered by 2d classification to a set of 84,230 particles and then, as before, further refined by unbiased 3d classification. the two particle sets were then refined together, with a final set of 144,680 particles.for b and c (triangular ring and 'dimeric' form), particles from both the zero and 30° datasets were combined in a similar manner to the spike-ey6a dataset using the 'exposure group utilities' module in cryosparc. both particle sets (b, 41372 particles and c, 119,343 particles) were then reclassified and the best class refined with non-uniform refinement. for b, c3 symmetry was imposed at this final refinement stage, resulting in an appreciable improvement in resolution, as indicated by inspection and gold-standard fsc = 0.143 (4.7 versus 5.9 å, see extended data table 4 ).the em density of spike/ey6a was fitted with the structure of a closed form of spike (pdb id 6vxx) apart from the rbds and ey6a fab which were fitted with rbd/ey6a of the ternary crystal structure using coot 37 . due to the lower resolution, rbd and ey6a are only fitted to the 'dimeric' and 'trimeric' em density. the spike/ey6a structure was refined with phenix 38 real space refinement, first as a rigid body and then by positional and bfactor refinements. only rigid body refinement was applied to the 'dimeric' and the 'trimeric'complexes. the statistics of em data collection and structure refinement are shown in extended data table 4 these authors contributed equally: d.z., hmed, c.-p.c. ey6a binds the s1 subunit of sars-cov-2 and cross react with s1 of sars-cov-1. b, antibody cr3022 similarly binds the s1 subunit of sars-cov-2 and cross react with sars-cov-1 s1, but with lower affinity. c, convalescent serum from a covid-19 patient was also included as a control and in this case binding to mers and oc43 spike proteins also investigated. d, binding of ey6a on the sars-cov-2 infected cells in immunofluorescence assay. anti-influenza h3 mab bs 1a was included as a control.sars-cov-2 spike sars-cov-2 s1 sars-cov-1 s1 mers spike oc43 spike the novel coronavirus known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) or simply covid-19 is the seventh member of the coronavirus family. 1 the other two viruses in this family that infect humans are severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). these are positive-sense, single-strand enveloped rna viruses. the coronavirus particles contain four main structural proteins: the spike, membrane, envelope, and nucleocapsid. [1] [2] the spike protein protrudes from the envelope of the virion and consists of two subunits; a receptor-binding domain (rbd) that interacts with the receptor proteins of host cells and a second subunit that facilitates fusion of the viral membrane into the host cell membrane. recent studies showed that rbd of spike proteins of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 interact with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ace2 belongs to the membrane-bound carboxydipeptidase family. it is attached to the outer surfaces of cells and is widely distributed in the human body. in particular, higher expression of ace2 is observed in organs such as small intestine, colon, kidney, and heart, while ace2 expression is comparatively lower in liver and lungs. [3] [4] the role of oxidative stress on the binding of viral proteins on the host cell surface receptors is a relatively underexplored area of biomedical research. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] previous studies have indicated that the entry of viral glycoprotein is impacted by thiol-disulfide balance on the cell surface. 5, [7] [8] [9] [11] [12] any perturbations in the thiol-disulfide equilibrium has also been found to deter the entry of viruses into their target cells. 5 the first step of the viral entry involves binding of the viral envelop protein onto a cellular receptor. this is followed by endocytosis, after which conformational changes of the viral protein helps the induction of the viral protein into the endosomal membrane, finally releasing the viral content into the cell. these conformational changes are mediated by ph changes as well as the conversion of disulfide to thiol group of the viral spike protein. 7 several cell surface oxidoreductases 9 regulate the thiol-disulfide exchange, responsible for conformational changes of viral proteins needed for virus entry into host cells.in the backdrop of significant mortality rate for sars-cov-2 (hereinafter referred to as cov-2) infection, it is important to know if the thiol-disulfide balance plays any role on the binding of the spike glycoprotein on to the host cell receptor protein ace2. a recent study with the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov (hereinafter referred to as cov) has exhibited a complete redox insensitivity; 7 despite the reduction of all disulfide bridges of cov to thiols, its binding to ace2 remained unchanged. 7 however, this study did not probe the redox sensitivity of ace2 receptor. thus, in the present study, we computationally investigated the redox state of both partners (ace2 and cov/cov-2) on their binding affinities. the structure of cov 1 3 and cov-2 14-15 complexed with ace2 are known and the noncovalent interactions at the protein-protein interface 16 have been reported recently. using these reported structures, molecular dynamics simulations and electrostatic field calculations were performed to explore the impact of thioldisulfide balance on cov/cov-2 and ace2 binding affinities. the structural and dynamical changes due to the change in the redox states of cysteines in the interacting proteins were analyzed and their effects on binding free energies were studied.the molecular basis of the binding of spike proteins to ace2 is known from x-ray crystallographic (sars-cov) 13 and cryo-electron microscopic (sars-cov-2) 16 studies. the sequence alignment of cov and cov-2 spike proteins showed high sequence identity (>75 %)indicating that their binding to ace2 receptors will be similar ( fig. 1 ). in both bound structures, the rbd of cov and cov-2 is found to be complexed with ace2 (fig. 2) . both ace2 andcov-2 possess four disulfide bridges, whereas cov subunit has only two disulfide linkages (table 1 and fig. 2a and 2b) . two large helices of ace2 form a curved surface (fig. 2, illustrated by the dashed curved line) that interacts with the concave region of cov or cov-2 subunit.structural change along the trajectory. in all cases, the simulation started with an equilibrated structure, which was obtained after minimizing the neutralized solvated protein complex built from the experimentally determined structures. the evolution of the protein structure along the md trajectory was monitored by calculating the root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of each structure from the starting structure as a frame of reference following standard procedure. 17 briefly, during the md simulation, the protein coordinates were recorded for every 10 ps interval and a root-mean-square-deviation (rmsd) of each frame was calculated from the average root-mean-square displacement of backbone c α atoms with respect to the initial structure. then, the rmsd values, averaged over conformations stored during 1 ns time, were plotted against the simulated time (fig. 3 ). compared to the starting structure, only a moderate backbone fluctuation was noted in all protein complexes during 20 ns simulations and the maximum of rmsd was in the range of 2.0-3.8 å ( table 2 ). the evolution was smooth and its stability was demonstrated by the standard deviation of the computed rmsds, which was less than 0.3 å. taken together, results of the simulations showed no unexpected structural deformation of the sar-cov/cov-2⋅⋅⋅ace2 complex in both, reduced (thiol groups) andoxidized (disulfide bonds) states (table 2) . table 3 ).however, when all disulfides in cov/cov-2 as well as ace2 were reduced to thiols, the binding became thermodynamically unfavorable. in both cases, the binding free the study found that the reduction of all disulfides into sulfydryl groups completely impairs the binding of sars-cov/cov-2 spike protein to ace2. this is evident from the positive gibbs energy of binding (∆ bind g o ) obtained for both cov ox ⋅⋅⋅ace2 ox and cov-2 ox ⋅⋅⋅ace2 ox complexes.when the disulfides of only ace2 were reduced to sulfydryl groups, the binding becomes weaker, as the the redox environment of cell surface receptors is regulated by the thiol-disulfide equilibrium in the extracellular region. 12, 18 this is maintained by glutathione transporters, 19 a number of oxidoreductases 12 including protein disulfide isomerase, 8 and several redox switches. 12 under oxidative stress, the extracellular environment becomes oxidation-prone resulting more disulfide formation on protein surfaces. 12 therefore, under severe oxidative stress, the cell surface receptor ace2 and rbd of the intruding viral spike protein are likely to be present in its oxidized form having predominantly disulfide linkages. this computational studyshows that under oxidative stress, the lack of reducing environment would result in significantly favorable binding of the viral protein on the cell surface ace2. in terms of energetics, this computational study demonstrates that the oxidized form of proteins with disulfide bridges would cause a 50 kcal/mol of decrease in gibbs binding free energy. furthermore, ace2, which the viral spike proteins latch on to, is known to be a key player in the remedial of oxidative stress. 20 binding of the viral protein will prevent the key catalytic function of ace2 of converting angiotensin 2 (a strong activator of oxidative stress) to angiotensin 1-7 thereby creating a vicious circle of enhanced viral attack. in summary, the present study demonstrates 1 0 that the absence of or reduced oxidative stress would have a significant beneficial effect during early stage of viral infection by preventing viral protein binding on the host cells.computational setup. setting up of protein systems and all structural manipulations were carried out using visual molecular dynamics (vmd). 21 disulfide groups were modified to thiols during setting up of structures using standard vmd scripts. molecular optimization and dynamics (md) simulations were carried out using nanoscale molecular dynamics (namd) package using charmm36 force field. [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] during md simulations, electrostatic energy calculations were carried out using particle mesh ewald method. 27 backbone root-mean-squaredeviation (rmsd) calculations were performed using vmd. protein-protein interactions were studied using adaptive-basis poisson boltzmann solver (apbs). 28 electrostatic field calculations were performed using pdb2pqr program suit. 29 molecular dynamics simulations. all simulations were performed using the structure of ace2 bound sars-cov (pdb entry: 3d0g) 1 3 and scar-cov-2 (pdb entry: 6m0j) 15 . in all simulations, setup of protein complexes systems was carried out following protocols used previous studies from this lab. 17, 30 briefly, hydrogens were added using the hbuild module of charmm. ionic amino acid residues were maintained in a protonation state corresponding to ph 7. the protonation state of histidine residues was determined by computing the pka using binding free energy calculations. gibbs free energies of binding between the ace2 and sars cov or cov-2 proteins were calculated using apbs using a standardized method of a treecode-accelerated boundary integral poisson-boltzmann equation solver (tabi-pb). 33 in this method, the protein surface is triangulated, and electrostatic surface potentials are computed. the discretization of surface potentials is utilized to compute the net energy due to solvation as well as electrostatic interactions between the two protein subunits, as outlined in thermodynamic scheme, scheme 1. following scheme 1, the free energy of binding of the two protein fragments in water, can be expressed as a sum of two components (eq. 1)where the ∆ coul g represents the coulombic (electrostatic) interactions between the proteins occurring at the protein-protein interface (scheme 1) and ∆ ∆ solv g is the difference of the solvation energies between the complex and the corresponding free proteins:however, the solvation calculation used only part of the entire spike protein as well as the ace2, therefore ∆ bind g tabi-pb was calibrated by correcting ∆ ∆ solv g using experimentally known binding free energy of ace2···cov-2:where k d is the experimental dissociation constant, which is equal to 37 nm. 16 the corrected free energy of the solvationusing the ∆ g corr and eq. 4, the corrected binding free energy, ∆ bind g o of all protein complexes is expressed byas shown in eq. 4, the combination of last two terms in eq. 5 is equal to ∆ ∆ solv g corr. therefore, eq. 5 can be simplified as: figure 1 . sequence alignment (generated by clustal omega 35 ) between the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov and sars-cov2 proteins. the "*" represents the identical residues, ":" represents similar residues, and gap represents dissimilar residues. the cysteine residues are highlighted in yellow.rvqptesivrfpnitnlcpfgevfnatrfasvyawnrkrisncvadysvlynsasfstfk 60 cov ------------------pfgevfnatkfpsvyawerkkisncvadysvlynstffstfk 42 *********:* *****:**:**************: *****cygvsptklndlcftnvyadsfvirgdevrqiapgqtgkiadynyklpddftgcviawns 120 cov cygvsatklndlcfsnvyadsfvvkgddvrqiapgqtgviadynyklpddfmgcvlawnt 102 ***** ********:********::**:********** ************ ***:***: the medium-scale fluctuations are shown in green.coronaviruses are a large family of viruses which may cause illness in animals. in humans, seven coronaviruses are known to cause respiratory infections, ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases. the first two coronaviruses, human cov-229e (hcov-229e) and human cov-oc43 (hcov-oc43), were discovered in the 1960s, and cause relatively mild respiratory symptoms. human severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sarsr-cov) was identified in 2003, and causes flu-like symptoms and atypical pneumonia in the worst cases [fouchier et al. 2003 ]. the human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), identified in 2004, and the human cov-hku1 (hcov-hku1), described in 2005 [woo et al. 2005] , generally cause upper respiratory disease in humans, which may progress in lower respiratory infections [van der hoek et al. 2004 ]. more recently, the pathogenic middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) coronavirus, which appeared for the first time in 2012, was identified as the sixth human coronavirus [zaki et al. 2012 ]. finally, a previously unknown coronavirus probably originated in baths, sars-cov-2, was identified in december 2019 in wuhan, china [andersen et al. 2020 ,gorbalenya et al. 2020 ]. sars-cov-2 caused an ongoing pandemic of severe pneumonia named coronavirus disease 19 , which has affected over 4 million people worldwide, and caused more than 300.000 deaths as may 13, 2020.currently, no vaccine for any of the known coronaviruses has been approved. coronavirus vaccines can be live attenuated/ inactivated viruses, protein-based vaccines, dna and mrna vaccines . the viral spike (s) glycoprotein and the nucleocapsid (n) protein are two of the main targets for antibody production and for the development of vaccines and antiviral drugs ], due to their ability to trigger a dominant and longlasting immune response.the spike protein is a large type i transmembrane protein of approximately 1400 amino acids. s protein is an attractive target for vaccine development, as its surface expression renders it a direct target for the host immune response. spike proteins assemble into trimers on the virion surface to form the distinctive crown-like structure, and mediate the contact with the host cell by binding to ace2 receptor, a process necessary for the virus entry. s protein contains 2 subunits: s1n-terminal domain, responsible for receptor binding, and s2 c-terminal domain, responsible for the fusion. the s2 subunit is the most conserved one, while the s1 subunit differs even within species of the same coronaviruses. the s1 contains two sub-domains (n-terminal and c-terminal), which are both show receptor-binding functions. the s2 domain contains two heptad repeats with hydrophobic residues, responsible for the formation of an αhelical coiled-coil structure that participate in the virus-host cell membrane fusion [walls et al. 2020 ].the nucleocapsid protein regulates the viral genome transcription, replication and packaging, and it is essential for viability. the n protein is of potential interest for vaccine development as it is highly immunogenic and its amino acid sequence is highly conserved. this protein contains two structural domains: the n-terminal domain, that acts as a putative rna binding domain, and a c-terminal domain, which acts as a dimerization domain [tilocca et al. 2020 ].t cell-responses against s and n proteins have been shown to be the most immunogenic and long lasting in sars-cov patients. furthermore, b-cell antibody response against s and n proteins was also reported to be effective, although short-lived compared to the t cell-response. the search of t-cell and b-cell epitopes , which can stimulate a specific immune response against s and n proteins, represents a valuable strategy to identify targets for the development of a sars-cov-2 vaccine [ahmed et al. 2020 ].in a previous study, we showed that genes encoding n and s proteins tend to evolve faster than genes encoding matrix and envelope proteins [dilucca et al. 2020 ]. this result suggested that the higher divergence observed for these two genes could represent a significant barrier in the development of antiviral therapeutics against sars-cov-2. here, we perform a comprehensive analysis of the position-specific rates of evolution and the order-disorder propensities of the spike glycoprotein (s) and the nucleocapsid protein (n) of sars-cov-2. thus, we provide an in-silico survey of the major nucleocapsid protein and spike protein epitopes and identify a subset of them that are well-conserved among homologues of human coronaviruses that could help design broad-spectrum vaccines against sars-cov-2.the complete coding genomic sequences of sars-cov-2 was obtained from ncbi viral databases, accessed as of 10may2020. in this study, we also considered six human coronaviruses: human cov-229e (hcov-229e), human cov-oc43 (hcov-oc43),human severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sarsr-cov), human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), human cov-hku1 (hcov-hku1), middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), and the severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). we downloaded the coding sequences of these coronaviruses from the national center for biotechnological information (ncbi) (available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). for each virus, we investigated the evolutionary conservation and the structural disorder tendency of protein n (uniprot id: p0dtc9) and s (uniprot id: p0dtc2), which are regarded as important targets for the development of vaccines and antiviral drugs.to explore the evolutionary relationships among the proteins n and s in the seven human coronaviruses here considered, the selected protein sequences were aligned by using clustal omega (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/clustalo/) [madeira et al. 2019 ]. this tool is a new multiple sequence alignment (msa) program that uses seeded guide trees and hmm profile-profile techniques to generate alignments and phylogenetic tree of divergent sequences.the structural order-disorder propensity of each protein was predicted by usingiupred2a(https://iupred2a.elte.hu) [mészáros et al. 2018 ], using the option for long disordered regions. briefly, iupred2a is a fast, robust, sequence-only predictor based on an energy estimation approach that allows to identify disordered protein regions. the key component of the calculations is the energy estimation matrix, a 20 by 20 matrix, whose elements characterize the general preference of each pair of amino acids to be in contact as derived from globular proteins. this prediction associates a score to each residue in the protein sequence ranging from 0 (strong propensity for an ordered structure) to 1 (strong propensity for a disordered structure), with 0.5 as the cut-off to classify residues as either ordered or disordered. in line with the original protocol [dosztànyi et al. 2005] , the position-specific estimations of the structural order-disorder propensity of each residue were then averaged over a window of 21 residues, and the average value was assigned to the central residue of the window (taking into account the limitations on both sides of the protein sequence).we calculated the rate of evolution per site of the sars-cov-2proteins n and s relative to their orthologs in other six human coronaviruses using rate4site (https://m.tau.ac.il/~{}itaymay/cp/rate4site.html) [pupko et al. 2002] .rate4site calculates the evolutionary rate at each site in the msa using a probabilistic-based evolutionary model.this allows taking into account the stochastic process underlying sequence evolution within protein families and the phylogenetic tree of the proteins in the family. the conservation score at each site in the msa corresponds to the site's evolutionary rate. the position-specific estimations of the rate of evolution of each residue were then averaged over a window of 21 residues, and the average value was assigned to the central residue of the window (taking into account the limitations on both sides of the protein sequence). the size of the window was taken equal to that used above in section 2.3.the aminoacidic sequences of the nucleocapsid (n) protein and spike (s) glycoprotein from the seven human coronaviruses here considered (sars-cov-2, sars-cov, mers-cov, hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, andhcov-hku1) were compared to assess the position-specific rates of evolution of these two proteins. we then investigated the relationships between the position-specific rates of evolution and the distribution of the epitopes that have previously been suggested to contribute to immune response caused by human sars-cov-2 infections. for this purpose, we considered the sars-cov-2b cell and t cell epitopes derived from n and s proteins by ahmed et al.[ ahmed et al. 2020] . it is worth noting that these epitopes were also considered in another study aiming to provide a molecular structural rationale of the major nucleocapsid protein epitopes for a potential role in conferring protection from sars-cov-2 infection [tilocca et al. 2020 ].we herein focused on the sars-cov-2 n and s proteins because both these two proteins are the main targets of vaccines and antiviral drugs due to their dominant and long-lasting immune response previously reported against sars-cov [ahmed et al. 2020 ].we aligned the homologous protein sequences in the seven human coronaviruses and used the resulting alignment to calculate a conservation profile by using the software rate4site [pupko et al. 2002] (see materials and methods). in fig. 1 , we report the profile obtained for the protein n, together with the functional regions/domains and the sars-cov-2 derived b cell and t cell epitopes. on the top, we report the sars-cov-2 derived b cell epitopes (in blue) and t cell epitopes (in red) by ahmed et al. [ahmed et al. 2020] .in this profile, values greater or less than zero reflect a faster or a slower evolution, respectively. we note that both the rna-binding domain (region 41-186) and the dimerization domain (region 258-361) correspond to regions with values less than zero, implying a higher conservation with respect to the rest of the sequence. although the general trend of the conservation profile hovers around 0, there are some regions where the conservation score is greater than one, indicating that these regions are likely to be under positive selection. interestingly, the location of some of these regions corresponds to the presence of b cell and t cell epitopes (see fig. s1 for the specific location and the sequences of each epitope). these segments could display high amino acid variability because amino acid diversity in these regions allows the virus to evade the host immune system recognition. thus, we can conclude that the source of variability in this regions is likely to be the host immune response. however, it is worth noting the presence of epitopes in highly conserved regions spanning residues 150-200 and 250-315, which may potentially offer long-lasting protection against sars-cov-2.similarly, we study the conservation profile of the protein s and the distribution of the associated epitopes (fig. 2) .the solid blue line represent the position-specific estimations of the rate of evolution of each residue averaged over a window of 21 residues around that position (taking into account the limitations on both sides of the protein sequence) as a function of the distance from the start codon. thin horizontal dotted line represent the threshold value, above which the score is characteristic of disorder (0 for rate4site). on the bottom, with orange rectangles we show the receptor-binding domain and its receptor binding motif to human ace2, the fusion peptide, and the two heptad repeats. on the top, we report the sars-cov-2 derived b cell epitopes (in blue) and t cell epitopes (in red) by ahmed et al. [ahmed et al. 2020 ].on the bottom of fig. 2 in endocytosis and translocation of both the virus and the enzyme into endosomes located within cells [wang et al. 2008; millet and whittaker 2018] . interestingly, both the receptor-binding motif to ace2 (region 437-508) and the fusion peptide (amino acids 788-806iyktppikdfggfnfsqil for sars-cov-2), the segment of the fusion protein that inserts to a target lipid bilayer and triggers virus-cell membrane fusion, are characterized by high rates of evolution.conversely, heptad repeats 1 and 2,which are known to play a crucial role in membrane fusion and viral entry [liu et al 2004] , show lower rates of evolution.moreover, we note that a large percentage of both b cell and t cell epitopes are located in the c-terminal region of spike protein in correspondence of the heptad repeats 1 and 2 in the s2 domain (see fig. s2 for details about the sequences of epitopes and their location along the sequence). thus, at variance with the protein n, we note that spike protein epitopes are mainly located in the protein regions that are characterized by lower rates of evolution. this observation suggests that the immune system has adapted to recognize slowly evolving regions of the s protein.we predicted the structural order-disorder propensity proteins s and n to investigate the relationship between disordered structure and the spatial distribution of the sars-cov-2 derived b cell and t cell epitopes. to estimate the structural stability of a protein from its sequence without relying on the structure, we used the energy estimation approach at the core of the iupred2a disorder prediction method (see materials and methods). in fig. 3 , we show the order-disorder propensity profile for protein n, together with the sars-cov-2 derived b cell and t cell epitopes. the solid blue line represent the position-specific estimations of the structural order-disorder propensity of each residue averaged over a window of 21 residues around that position (taking into account the limitations on both sides of the protein sequence) as a function of the distance from the start codon. thin horizontal dotted line represent the threshold value, above which the score is characteristic of disorder (0.5 for iupred2a). on the top, we report the sars-cov-2 derived b cell epitopes (in blue) and t cell epitopes (in red) by ahmed et al. [ahmed et al. 2020 ]. with two orange rectangles we show the rnabinding domain and the dimerization domain.the rationale to understand the results below is that the score of each residue in the protein sequence ranges from 0 (strong propensity for an ordered structure) to 1 (strong propensity for a disordered structure). in particular, each residue in the sequence is classified as either ordered or disordered depending on whether the iupred2a score is < 0.5 or > 0.5, respectively. both the rna-binding domain and the dimerization domain are predicted to be ordered in a large percentage of their residues, and the vast majority of the b cell epitopes and t cell epitopes overlap these two functional regions of the protein n (see also fig. s3 for details).although disordered protein regions are expected to be under-represented as epitopes due to their sensitive to proteolysis [mitić et al. 2004 ], we note the presence of a large fraction of b-cell and t-cell epitopes in predicted disordered regions.similarly, we then studied the order-disorder propensity profile of s protein (fig. 4) .order-disorder propensity profile of sars-cov-2 protein s. the solid blue line represent the position-specific estimations of the structural order-disorder propensity of each residue averaged over a window of 21 residues around that position (taking into account the limitations on both sides of the protein sequence) as a function of the distance from the start codon. thin horizontal dotted line represent the threshold value, above which the score is characteristic of disorder (0.5 for iupred2a). on the top, we report the sars-cov-2 derived b cell epitopes (in blue) and t cell epitopes (in red) by ahmed et al. [ahmed et al. 2020] . with orange rectangles we show the receptor-binding domain and its receptor binding motif to human ace2, the fusion peptide, and the two heptad repeats 1 and 2.the spike protein is predicted to be ordered along the whole sequence. both the receptor binding domain and the fusion peptide are well-structured. also in this case, we observe that the vast majority of the sars-cov-2 derived b cell and t cell epitopes are located in regions displaying reduced disorder tendency (see also fig. s4 for details).the characterization of evolutionary and structural properties of the spike-surface (s) glycoprotein and the nucleocapsid (n) protein is central for the development of vaccines and antiviral drugs [ahmed et al. 2020] .in this study, we performed a systematic analysis of the rates of evolution and the structural order-disorder propensities of protein n and s, in relation to the location of the sars-cov-2b cell and t cell epitopes derived from n and s proteins by ahmed et al. [ahmed et al. 2020 ].identification of conserved epitopes is of strong interest to help design broad-spectrum vaccines against the present outbreak of sars-cov-2. indeed, high-affinity neutralizing antibodies against conserved epitopes could provide immunity to sars-cov-2 and protection against future pandemic viruses. conservation score measures the evolutionary conservation of an amino acid position in a protein based on the phylogenetic relationships observed amongst homologous sequences. the rate of evolution is not constant among amino acid sites: some positions evolve slowly and are commonly referred to as "conserved", while others evolve rapidly and are referred to as "variable" (see fig. 1 and fig. 2) . the rate variations correspond to different levels of purifying selection acting on these sites . the purifying selection can be the result of geometrical constraints on the folding of the protein into its 3d structure, constraints at amino acid sites involved in enzymatic activity or in ligand binding or, alternatively, at amino acid sites that take part in protein-protein interactions.here, we used rate4site as a method to infer the rate of evolution of each residue in the amino acid sequences of protein n and s. we then analyzed the structural properties of the protein regions where the epitopes are located by studying their order-disorder propensity.we show the presence of both conserved epitopes and non-conserved epitopes in terms of rates of evolution.specifically, the vast majority of the sars-cov-2 derived b cell epitopes and t cell epitopes for the nucleocapsid n protein are located in the rna-binding and dimerization domains. in this case, we found epitopes in both ordered and disordered regions. although we noted that the vast majority of epitopes are located in regions having high rates of evolution, we also identified epitopes in conserved protein regions. similarly, we observed that the sars-cov-2 derived b cell and t cell epitopes for the spike s protein are preferentially located in protein regions that are predicted to be ordered and conserved. we thus suggest that the immune targeting of these conserved epitopes may potentially offer protection against this novel coronavirus.finally, it is worth noting that numerous sars s-protein-specific neutralizing antibodies have been reported to recognize epitopes within the receptor binding domain (rbd) for ace2 receptor [sui et al. 2014 ]. indeed, rbd immunization induced specific antibodies may block this recognition and thus effectively prevent the invasion of the virus. however, we showed here that both the receptor-binding motif to ace2 (region 437-508) and the fusion peptide (region 788-806) are characterized by high rates of evolution, indicating a tendency for these two regions to mutate and, therefore, overcome the host immunity.in conclusion, our results suggest that targeting conserved regions of sars-cov-2 spike and nucleocapsid proteins with less plasticity and more structural constraint should have broader utility for antibody-based immunotherapy, neutralization and prevention of escape variants.the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 has spread widely and rapidly since it was first identified in wuhan, china in december 2019 [1] [2] [3] . its associated disease, covid-19, causes severe respiratory difficulties, with aged patients at higher risk of mortality [1] . at the time of writing, over 3.000.000 confirmed cases and over 200.000 deaths have been registered worldwide. given the dramatic public health emergency, there is a strong and urgent need for new antiviral agents to block human-to-human transmission and to treat infected patients.like other coronaviruses, sars-cov-2 makes use of a densely glycosylated spike (s) protein to gain access into host cells [4, 5] . the s protein forms homotrimers protruding from the viral envelope and binds with high affinity to the host receptor ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), mainly expressed by epithelial cells of the respiratory tract [6] . recently, another human receptor, cd147, has been identified as a possible route of viral entrance, again mediated by the s protein [7] . cd147 is also known as basigin or emmprin, and is a transmembrane glycoprotein that belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily involved in many processes, including tumor development, plasmodium invasion and virus infection [7] . after attachment, the human transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2) cleaves and activates the s protein, thus allowing sars-cov-2 to enter the host cells [8] . compared to sars-cov, an additional protease, possibly furin, is likely involved in priming of the sars-cov-2, since the s protein of sars-cov-2 contains four redundant furin cut pro-arg-arg-ala motifs, which are absent in sars-cov [6] . the s protein contains two subunits, s1 and s2.of these, s1 comprises the receptor binding domain (rbd), which is responsible for recognizing and binding the cell surface receptor ace2 [5] . being essential for infection, the s protein is a promising target for antibodies and vaccines [9] . indeed, preventing attachment of the s protein to either the ace2 or the cd147 receptors would hamper infection at the early viral entry step. based on the structural information available on the complex between the s protein and the ace2 receptor [10] , we engineered a miniaturised mimic of ace2, here named spikeplug. this mini-protein, which we produced in high yields, is highly soluble, conformationally stable and displays nanomolar binding affinity with the s protein of sars-cov-2. given its properties, spikeplug is a promising molecule for the development of treatments based on inhibition of viral entry for different types of coronavirus.we used all available structural information on the interactions between s protein and the human ace2 receptor to design spike interactors. an analysis of the structure of sars-cov-2 complex with ace2, reveals that most hydrogen bonds between protein s and ace2 involve the helix h1 (residues 20-52) and the c-terminal part of helix h2 (residues 56-82) of ace2 [10] . outside this region, an important interaction between the s protein and ace2 is mediated by lys353 of ace2.indeed, the presence of histidine in the place of lysine at position 353 of rat ace2 disfavours viral binding [11] .starting from the region h1-h2 of ace2 as a basic scaffold for the design of a spike interactor, we included a number of mutations to increase its stability and solubility and with the aim to compensate for the missing interactions mediated by residues outside helices h1 and h2. an important issue with peptide or small protein design is their conformational stability, since peptides are usually not folded in solution. therefore, to stabilise this scaffold, we included an extra helix, h3 (residues 91-101) which naturally caps helices h1 and h2 in the ace2 structure, through a cluster of hydrophobic interactions involving val92, leu97 and leu100 of h3, phe28, leu29, phe32 of h1 and ala80 of h2, therefore holding together the two helices h1 and h2 ( figure 1 ). in addition, we noticed that glu37 is important to stabilise the structure of the ace2 receptor by forming a salt bridge interaction with arg393 and a hydrogen bond with the backbone n of lys353 ( figure 2a ). however, this residue forms a weak hydrogen bond with tyr505, which is considered outside the receptor binding motif sars-cov-2 [10] , while it is not engaged in any contact in the complex of ace2 with rbd of the s protein of sars-cov (74% homologous to sars-cov-2 and 83% on the rbd domain) [11] . therefore, we mutated glu37 to an arginine residue and energy minimised using gromacs [12] .as shown in figure 2a , arg37 side chain can form hydrogen bonds with the main chain of gly496 of the s protein ( figure 2a ). as such, the conformation of arg37, also stabilised by a salt bridge with asp38, mimics the interactions with the s protein mediated by lys353 of ace2 ( figure 2a ) [10, 11] .we further engineered this variant by including two mutations, leu 91 to gln and leu 95 to gln, to improve protein solubility by replacing hydrophobic with hydrophilic residues, and hamper aggregation in solution. in ace2, these two residues are located on the opposite side of the s-binding region and form hydrophobic interactions with the core of ace2 to stabilise it ( figure 2b ,c). their mutation to glutamine residues was also motivated by the characteristics of glutamine to further stabilize α helix structures. this recombinant mini-protein, here named spikeplug (table 1, figure   2c ), was successfully over-expressed in e.coli, resulting in a high yield, of 70 mg of pure protein from one litre of bacterial culture. using far-uv cd spectroscopy, we observed that the spectrum of spikeplug is typical of a wellstructured fold with a high α-helical content ( figure 3a) , with typical minima at 208 and 222 nm ( figure 3 ). spectra also showed that folding is fully reversible, with the cd spectrum after refolding fully superimposable to that recorded at 4°c ( figure 3a ). to investigate the heat-induced changes in the protein secondary structure, thermal unfolding curves were recorded by following the cd signal at 208 nm as a function of temperature, thus providing a melting temperature tm of 37°c ( figure   3b ). microscale thermophoresis (mst) analysis was performed to measure the binding affinity of blocking the very first step of sars-cov-2 entry into host cells by hampering the interaction of the s protein with the cellular receptor, represents a highly promising therapeutic strategy against covid-19. we focused on generating a spike interactor that resembles the human ace2 receptor as we argued that such type of molecule would act against all known coronaviruses using this receptor, such as sars-cov and hcov-nl63, as well as other coronavirues possibily emerging in the future. several structures of the complex between the s protein and the ace2 receptor have been recently published. based on this structural information, we designed a mini-protein which embeds all important spike-interacting residues of the ace2 receptor. this miniaturised mimic of ace2, was properly engineered to be stable in solution and to enhance its affinity with the s protein. indeed, an important issue with peptide-or protein-based drugs is its conformational stability. this mini-protein, spikeplug, presents a highly stable α helical conformation in solution and a nanomolar binding affinity to the rbd domain of glycosylated s protein from sars-cov-2. the dissociation constant kd determined here using mst, 40 nm, is in the same range of the affinity measured between the s protein and the ace2 receptor of 14.7 nm [5] . we are currently designing additional variants to further improve binding affinity to the s protein.our basic idea is that mimics of the host receptor have a great advantage over other drugs for several reasons. first, if a novel coronavirus will emerge, able to infect humans through the ace2 receptor, then its s proteins will be recognised and plugged by our receptor mimics ( figure 5) , blocking viral entry. importantly, spikeplug is large enough to cover most important interactions with the s protein, but small enough to bind simultaneously to the three chains of the s protein, thus increasing its potential to hamper interactions with the ace2 receptor ( figure 5 ). another point we considered in our research was drug resistance, as pathogens can easily mutate to escape therapeutic treatments.however, if the virus mutates to escape binding to spikeplug, then it will also likely drop its affinity for the natural ace2 receptor, resulting in suicide action. the validity of such an approach has been demonstrated by the development of the antiretroviral drug enfuvirtide, which blocks the action of the hiv-1 gp41 fusion protein, thus preventing viral entry. as for all antiviral drugs, also enfuvirtide can select for resistance mutations. however, it has been shown that resistance to the drug comes at a serious fitness cost for the virus since it involves structural alterations in an essential component of the virus-host cell fusion complex [13] . hence, targeting the receptor binding domain of sars-cov-2 might also result in a high genetic barrier towards resistance. last, we expect spikeplug to be well tolerated because of its almost complete identity with the correspondent domains of the endogenous human protein.in conclusion, we believe that spikeplug is a first-in class promising lead candidate for the development of molecular targeted therapies against sars-cov-2 and other coronaviruses. figure 5 . cartoon representation of a plugged spike trimer. the structure of the s protein (pdb code 6vxx) [9] is reported in magenta, prune and blue. the position of spikeplug molecules (green surface representation) on the s protein was determined upon superposition of rbd domain of our minimised spikeplug-rbd complex on the rbd domain of the entire s protein (pdb code 6vxx). a and b panels report side and top views, respectively.molecular modelling was initially performed using the cryo em structure of the sars-cov-2 s protein (pdb code 6vsb) [5] and the crystal structure of the complex between ace2 and the rbd domain of sars-cov s protein (pdb code 2ajf) [11] . to complete missing regions in the cryo em structure, we computed the homology model of sars-cov-2 s protein using modeller [14] , and the structure 2ajf as a template. while this work was in progress, the crystal structure of the complex between ace2 and the rbd domain of the s protein from sars-cov-2 (pdb code 6m0j) was released [10] . in this structure, most of the interactions between the s protein and ace2 are conserved.given the high sequence identity between rbd of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (84%), we relied on both structures to take also possible crystal packing bias into account. mutations in the basic scaffold were generated using the software coot [15] . models were energy minimised using the gromacs package [12] . figures were generated with pymol [16] .the gene encoding spikeplug was synthesised and codon-optimised for e. coli expression by geneart® gene synthesis company (invitrogen) and subsequently sub-cloned into petm-13 vector (embl, germany) between the ncoi and xhoi restriction sites. this plasmid endows the placement of a histidine-tag at the c-terminal of the mini-protein. the expression level was optimised after carrying out small scale expression screening using different e. coli available strains. from the screenings, the recombinant protein was successfully over-expressed in e.coli bl21(de3) cells, resulting in a yield of 70 mg of pure protein from one litre of bacterial culture. briefly, an overnight starting culture of 10 ml was prepared for growth in 1l of luria bertani (lb) medium containing 50µg l −1 kanamycin, which was then induced with 0.8 mm of iptg at 16°c for approximately 16 h.the protein was purified by sonicating bacterial cells resuspended in binding buffer (300mm nacl, 50mm tris-hcl, 10 mm imidazole, 2.5% (v/v) glycerol, ph 7.8) containing a protease-inhibitor cocktail (roche diagnostics). the lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 18000 rpm at 4°c and the supernatant was loaded onto 5 ml ni-nta resin (qiagen, milan, italy) equilibrated with binding buffer. after washing with ten volumes of binding buffer, the protein was eluted by adding 300 mm imidazole to the binding buffer. the fractions containing the eluted protein were pooled, concentrated and then loaded onto a superdex 75 hr 10/30 gel-filtration column (ge healthcare) equilibrated with 150mm nacl, 50mm tris-hcl, 2.5% (v/v) glycerol ph 7.8 for a further purification step. the sample eluted in a single peak and was homogeneous, as judged by 18% sds-page analysis. the protein was concentrated using a centrifugal filter (merck millipore) and the concentration was determined by uv absorbance using the corresponding ɛ values (m -1 cm -1 ).cd measurements were carried out using a jasco j-815 cd spectropolarimeter equipped with a the thermophoretic measurements were performed using monolith nt.115 device with red detection channel (nanotemper technologies, munich, germany). recombinant spikeplug was produced in our laboratory, while sars-cov-2 spike rbd was purchased from sino biological inc. for mst recording, the sars-cov-2 spike rbd was labelled with the fluorescent dye nt647 using the protocol suggested from the nanotemper. thermophoretic experiments were conducted using monolith nt.115 (nanotemper technologies, munich, germany). briefly, 90 µl of a 10 µm solution of sars-cov-2 spike protein (rbd) in labelling buffer (130 mm nahco3, 50 mm nacl, ph 8.2) was mixed with 10 µl of 300 µm nt647-n-hydroxysuccinimide fluorophore (nanotemper technologies) and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. spike rbd concentration after labelling (nt647-spike rbd) was measured using a uv-vis spectrophotometer and the labelling efficiency was determined to be about 25%.the mst experiment was performed in a buffer containing 200 mm nacl, 50mm tris-hcl, 0.05% coronaviruses (covs) are enveloped, single positive stranded rna viruses that belong to the subfamily coronavirinae. the genomes of covs are within the range of 26 to 32 kilobases in length and is probably the largest viral rna known (cui et al., 2019; fehr & perlman, 2015) . one of the main features of the coronavirus is that it has spike projections that stand out from the virion surface and resemble to a crown shape, which is the reason of its name.covs are considered causal agents of several diseases in birds and mammals including, bats, bovines, mice, dogs, cats, civets, and camels (fehr & perlman, 2015) . coronaviruses were not considered a highly pathogenic virus until "severe acute respiratory syndrome" (sars) was found in 2002 and 2003 in the chinese province of guangdong (cui et al., 2019) . one decade after, another highly pathogenic coronavirus emerged named as the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov), affecting different countries of the middle east. recently in december 2019 (ji et al., 2020) , a novel cov identified as the pathogen causing outbreaks of illness in the chinese city of wuhan was firstly named as 2019-ncov by the world health organization (who), however, later, it was renamed sars-cov-2 by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv). sars-cov-2 belongs to lineage b b-covs, subgenus sarbecovirus (ji et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020) .covs have four principal proteins in their structure, spike glycoprotein (s), membrane (m), envelope (e) and nucleocapside (n) (fehr & perlman, 2015) . the homotrimers of s protein constitute the spike structure on the virus surface. the spike glycoprotein mediates the binding of the receptor to the host through rbd (fehr & perlman, 2015) . the 3.5 å resolution cryo-em structure of the sars-cov-2 shows that its predominant state of the trimer has one of the three rbds (wrapp et al., 2020) of worthy interest is that the described receptors for coronaviruses depend on the lineage, therefore, for the alpha lineage, aminopeptidase n (apn) has been described as their receptor, while sars-cov and hcovnl63 use angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as their receptor. in the case of mers-cov, it uses the protein cd26 as a host, infecting epitelial bronchial non ciliated cells and type ii pneumocytes (cao et al., 2020; li et al., 2020) . in the case of sars-cov-2 it has been suggested that it could use the enzyme ace2 as host despite the presence of mutations in the binding domain lu et al., 2020) .additionally, spike glycoprotein has a hydrophobic segment (a "fusion loop" or "fusion peptide") and is considered a class i fusion protein (fehr & perlman, 2015) . s protein activation is subjected to a diverse conformational changes and insertion of a putative fusion peptide (fp) into the target membrane (ou et al., 2016) . thus, the study of the spike glycoprotein of the virus and the determination of structural similarity in the binding domains of the receptor of covs (lu et al., 2020) as well as its importance in the fusion process of the replication cycle are relevant.sars-cov-2 has infected a lot of people in about 216 countries, until june 1 st 2020 oms had reported 6, 194, 533 people infected by the sars-cov-2 and 376,320 deaths (https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease/novel-coronavirus-2019), indicating that we are facing a new pandemic (nishiura et al., 2020) . unfortunately, there is no treatment or vaccines. currently, the best preventive strategy to treat diseases from diverse pathogens is vaccine application.vaccine application can prevent some diseases from pathogens. currently, one of the most common strategies is the development of peptide based vaccines (immunogenic regions) by using inmunoinformatics tools (calis et al., 2019) . these peptides, better known as epitopes can form mhc-epitope complexes, driving the activation of an immune response to prevent further infection.major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i and mhc class ii-dependent immune responses are considered important. class i molecules (mhci) are expressed in all nucleated cells and interact with t cell receptors (tcrs) to induce cytotoxic immune system by lymphocytes t. mhcii molecules bind antigenic peptides generated in the endocytic pathway (endosomes and phagosomes) of professional apcs (macrophages, b lymphocytes and dendritic cells) and then present to the cd4 þ t cell receptor (agudelo & patarroyo, 2010) . both types of molecules participate in the immune response to eliminate antigens by different mechanisms and the two mhc molecules show grooves in which peptides are bound. generally peptides within the range of 8 to 11 amino acids size commonly bind to mhci, whereas peptides of 10-20 amino acid size bind mhcii (agudelo & patarroyo, 2010; apostolopoulos et al., 2008) . the mhc allele set present in each chromosome is called mhc haplotype. in this work, the haplotype class i (hla-a ã 2402 and hla-a ã 0301) and haplotype class ii (hla-drb1 ã 0401 and hla-drb1 ã 0701); were included due to their response against viruses, including neutralizing antibody (cd4þ t-cell mediated) and cd8þ t-cell mediated antibodies (humoral and cellular immunity responses, respectively).furthermore, in this work we have used bioinformatics tools to find spike glycoprotein epitopes from sars-cov-2 as possible immunogenic peptides that could be used as possible vaccines in the future. adequate selection of these epitopes through bioinformatics tools will help to induce a more direct and potent immune response. by using this methodology, we have considered some epitopes features which have been suggested in other works, for example, promiscuity, (saraav et al., 2016) , conservation (doytchinova & flower, 2005; sidney et al., 2008) and exposure to the surface of the trimeric spike glycoprotein (liang et al., 2009 ).consensus sequences of spike glycoprotein sars-cov-2 2745 protein and 1702 complete genome sequences reported sequences available on may 18 th 2020 were downloaded from the covid 19 data hub. only complete genomes of high-coverage and the ones that do not have regions with clearly identified amino acids or nucleotides (nn or xx) were sequences included in this study. further multiple alignments were carried out by clustal x program by employing default parameters provided by the program (larkin et al., 2007) . afterwards, complete genome sequence alignment was traduced to protein sequences. sequences with the following ids nc_045512 and yp_009724390.1 were considered as reference sequences (refseq) since they are both available at the covid 19 data hub.from the consensus sequence of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein, hla supertypes molecules of mhci and mhcii proteins were identified. the affinity of each of the peptides to hla-supertype molecules was determined employing the following servers: netmhc 4.0 and netmhcii 2.3. netmhc 4.0 server was used to predict 10 mer peptides which could have affinity to hla supertypes of mhci proteins (andreatta & nielsen, 2016) whereas netmhcii 2.3 (jensen et al., 2018) was employed to predict 25mer peptides which could show affinity for hla sypertypes for mhcii proteins.at the time we prepared the manuscript, there was no crystal structure in protein data bank (rose et al., 2017) , thus, a threedimensional (3d) model of the protein was built employing molecular modeling techniques and the program swissmodel (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/) (waterhouse et al., 2018) . from the ncbi database, the primary sequence of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein (id sequence: yp_009724390.1) was found. this sequence was used to build a 3d model of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein by using the swissmodel software. in this process, the crystal structure (pdb: 6acd) of the sars-cov spike glycoprotein structure was employed as template to build the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. the sars-cov spike glycoprotein has an identity of 76.47% with sars-cov-2. the predictive 3d model from the consensus sequence was named scons and represents the structure of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. furthermore this model was validated using the software pdbsum (laskowski et al., 2018) .additionally, at the time we were preparing the manuscript, two crystal structures that represent distinct conformational states of the spike glycoprotein were released. the pdb id: 6vyb represents the up conformation, whereas pdb id: 6vxx constitutes the down conformation. both of the crystals showed missing fragments, thus, these were completed by employing molecular modeling techniques, using the program modeller 9.23 (script segment.py) (webb & sali, 2016) . after this process, the resultant models were denoted as 6vxx-fill and 6vyb-fill.in the process of epitope selection, only peptides that showed the following features: promiscuity, protein surface exposure and conservation grade were selected.in the pdb database we searched for the structures of the mhc-i-ii proteins; for the hla-drb1 ã 0401 molecule, the crystal with the pdb id: 6bij, for hla-a ã 2402 we used the crystal structure pdb id: 3w0w, and for hla-a ã 0301 we used the structure pdb id: 2xpg whereas for the hla-drb1 ã 0701 molecule, we did not find a structure in the pdb, so we modeled the structure by homology modeling using program modeller 9.23 (webb & sali, 2016) . we employed the crystal structure pdb id: 3pdo as a template, with an identity of 100% for the alpha chain and an identity of 89.90% for the beta chain.three dimensional (3d) structures of the chosen epitopes were built by employing pep-fold 3 server which employs the novo peptide structure prediction strategy based on a hidden markov model derived structural alphabet (sa) (lamiable et al., 2016) .mhci-ii proteins were docked with the chosen epitopes using the cluspro 2.0 server (vajda et al., 2017) . with regards to this program, epitopes can be considered as ligands, whereas molecules such as hla-drb1 ã 0401, hla-a ã 2402, hla-a ã 0301 and hla-drb1 ã 0701 can be determined as receptors. cluspro server employs distinct algorithms which permit to evaluate millions of predictive complexes by taking account their electrostatic energy as well as desolvation parameters (larkin et al., 2007) . subsequently, some mhc-epitope complexes which show the highest affinity were selected.eleven molecular dynamics simulations of the mch ii epitopes-complexes were carried out by means of the namd program and using the known inputs for namd standard md simulations (phillips et al., 2005) . complexes were solvated and the notal charge was neutralized up to a final concentration of 0.15 m nacl.md simulations were performed under periodic boundary conditions (pbc). the method of partcile-mesh ewald (pme) was used for the calculation of the electrostatic potential energy. a no bonded cutoff of 12 å, switchdist of 10 å and pairlistdist of 16 å were implemented for these long range interactions.in the equilibration step, a ntv (constant volume and temperature) protocol was applied. for the production step a ntp (constant temperature and pressure) ensemble was maintained with langevin thermostat (310 k) and anisotropic langevin barostat (1 atm). for these last two steps, a integration time step of 2 femtosecond (fs) was used, and all the bond lengths involved. finally, md simulations were run for about 10 ns. table 1 . promiscuous epitopes. this table describes which molecules of hla supertype show affinity to the epitopes by using netmhc 4.0 and netmhcii 2.3 servers. the affinity is indicated in parenthesis as either weak (wb) or strong (sb). from the predicted alignment of the complete genome sequences, 81 amino acid changes were identified (table s02 and figure 1 (a)) and from the spike glycoprotein sarc cov2 alignment (protein sequences) 164 amino acid changes were found (table s01 and figure 1(b) ). from these results, the mutation snp d614g was identified, interestingly, this mutation is presumably found in the possible region of the s1-s2 binding site near the furin recognition site (r667) for the cleavage of the spike glycoprotein (yin, 2020) .the sequence id yp_009724390.1 was analyzed through the servers netmhc 4.0 server and netmhcii 2.3 to predict immunogenic regions which could induce antibodies against the virus sars-cov-2. both of the servers mentioned predicted more than 200 regions which could have affinity either for mhci or mhcii proteins. after this process, we selected 11 epitopes because these regions showed promising characteristics which include promiscuity (ebrahimi et al., 2019; saraav et al., 2016) conservation, affinity to hla-supertypes (doytchinova & flower, 2005; sidney et al., 2008) and exposure to the surface of the trimeric spike glycoprotein (liang et al., 2009 ).a. promiscuity and affinity revealment to hla-supertypes after submitting peptides in the above mentioned servers, 11 epitopes (table 1) which showed affinity to the mhci and mhcii molecules were identified as promiscuous since they were capable of binding to different molecules, and universal because displayed affinity towards hla-supertype molecules, thus, epitopes would be efficient in different ethnic groups.the conservation grade of the epitopes was also calculated from the two multiple sequence alignments described above. table 2 shows the most conserved epitopes, highlighting: e440-464 (change of the residue in y453f), e627-651 (change of the residue in p631s), e332-370 (changes of the these residues: a348t and v367f), and e694-715 (change of the residues s704l and a706s). finally, the epitopes that showed more variations or higher number of reside changes are e811-848 and e136-167.a. the exposure to the surface of the trimer spike glycoprotein figure 2 shows different trimers on which the epitopes are bound and they exhibited exposed, scons (consensus sequence), 6vxx-fill (down conformation) and 6vyb-fill (up conformation).in the up conformation (6vyb-fill), the e199-225 and e238-262 epitopes are not exposed; however, is the down conformation (6vxx-fill) and in the model of consensus sequence (scons) they are exposed in the surface of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein (figure 3) . it can be also depicted from the figures  3 and 4 that the other epitopes are exposed in the all the figure 5 . docking of the e136-167, e199-225, e238-262 and e627-651 peptides with the hla-drb1 ã 0401 molecules: a) the structural coupling of the e136-167 peptide with a lowest energy of à1903.2 and a frequency of 24.3% was observed. b) e199-225 (green) is schematized with a lowest energy of à1191 and a frequency of 15.4% c) we observe in blue color the peptide e238-264 interacting with the drb1 ã 0401 complex, the peptide e238-262 is posed in the binding cavity to the ligand with a frequency of 36.5% and a lowest energy of à1173.3. d) e627-651 peptide (orange) binds in the binding cavity with a frequency of 37.7% and lowest energy of à1560.3. furthermore, amino acids of the peptides interact with the amino acids in the cavity of hla-drb1 ã 0401. models. specifically, the e481-506 epitope is more exposed in chain b (figure 3 (c) colored in gray) in comparison to the other conformations (figure 3(a, b) ). figure 4 (b) shows down conformation (6vxx-fill) in which e440-464 epitope is more exposed on this structure than in the up conformation or in the scons. based on these results, we suggest that conformational state of the protein could influence the exposure grade of the peptides on the surface.the structure of the molecules mhci and mhcii molecules are quite different. the cavity of mhcii shows different pockets: pocket1 (p1), pocket 4 (p4), pocket 6 (p6) and the pocket 9 (p9) which are known to be crucial in the stability of the mhcii-epitope complex and they may play a role in the recognition of amino acids (agudelo & patarroyo, 2010) . for the case of the mhci complex, six specificity pockets a-f have been found: pocket b (pb) and pocket f (pf) which are known to be relevant in the anchorage process of some molecules on mhci molecules (hinrichs et al., 2010) . in the present work we were focused on searching for other pockets that could be crucial for the stability of mhc-epitope complex.the following peptides e136-167, e199-225, e238-262, e332-370, e153-180, e627-651, e481-506, e694-715, e811-848, and e911-939 were docked on the hla-drb1 ã 0401 molecule, whereas the epitope e440-464 was coupled with hla-drb1 ã 0701. these peptides e136-167, e238-262, e332-370, e153-180, e481-506, e627-651 and e694-715 were coupled with the hla-a ã 2402 allele (liu et al., 2010) , whereas the peptide e811-848 was coupled with the hla-a ã 0301 allele. it is worth mentioning that the chosen alleles were identified as the most frequent among the ethnic groups. on the other side, the capability of the epitopes to form covalent and non-covalent interactions in the cavities of the alleles was also evaluated while highlighting the interactions present in the pockets and crucial for the stability for the mhci-epitope complex. figure 5 (a) and table 3 show the results of the binding of the e136-167 peptide on hla-drb1 ã 0401 allele from which it could be observed that the peptide interacts with residues involved in the p1, p4, p6 and p9 pockets. particularly, the residues q99b (p4), n87a (p6, p9) and n94a (p6, p9) form hydrogen bonds, and specifically d86b (p9) is able to form hydrogen bonds and generate a saline bridge. this residue shows covalent interactions among the p4, p6 and p9 pockets.the e153-180, e627-651 and e911-939 peptides form nonbonded interactions in the crucial pockets for both hla-drb1 ã 0401 and hla-a ã 2402 as depicted in tables 3 and 4. the first peptide e153-180 is able to bind to the p1, p4, p6 and p9 pockets, which are located in the hla-drb1 ã 0401 allele. the pb and pf pockets display electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds with the hla-a ã 2402 allele (figures 6(a) and 8(c) ).on the other side, e136-167 peptide interacts with the allele hla-a ã 2402 (figure 7 (c) and table 4 ). in such complex, hydrogen bonds and saline bridges are present in the crucial pockets pb and pf. thus, suggesting that the e136-167 peptide could form stable complexes with hla-a ã 2402 and hla-drb1 ã 0401 alleles.the affinity of the e627-651_hla-drb1 ã 0401 complex is attributed to three hydrogen bonds in the p1, p4 and p6 pockets and saline bridges sited in the p4 and p6 pockets ( figure 5(d) ). for the e627-651_hla-a ã 2402 complex, the presence of electrostatic interactions such as two hydrogen bonds located in the pocket b of the hla-a ã 2402 allele are depicted (figure 8(a) ). figure 6 . docking of e153-180, e332-370 and e440-464 peptides with mhcii: a) the e153-180 peptide is coupled with the hla-drb1 ã 0401 haplotype to the peptide recognition cavity with a frequency of 16.3% and lowest energy of à1213.6. b) in this section, we observe the e332-370hla_drb1 ã 0401 complex, this peptide is coupled with lowest energy à1361 and a frequency of 20% in the peptide binding cavity. c) e440-464 peptide binds to hla-drb1 ã 0701 haplotype, with a 28.7% frequency and a lowest energy of à1196.7. d) the e481-506 binds to the cavity with a frequency of 28.3% and lowest energy à1545.9 in addition, the amino acids of the peptides that interact with the amino acids of the mhcii molecule cavity are shown.the e911-939 peptide is able to form electrostatic interactions that include four hydrogen bonds, three of which are located in the pf and pb pockets of the e911-939_hla-a ã 2402 complex (figure 9 (b)). figure 9 (c) shows the e911-939_hla-hla-drb1 ã 0401 complex, and its affinity is mediated through hydrogen bonds located in the p4, p6 and p9 pockets.the e332-370 and e440-464 peptides are situated in the rbd region, which corresponds to the binding domain of ace2 receptor (wrapp et al., 2020) making them even more interesting. the e332-370 peptide interacts within the p1, p4 and p6 pockets with the hla-drb1 ã 0401 allele. figure 6 (b) depicts the presence of 3 hydrogen bonds within the p1, p4 and p6 pockets ( table 3 ). the e332-370 peptide interacts with the pb y pf pockets in the hla-a ã 2402 molecule (table  4 ) and the stability of the e332-370_hla-a ã 2402 complex is mainly due to the presence of 7 hydrogen bonds ( figure  7(d) ), of which 6 are located in the pb and pf pockets.interestingly, according to immunoinformatic predictions, the e440-464 peptide does not show affinity to hla-drb1 ã 0401, while e440-464 shows affinity for hla-drb1 ã 0701. from these theoretical predictions, it could be identified that these peptides bind to the p4, p6 and p9 pockets (figure 6 (c) and table 3 ) in which electrostatic interactions, for example, 11 hydrogen bonds and 2 saline bridges, are found. five of the hydrogen bonds are located in the p4, p6 and p9 pockets. the e440-464_hla-a ã 2402 complex is stable because the e440-464 peptide is able to bind to the pb and pf pockets in the hla-a ã 2402 allele (table 4 and figure 8(b) ). this complex shows non-covalent interactions, for example, 5 hydrogen bonds and 3 saline bridges. additionally, there is the presence of one hydrogen bond in the pb pocket. figure 6 (d) shows that the e481-506 epitope binds to the hla-drb1 ã 0401 molecule by non-covalent interactions, and three hydrogen bonds are located at the p4 and p6 pockets. in addition, table 4 shows that the figure 7 . docking of the peptides e694-715, e811-848, e136-167 and e332-370 with the mhc molecules: a) the peptide e694-715 (magenta) binds to the cavity of drb1 ã 0401 with a frequency of 9.8% and a lowest energy of à1319.9 b) the e811-848_drb1 ã 0401 complex is illustrated, where it was determined that the binding frequency of the ligand in this formation is 14.4% and a lowest energy of à1410.8. c) in this section it is shown that the e136-167 peptide binds to the cavity of the hla-a ã 2402 molecule with a frequency of 24.1% and a lowest energy of à1641.4. d) finally in this figure the e332-370 peptide binds to hla-a ã 2402 with a frequency of 19.5% and lowest energy of à1441.4. in addition, the amino acids of the peptides that interact with the amino acids of the mhc molecule cavity are shown.peptide binds to the crucial pockets. the e481_506-hla-a ã 2402 complex (figure 9 (d) and table 3 ) also binds to the crucial pockets (pb and pf) and this binding is mediated seven hydrogen bridges, of which 5 are distributed in the crucial pockets.the e199-225, e238-262, e694-715 and e811-848 epitopes interact with the p1, p4 and p6 pockets of the hla-drb1 ã 0401 allele. the affinity of e199-225 and e238-262 peptides is due to non-covalent interactions, specifically through hydrogen bonds. the four hydrogen bonds which are formed in e199-225 are distributed in the p1, p4, p6 and p9 pockets ( figure 5(b) ). the e238-262 peptide forms 3 hydrogen bonds, two of which are found in the of p1 and p4 pockets ( figure 5(c) ).the binding force of the e694-715 and e811-84 peptides is mediated by non-covalent interactions, including hydrogen bonds and saline bridges. the e694-715 peptide forms 6 hydrogen bonds, 3 of which are positioned in the p1, p4 and p6 pockets, and 4 saline bridges, 3 of which are placed in the p1 and p6 pockets (figure 7(a) ). in the e811-848_hla-drb1 ã 0401 complex, some hydrogen bonds can be depicted in the p1 and p4 pockets as well as saline bridges in the p1 pocket (figure 7(b) ). for the two complexes, e694-715_hla-a ã 2402 and e811-848_hla-a ã 0301, the bound peptides interact with the pb and pf pockets. both of them show the formation of electrostatic interactions, which include hydrogen bonds and saline bridges between the peptides and mhci molecules. in the figures 8(d) and 9 hydrogen bonds can be detected, of which 2 are positioned in the pb and pf pockets, as well as 2 saline bridges, which form the e694-715_hla-a ã 2402 complex.for the e811-848 peptide (figure 9 (a)), it could be seen that it was bound to the hla-a ã 0301 allele while displaying 9 hydrogen bonds, where 6 of them are sited at the pb and pf pockets. additionally, 3 saline bridges where found and two of them are placed in the pb pocket. figure 8 . docking of the e627-651, e440-464, e153-180 and e694-715 peptides with the molecule hla-a ã 2402: a) the peptide e627-651 binds in the binding cavity to the ligand with a frequency of 23.2% and a lowest energy of à1361.4. b) it is shown in the section that the frequency of the e440-464_hla-a ã 2402 complex is 35% and a lowest energy of à1171.3. c) the e153-180 is bound in the recognition cavity with a frequency of 19.7% and a lowest energy of à1252.9. d) e694-715 binds in the hla-a ã 2402 cavity with a lowest energy à1163.3 and a frequency of 11.4%.for these studies, we have focused mainly on the mhc ii molecule since it has been widely described the potential roles of mhc-ii molecules in inducing immune responses to vaccination although the mechanisms are still unknown (eunju et al., 2014; takenaka et al., 2012) . two md simulations correspond to alleles hla-drb10401 and hla-drb10701 and the others to the mhcii-epitopes complexes.we carried out structural analysis of the 11 mhcii-epitopes md simulations by calculating root mean square deviation (rmsd) while considering only the alpha carbon atoms of the mhcii molecules along the 10 ns trajectories. calculations were performed by using carma program (glykos, 2006) . figure 10 shows that rmsd values of all the protein structures are stable after about 2 ns. rmsd values of the mhcii molecules e199-225_hla-drb1 ã 0401, e238-262_hla-drb1 ã 0401, e694-715_hla-drb1 ã 0401 and e811-848_hla-drb1 ã 0401 fluctuate between 1 to 2 å. for the mhcii molecules e136-167_hla-drb1 ã 0401, e332-370_hla-drb1 ã 0401 and e911-939_hla-drb1 ã 0401 rmsd values fluctuate between 1.5 and 2.5 å. rmsd value for the mhcii molecule e440-464_hla-drb1 ã 0701 oscillates between 1 to 3.5 å. finally, mhcii molecules e153-180_hla-drb1 ã 0401, e481-506-hla-drb1 ã 0401 and e627-651_hla-drb1 ã 0401 show rmsd values between 1.5 to 3 å. table 5 shows the binding free energy calculations of the mhcii-epitopes complexes by using mm-pbsa method. from these results, it could be seen that the epitope with the lowest energy (à1810.9855 kcal/mol) corresponds to e811-848_hla-drb1 ã 0401. other epitopes that show low binding free energy values correspond to e694-715_hla-drb1 ã 0401, figure 9 . docking of the e811-848_hla-a ã 0301, e911-939_hla-drb1 ã 0401, e911-939_hla-a ã 2402 and e481-506_hla-a ã 2402 complexes: a) the e811-848 peptide binds to the cavity where the ligand is bound, with a frequency of 11.4% and lowest energy of à1163.3. b) it is observed that the frequency is 20.7% and lowest energy of à1453.9 of the e911-939_hla-a ã 2402 complex. c) the e911-939 peptide binds to the recognition site with a frequency of 31.1% and lowest energy of à1714.4. d) the e481-506_hla-a ã 2402 complex binds to the cavity with a lowest energy of à1613.9 and a frequency of 41.6%.e332-370_hla-drb1 ã 0401 and e136-167_hla-drb1 ã 0401. these epitopes are marked in bold in the table.currently, immunoinformatics represents a useful interface between computer science and experimental immunology. in this work, we have used computational tools, which permitted to find spike glycoprotein epitopes from sars-cov-2 as possible immunogenic peptides. in the process of selection of these epitopes, we considered different epitope features such as promiscuity, conservation and exposure to the surface of the trimeric spike glycoprotein. (liu et al., 2010) . additionally, the e136-167, e199-225, e332-370, e440-464, e481-506, e627-651, e153-180, e694-715 and e911-939 peptides display affinity towards the hla-a ã 2402 allele, which is expressed in different ethnic groups amerindian, arab, asian, aboriginal, austronesina, caucausoid, hispanic, jew, melanesian, mextizo, mixed, mixed ancestry, mulatto, oriental persian, polynesian y siberian (gonzalez-galarza et al., 2011) . overall, all these peptides mentioned in table 1 were identified as promiscuous and showed affinity to hla-supertype. these two properties of peptides are important because they can be recognized by different proteins of both the mchi and mhcii families, providing greater capacity to generate antibodies. in addition, as mentioned in the databases where the frequency of the alleles has been investigated, we found that the hla-drb1 ã 0401 and hla-a ã 2401 alleles are distributed in different ethnic groups, therefore these peptides could be used as a base to design new vaccines for different human races or ethnic groups, which are important because sars-cov-2 is not only in china but also distributed in different countries.from this immunoinformatics analysis, it could be depicted that the e332-370, e627-651, e440-464 and e694-715 epitopes are potential candidates as immunogenic agents because they show four important features: promiscuity, universality (hla-supertype), exposure to the trimer and are conservation grade. interestingly, the mentioned epitopes also showed the lowest binding free energies from the mm- pbsa calculations, indicating also structural stability of the mhcii-epitope complexes. the e440-464 peptide showed not only the mentioned features before, but also a region that can be crucial for the receptor interaction of the target cells, which could also initiate the infection process. additionally, structural alignments have demonstrated that the amino acid leu455 is crucial in the affinity of spike glycoprotein for ace2 protein .on the other hand, epitope 694-715 is located near the peptide fusion (ou et al., 2016) in the trimeric spike glycoprotein, therefore, it could be recognized by antibodies, and this could prevent structural changes that are necessary for the virus to fuse to the endosome membrane and release genome for cycle replication. we suggest that the proposed epitopes by using immunoiformatics tools could interfere in functional regions of the spike glycoprotein, which are crucial in the steps of the virus infection.from in silico studies we identified that epitopes e332-370, e627-651, e440-464 and e694-715 accomplish essential features such as promiscuity, conservation grade, exposure and universality, and also they also form stable complexes with mhcii molecule as observed from the binding free energy calculations (mm-pbsa). on the whole, these characteristics could provide higher probability to generate a specific immune response. the epitope e440-464 is located in the functional region of the spike glycoprotein while the epitope e694-715 is located near this region. on the other hand, the antibodies that could be potentially generated by the epitope e440-464 could recognize the rbm region while avoiding the formation of the spike glycoprotein-ace2 complex, and this could result in the interruption of the virus entry in a host cell. finally, these immunoiformatics tools permitted us to identify epitopes that can be used as potential vaccines in pandemic events. this work proposed a set of epitopes that could be synthesized and assayed in animal model to determine their potential to induce immunogenic responses and even used for future applications such as the design of new epitope vaccines against the sars-cov-2, which could also represent a preventive strategy to stop the pandemic worldwide.the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic has rapidly become an international public health threat, which is causing an inconceivable loss of lives and a severe socio-economic instability worldwide. the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), identified as the causal agent of this disease, is an enveloped single-stranded positive-sense rna virus assigned to the species severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, genus betacoronavirus, family coronaviridae, and was firstly identified from a cluster of pneumonia cases in wuhan (china) on december 2019 (zhou et al., 2020) . on january 30, 2020 the world health organization (who) declared the coronavirus epidemic as a public health emergency of international concern. who raised the threat of the coronavirus epidemic to the world level to "very high" on february 28, and on march 11 the covid-19 was officially declared a worldwide pandemic. on march 13, who stated that europe is becoming the new epicentre of the pandemic.the main cause of the uncontainable spread of this disease is the lack of specific antiviral medications, though several groups in the world are making a lot of effort in trying to speed up this research. although the production of vaccines could be the most powerful weapon against sars-cov-2 spread and invasion, it will take quite a long time to develop and clinically test their safety. thus, as an emergency measure, it would be fundamental to identify or develop antiviral molecules not only to treat the covid-19 but also to prevent its further transmission.although no antiviral treatment has yet been approved, several therapeutic approaches have been proposed, based on the administration of molecules developed for treating other diseases as the combination of lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine (kupferschmidt and cohen, 2020) . preclinical studies also suggested that remdesivir, a rna polymerase inhibitor developed against ebola, could be effective for both prophylaxis and therapy of human coronavirus infections, as suggested by results obtained testing its activity in a rhesus macaque model of mers-cov infection (de wit et al., 2020) . finally, an investigation led by the istituto nazionale tumori, fondazione pascale di napoli is focused on the use of tocilizumab, a humanized igg1 monoclonal antibody, directed against the il-6 receptor and commonly used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, to prevent the cytokine storm syndrome caused by the sars-cov-2 infection (clinicaltrials.gov identifier nct04317092, available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04317092). however, there is no certain evidence that these treatments can be conclusive and that they may also be available for developing countries.it has been confirmed that the sars-cov-2 initiates its entry into host cells by binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) cell receptor via the receptor binding domain (rbd) of its trimeric spike s glycoprotein, triggering a mechanism which mediates the fusion of host and viral membranes (zhou et al., 2020) . the s protein is a trimeric class i fusion protein that exists in a metastable prefusion conformation, which undergoes substantial structural rearrangements to fuse the viral membrane with the host cell membrane (bosch et al., 2003; li, 2016) . the s protein further subdivides into two distinct functional subunits: the s1 subunit is involved in host cell receptor recognition, while the s2 mediates viral fusion to host cells. fusion process is triggered when the s1 subunit binds to a specific cell receptor. receptor binding destabilizes the prefusion trimer, resulting in shedding of the s1 subunit and transition of the s2 subunit to a stable postfusion conformation. the latter is characterized by the assembly of its heptad repeats 1 (hr1) and 2 (hr2) regions into a 6-helix bundle structure that allows viral fusion and entry into host cells (bosch et al., 2003; walls et al., 2017) . the complete three-dimensional structure of the human sars-cov-2 spike in postfusion conformation has not yet been published but recently wrapp and coworkers (wrapp et al., 2020) determined the first 3.5 å resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) structure of the sars-cov-2 s trimer in the prefusion conformation. the study provides biophysical and structural evidences that the sars-cov-2 s protein binds the ace2 receptor with higher affinity than does the closely related severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) s protein. additionally, the authors tested several published sars-cov rbd-specific monoclonal antibodies and found no appreciable binding to the sars-cov-2 s protein, suggesting that antibody cross-reactivity may be limited between the rbds of these two viruses (wrapp et al., 2020) .because of the crucial function of the s protein in the sars-cov-2 infection process, this structural component could represent a target for antibody or small-molecules mediated neutralization, and characterization of the prefusion s structure allowed to get atomic-level information essential to guide the design and development of novel therapeutic molecules.previous data obtained for the human respiratory syncytial virus (hrsv) f protein, a class i viral fusion glycoprotein sharing structural similarities with most of the lower respiratory tract viruses' fusion glycoproteins, indicated that newly generated escape mutations for evaluated smallmolecule fusion inhibitors were clustered inside the central cavity of the f protein in prefusion conformation (battles and mclellan, 2019; lopes et al., 2020; yan et al., 2014) . crystallographic studies later confirmed that these small-molecules bind within the central cavity, contacting from j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f two to three lobes of the trimeric binding pocket and interacting with residues of the fusion peptide and the second heptad repeat (battles et al., 2016) . functional studies involving soluble f proteins (samuel et al., 2015) and membrane-bound f proteins (battles et al., 2016) , further demonstrated that the evaluated small-molecules act as antagonists that prevent the protein transition to the postfusion conformation. to date, all known small-molecule fusion inhibitors bind in the same pocket and have the same mechanism of action (devincenzo et al., 2014; stevens et al., 2018) . these data suggest that, also in the case of sars-cov-2, targeting the central cavity of the spike glycoprotein in prefusion conformation could be a valuable approach for hindering its prefusion to postfusion transition and consequently virus entry into host cells.in this paper, we have used the sars-cov-2 s trimer structure in prefusion conformation (wrapp et al., 2020) to perform a drug repurposing with the aim to find and suggest smallmolecule fusion inhibitors for clinical use. repurposing of drugs already approved, or still in clinical trial, represents an accelerated route for drug discovery, because existing drugs have already established clinical and pharmacokinetic data. we have carried out a virtual screening (vs) simulation using 8.770 fda drugs extracted from the drugbank database (https://www.drugbank.ca/) (wishart et al., 2018) . the structure of the spike glycoprotein (wrapp et al., 2020) has been completed using modeling techniques and used for the identification of available compounds strongly interacting inside its inner cavity (fig. 1) . furthermore, the stability of selected protein-drug complexes has been tested using classical molecular dynamics (md) simulations and the free energy of interaction of these molecules has been finely evaluated through the molecular mechanics energies combined with generalized born and surface area continuum solvation (mm/gbsa) method and per-residue energy decomposition analysis (genheden and ryde, 2015) . finally, alignments between the sequence of the spike glycoprotein used in our study and sequences of all betacoronavirus spike glycoproteins reported in the genbank database (clark et al., 2016) , including recently deposited sequences of different sars-cov-2 isolates, have been carried out to evaluate the presence of variability within the protein region analyzed by this simulation research.as a result, considering the available scientific information, a selected set of drugs has been suggested as sars-cov-2 fusion inhibitors, with the hypothesis that the use of these compounds can be extended also to other related viruses. cryo-em structure of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein in prefusion conformation has been obtained from the pdb database (pdb id: 6vsb) (wrapp et al., 2020) . the trimer structure, composed by three identical monomers (named a, b, c), has been completed modeling nonterminal missing loops using the swiss-model web-server (waterhouse et al., 2018) . the modeling procedure mainly involved regions of the s1 subunit of the glycoprotein (residues: 67-78, 96-98, 143-155, 177-186, 247-260, 329-334, 444-448, 455-490, 501-502, 621-639, 673-686; of monomer a, residues: 67-80, 142-154, 177-186, 210-216, 243-262, 444-448, 455-459, 474-486, 501-502, 621-637, 673-686; of monomer b and residues: 67-79, 96-98, 141-156, 177-186, 246-260, 444-448, 455-459, 472-486, 499-502, 621-640, 673-686 ; of monomer c), and also two regions of the s2 subunit (residues 812-814 and 829-852 of monomers a, b and c).although the modeled regions were not close to the central cavity of the spike glycoprotein, they have been rebuilt since it is not possible to accurately simulate and analyze a protein with missing parts using classical md simulation. in fact, during the simulation, the protein would be subjected to unnatural fluctuations, misleading the subsequent analyses.a drug library, containing 8.770 compounds in mol2 format, has been extracted from the drugbank database v. 5.1.5 (wishart et al., 2018) (https://www.drugbank.ca/). spike glycoprotein receptor and drug structure files have been converted into pdbqt format using the prepare_receptor4.py and the prepare_ligand4.py tools of the mgltools software (morris et al., 2009; sanner, 1999) . seven drug structures have been excluded from the analysis, since prepare_ligand could not generate their pdbqt files, while other eight structures, containing si atoms, have been excluded due to the absence of force-field parameters. the 8755 molecular docking simulations have been performed using an in-house parallelized version of the autodock vina 1.1.2 program (trott and olson, 2010) . one docking simulation, including ten docking runs, has been carried out for each drug. for each docking simulation, the autodock vina program selects 10 binding poses representing the cluster centroids of all the different conformations, generated in each run using the lamarckian genetic algorithm. a box of size x=23.25 å, y=24.38 å, z=25.88 å has been placed over the hr1 internal region (residues 897 to 920) of the spike j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f glycoprotein a monomer. 15 receptor residues side-chains around the selected binding site have been considered as flexible (y904, f906, n907, i909, v911, t912, q913, n914, v915, d1092, q1106, n1108 of the monomer a and r1091, e1092, f1121 of the monomer c). virtual screening has been performed using 3 nodes of the enea hpc cluster cresco6 (ponti et al., 2014) , where each docking simulation took about 30'. for the 10 top-ranking docked compounds, binding energies have been re-evaluated as an average of the best poses obtained in three repeated molecular docking simulations.two sequential molecular docking simulations have been performed for phthalocyanine and hypericin, the two top-ranking drugs, in order to dock a second and a third molecule of the compounds inside the spike glycoprotein binding pocket. the best complexes obtained in the virtual screening first docking run have been used as receptors, converting the structures into pdbqt format using the prepare_receptor4.py tool of the mgltools software (morris et al., 2009; sanner, 1999) . the two molecular docking simulations, each including ten docking runs, have been carried out using the autodock vina 1.1.2 program (trott and olson, 2010) . a box of size x=25.88 å, y=24.00 å, z=25.88 å has been centred over the hr1 internal region of the spike glycoprotein monomer b, selecting 15 residues side-chains around this binding site as flexible (y904, f906, n907, i909, v911, t912, q913, n914, v915, e1092, q1106, n1108 of the monomer b and r1091, e1092, f1121 of the monomer a). finally, a box of size x=24.75 å, y=25.50 å, z=25.88 å has been placed over the hr1 internal region belonging to the monomer c, selecting 15 side chains as flexible (y904, f906, n907, i909, v911, t912, q913, n914, v915, e1092, q1106, n1108 of the monomer c and r1091, e1092, f1121 of the monomer b). binding energies have been calculated as an average of the best poses obtained from three repeated docking simulations.the sequential molecular docking simulations of the 4 top drugs, obtained after re-evaluating the compounds ranking, have been performed for the first three docked compounds applying the same parameters already described for the 3 compounds molecular docking. molecular docking of the fourth compound, instead, was performed using a box of size x=27.00 å, y=30.38 å, z=25.50 å centred between the hr1 internal regions of the monomers b and c, selecting 12 receptor side chains as flexible (i909, t912, e1092, q1106, r1107, n1108, f1109 of the monomer b and y904, r905, n907, q1036, k1038 of the monomer c).all molecular docking simulations took about 30' and have been performed using the enea hpc cluster cresco6 (ponti et al., 2014) .the two complexes obtained with multiple docking of phthalocyanine and hypericin drugs have been simulated using classical molecular dynamics. topologies and coordinates files of the input structures have been generated using the tleap module of the ambertools 19 package (case et al., 2018) . the spike glycoprotein has been parametrized using the ff19sb force field (tian et al., 2020) , while parameters for the two top-ranking drugs have been generated using the antechamber module of the ambertools 19 package (case et al., 2018) and the general amber force field (wang et al., 2004) . each spike glycoprotein, complexed with three drugs, has been inserted into a rectangular box of tip3p water molecules (jorgensen et al., 1983) , setting a minimum distance of 12.0 å from the box sides and neutralizing the solution with 0.15 mol/l of nacl ions. in order to remove unfavourable interactions, structures have been subjected to four minimization cycles, each composed by 500 steps of steepest descent minimization followed by 1500 steps of conjugated gradient minimization. a starting restraint of 20.0 kcal*mol -1 *å -2 has been imposed on protein and ligand atoms and subsequently reduced and removed in the last minimization cycle.systems were gradually heated from 0 to 300 k in a nvt ensemble over a period of 2.0 ns using the langevin thermostat (goga et al., 2012) , imposing a starting restraint of 0.5 kcal*mol -1 *å -2 on each protein and ligand atom, which was decreased every 500 ps in order to slowly relax the system. the systems were simulated in an isobaric-isothermal (npt) ensemble for 2.0 ns, imposing a pressure of 1.0 atm using the langevin barostat (aoki et al., 2004) and fixing the temperature at 300 k. covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms have been constrained using the shake algorithm (ryckaert et al., 1977) . a production run of 30 ns has been performed for both systems with a timestep of 2.0 fs, using the pmemd.cuda module of the amber 18 software (case et al., 2018) .the pme method was used for calculating long-range interactions while a cut-off of 9.0 å has been set for short-range interactions (darden et al., 1993) . system coordinates have been saved every 1000 steps.rmsd analysis for the spike glycoprotein has been performed using the rms module of the gromacs 2019 analysis tool (abraham et al., 2015) . hydrogen bond analyses have been carried j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f out using the hbonds plugin of the software vmd 1.9.3 (humphrey et al., 1996) . generalized born and surface area continuum solvation (mm/gbsa) analysis (genheden and ryde, 2015) and perresidue energy decomposition analysis have been performed over the last 10 ns of both simulations, using the mmpbsa.py.mpi program implemented in the amber18 software (case et al., 2018) on 3 nodes of the enea hpc cluster cresco6 (ponti et al., 2014) . decomposition analysis has been performed on residues surrounding each drug, located within a cut-off distance of 12 å.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fa virtual screening (vs) analysis (drug repurposing) of a set of 8755 structures of approved, experimental and investigational drugs, extracted from the drugbank database (https://www.drugbank.ca/) (wishart et al., 2018) , has been performed in order to find compounds that, entering the inner cavity of the protein and blocking the hr1 conformational changes, could act as spike glycoprotein fusion inhibitors.using an in-house parallelized version of the autodock vina software (trott and olson, 2010) , we evaluated the binding affinity of each drug for one of the three hr1 internal regions of the spike glycoprotein (residues 897-920). the ten top-ranking compounds obtained from the vs analysis are reported in fig. 2 and in table s1 . interestingly, three of these compounds have already been reported as possible antiviral agents, targeting different types of enveloped viruses. in particular, the compounds 31h-phthalocyanine (from here simply referred to as phthalocyanine) and hypericin represent the two most appealing molecules. in fact, they show a significantly high affinity for the hr1 region and, additionally, hypericin and different phthalocyanine derivates have been already shown to prevent human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infections, interfering with the surface glycoprotein gp120 binding and fusion to the host cell (françois et al., 2009; vzorov et al., 2003) . furthermore, these two compounds, or their derivatives, also possess different antiviral activities towards other viral species, as it will be discussed below in section 3.5, and hypericin has also been recently shown to inhibit the infectious bronchitis virus (ibv), an avian coronavirus, acting through a mechanism involving inhibition of the virus-induced cellular apoptosis (chen et al., 2019b) .considering the trimeric structure of the spike glycoprotein, we propose an inhibitory mechanism by which at least three drug molecules could enter and arrange inside the inner cavity, binding the three hr1 internal regions (wrapp et al., 2020) . the concurrent binding of three molecules could generate a strong steric hindrance inside the pocket, preventing the conformational changes of the hr1 regions and hence the formation of the 6-helix bundle stabilizing the postfusion conformation (walls et al., 2017) .in order to evaluate our hypothesis, starting from the top ranking complexes obtained from the vs procedure, we evaluated the binding affinity of two phthalocyanine or two hypericin molecules for the other two hr1 internal regions of the spike glycoprotein. the average binding energies obtained for each molecule have been reported in table 1 . it can be observed that even if the binding affinities of the second and third bound molecules are lower than that obtained for the first, due to the reduction in the conformational space inside the pocket, they still remain particularly suitable for establishing valuable interactions. both compounds contact a high number of residues within the pocket, both from the hr1 internal regions and from upward and downward regions of the spike, creating a connection between the hr1s and surrounding regions of the inner cavity (fig. 3) .phthalocyanine molecules arrange in a symmetric orientation (fig. 3 a-b) , facing the inner cavity of the pocket and establishing 11 hydrophobic interactions with surrounding residues. in particular, stacking interactions are settled between the isoindole groups of phthalocyanines and aromatic side-chains of the protein (fig. 3 b) . the three phthalocyanines can also set up hydrophobic interactions within themselves, increasing the stability of the multiple complex (fig. 3 b-c).hypericin molecules, on the other hand, bind to the hr1 regions in an alternate orientation ( fig. 3 d-e) , establishing 7 hydrophobic interactions and 4 hydrogen bonds with the surrounding residues. the hypericin molecules also set up contacts within themselves, interacting through hydrogen bonds established between their hydroxyl groups (fig. 3 f) . however, the higher affinity showed by phthalocyanine for the hr1 regions suggests that hydrophobic interactions can drive the formation of extremely favourable associations inside the pocket, hypothesis supported by the presence of many aromatic moieties in all the compounds showing higher affinity for this internal cavity (fig. 2 ).it is difficult to hypothesize what the location of these compounds might be in an intermediate or postfusion form of the spike, since complete postfusion structures are still not available. from a recently published incomplete structure of the spike postfusion core (pdb id: 6lxt) (xia et al., 2020) we found that only three of the key cavity residues, involved in interactions with the compounds, are present in the spike 6-helix bundle structure (residues 912-914). nevertheless, since our aim was to prevent virus entry in an earlier phase, directly blocking the prefusion conformation, potential interactions of the drugs with structures in conformational progress were not taken into further consideration since they would not add details to improve our model.to further assess the affinity of the top two drugs for the spike pocket we performed 30 ns md simulations of both multiple docking complexes to accurately evaluate, through the mm/gbsa method (genheden and ryde, 2015) , the interaction energies between the docked compounds and the receptor. mm/gbsa analysis confirmed the high affinity of both drugs for the binding pocket (table 2) showing that the presence of the three hypericin drugs leads to an increase in the hydrogen bonds network established within the pocket. in fact, these molecules can stably set up from 1 to 4 hydrogen bonds (fig. s1 , lower panel), mainly with residues p1090, r1091 and e1092 of the monomer a, n907, e1092 and q1113 of the monomer b and p1090 of the monomer c, as well as with themselves. conversely, polar interactions play only a minor role in phthalocyanine drugs binding to the pocket, since none of the three molecules established valuable hydrogen bonds during the simulation time (fig. s1, upper panel) .per-residue energy decomposition analysis (genheden and ryde, 2015) was also carried out for each drug to highlight the independent contribution of specific pocket residues to the binding, and to dynamically describe the compounds interactions within the pocket (table s2 ). the analysis showed that the drugs can establish from 9 to 15 medium-to high-affinity contacts with residues belonging to the internal hr1 regions (residues 897-920) and with other surrounding residues j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f inside the cavity. this evidence further supports the hypothesis that the drugs may act like anchors between surrounding internal regions. moreover, the results also confirmed that the interactions established by the three phthalocyanines are mostly hydrophobic, while the three hypericin molecules can also set up valuable electrostatic interactions with most of the contacted residues, although the hydrophobic contribution is still much stronger.the md and mm/gbsa results mainly confirmed the interaction patterns described by the molecular docking simulations, indicating that highly stable binding poses have been obtained.these molecules improve the number of hydrophobic interactions inside the pocket, creating a non-polar network and the establishment of strong steric hindrance within the cavity that may likely hamper the subsequent conformational changes leading to the formation of the postfusion conformation of the spike. interestingly, during the simulations it has been also observed that the first and second docked phthalocyanine or hypericin molecules maintain their starting binding poses interacting with the hr1 internal regions of the monomer a and b, while the third added phthalocyanine or hypericin compound moves towards the centre of the pocket, simultaneously contacting all the hr1 internal regions (fig. 4 a-b) . the arrangement of these compounds is expected to create a hard impairment to the motion of the hr1 regions, further contributing to the stabilization of the spike prefusion conformation. in conclusion, all these results sustain the hypothesis that the presence of these drugs inside the pocket may block the hr1 regions, preventing the huge spike conformational changes that permit the sars-cov-2 entry into the target cells.the ranking of the compounds obtained through the vs procedure (table s1 ) has been reweighted based on the literature retrieved for each compound (table 3 , and fig. s2 and s3 ). in particular, we conceived a scoring method which allowed us to evaluate a reformulated ranking based on: a) the obtained binding energies, b) known side effects and physiological effects of compounds and c) previously identified antiviral properties.briefly, side effects have been classified using a score ranging between -5 and +5 (named s(se)).in particular, compounds interfering with other drugs have been penalized, compounds with mild side effects have been assigned a positive score and compounds with unknown effects received a score of 0. physiological effects of the compounds also received a score ranging between -5 and 5 (named s(pe)), according to which compounds with unfavourable physiological activities were negatively weighted, compounds with predicted or evaluated antiviral or anti-inflammatory activity received a value between +1 and +5 and compounds with unknown or neutral physiological activities obtained a value of 0.drugs previously evaluated in clinical trials have been positively weighted, computing the clinical trial score (named s(trials)) as follows:where n at indicates the number of clinical trials where the compound has been evaluated for its antiviral action, n t the number of trials with other clinical targets and n phaseii , n phaseiii , n phaseiv , the number of trial in each experimental phase, as reported on the u.s. national library of medicine (nlm) clinical trials database (https://clinicaltrials.gov). a maximum value of 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 was allowed for the last three terms of the equation to balance the ranking, and a maximum value of 10 for the overall s(trials) score. compounds with antiviral properties, even if directed towards viruses and/or targets different from the one chosen in our research, have been highly favoured in the final score. this property can add an extra value to the drugs, assuming that they could affect other sars-cov-2 targets in addition to the spike cavity. furthermore, in particular in the case of phthalocyanine, the antiviral activity was experimentally observed but the specific viral targets were not completely understood (vzorov et al., 2003) , so the drug interaction within the inner cavity could provide a reason for this still undefined antiviral activity. for the s(antiviral) calculation, compounds with known antiviral activity have been assigned a score of +10, while compounds for which this activity was only hypothesized, but not experimentally assessed, were assigned a score of +5. if the compound showed activity on enveloped viruses, a +5 was added to the score. finally, according to confirmed data, a score between +10 and +20 was given to those compounds for which the reported inhibitory mechanism involved the binding of spike glycoproteins and/or the inhibition of virus fusion to host cells. for each compound, the average binding energy (named s(binding)) has been calculated from three repeated molecular docking simulations and summed to the obtained score. finally, a +2 weight was added to the best 5 compounds obtained from the vs procedure (named s(vs)), as reported in table s1 . concluding, the final score for each compound was computed using the following equation:the reweighted ranking reported in table 3 shows that four top ranking compounds (i.e. phthalocyanine, hypericin, tmc-647055 and quarfloxin), evaluated combining of all the analyzed data, represent the most promising drugs and are suggested as a possible treatment against sars-cov-2 infection.to highlight the clinical potential of the four selected compounds, we provide a brief description for each drug, strictly focused on known or hypothesized antiviral properties. the listed effects, although not directed towards sars-cov-2 and not representing an evidence of interaction with this virus, may contribute to the general antiviral properties of the drug cocktail.-phthalocyanines are dye molecules commonly used for optical, electrical and catalytic applications (sorokin, 2013; wright, 2001) . different phthalocyanine derivatives have also been evaluated for their efficacy as virucidal agents and as fusion inhibitors (françois et al., 2009; vzorov et al., 2003 vzorov et al., , 2007 . given their photochemical properties, pththalocyanines also showed a phototoxic virucidal action on different enveloped viruses (korneev et al., 2019; nikolaeva-glomb et al., 2017; smetana et al., 1994) . concerning the safety of this molecule, no cell toxicity has been reported and an in vivo study on mice showed a good toxicity profile and no tissue damage (styczynski et al., 2015) .-hypericin is a natural naphthodiantrone compound mainly derived from plants of the genus hypericum, particularly hypericum perforatum (st. john's wort), and widely known for its antidepressant activity (jendželovská et al., 2016; karioti and bilia, 2010) . hypericin has also shown specific antiviral activity on a wide variety of enveloped viruses, mainly related on the viral assembly and release inhibition (kubin et al., 2005) . hypericin was also reported to act as a fusion inhibitor for different viruses (kubin et al., 2005; lenard et al., 1993; stevenson and lenard, 1993) .hypericin and h. perforatum extracts have also been shown to inhibit the cellular apoptosis induced by the avian coronavirus ibv, and to attenuate the pathological injuries caused by this virus in the trachea and kidney of chickens (chen et al., 2019a , chen et al., 2019b . side effects reported for st. john's wort treatment include skin rash, dizziness, headache, tiredness and difficult sleep.-tmc-647055 is a macrocyclic indole, non-nucleoside inhibitor of the hepatitis c virus (hcv) ns5b rna-dependent rna polymerase (cummings et al., 2014; devogelaere et al., 2012; . clinical trials have highlighted its promising antiviral properties against hcv, as well as its good safety and tolerability profiles, with limited toxicity and off-target activities. in combination with the tmc435 protease inhibitor (also known as simeprevir) and ritonavir showed an increased antiviral activity against hcv and was well tolerated by patients (bourgeois et al., 2017; vijgen et al., 2017) .-quarfloxin (also known as cx-3543 or itarnafloxin), a fluoroquinolone derivative, is a gquadruplex-binding compound, which has been clinically evaluated for its antineoplastic activity (balasubramanian et al., 2011; drygin et al., 2009 ). this compound was well tolerated by patients during clinical trials and showed a good toxicity profile, but after reaching phase ii it was discarded for poor bioavailability at the action site (balasubramanian et al., 2011) . other g-quadruplex binding compounds were shown to exert antiviral activity against different enveloped viruses and to interact with g-quadruplex regions of viral genomes (lavezzo et al., 2018; ruggiero and richter, 2018) . for this reason, we hypothesize that quarfloxin could possess a potential antiviral activity, despite to our knowledge it has not yet been evaluated.the inhibition mechanism hypothesized in this research strictly depends on the interactions established between the compounds and the hr1 internal residues of the pocket. this mechanism may be consequently extended to other members of the betacoronavirus family depending on the sequence identity found in this region. with this purpose, the sequence of the spike glycoprotein structure used in this study has been first checked against the high number of sars-cov-2 sequences deposited until april 1, 2020 in the genbank protein database (clark et al., 2016) . we retrieved all complete sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein protein sequences from the ncbi virus portal (hatcher et al., 2017) , and performed a similarity search using the blast-p suite of blast (altschul et al., 1990) , selecting only the region spanning from the fusion peptide to the hr1 region (residues from 811 to 984 in the cryo-em structure). the 174-residues long query sequence showed 100% identity towards 345 of the 360 evaluated spike-glycoprotein target sequences, indicating that this region is highly conserved between all the sars-cov-2 isolates sequenced to date. among 15 entries with an identity lower than 100%, two sequences showed only one residue mismatch, located outside of the internal cavity, while the others contained undetermined residues that do not match to the query, explaining the lower identity percentage obtained. we further evaluated whether this region was also conserved among other betacoronaviruses j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (ncbi:txid694002). the submitted query sequence showed a 100% identity with the spike glycoprotein sequence of the bat coronavirus ratg13 (ncbi:txid2709072; genbank accession: qhr63300.2). identity values ranging from about 88 to 95% were observed for different sars-cov isolates and other animal sars-like betacoronaviruses, for a total of 148 different entries. in particular, the internal hr1 region, the specific target of our compounds, is completely conserved among all these 148 hit sequences, except for one residue mismatch observed within the sequence of the palm civet sars coronavirus a013 (ncbi:txid305402; genbank accession: aav97985.1). on the other hand, the spike glycoprotein sequences deposited for the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), another concerning human pathogen, only showed about 52 to 57% sequence identity against the fusion peptide-hr1 sars-cov-2 region, and an identity between about 58 and 67% for the internal hr1 region alone.these results show that our selected compounds, targeting the highly conserved internal regions of the spike, could represent a broad-spectrum treatment active against all sars-cov-2 currently isolated variants, overcoming the concerning mutation potential of this virus.furthermore, the high sequence and structural identities between the sars-cov and the sars-cov-2 spike glycoproteins suggest that these compounds may represent an efficient therapeutic strategy also towards the sars-cov virus. finally, the low sequence identity evaluated between the sars-cov-2 internal hr1 region and that of other members of the betacoronavirus family do not completely exclude the possibility that these drugs may also effectively bind within these nonidentical pockets, since the different pattern of interactions that would be established could perhaps enhance the binding of the compounds, instead of preventing it.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthe results obtained in this research support the hypothesis that the presence of specific compounds inside the inner cavity of the spike glycoprotein in prefusion conformation (fig. 1) could block the hr1 regions, preventing the conformational changes that allow sars-cov-2 entry into target cells. in fact, the hr1 regions are actively involved in the compounds recognition, as confirmed by the mm/gbsa per-residue decomposition analysis (table s2 ). in addition, our hypothesized inhibitory mechanism may explain the unknown mechanisms by which phthalocyanine derivatives have been experimentally shown to induce viral fusion inhibition with no impairment in spike glycoproteins binding to cell receptors (vzorov et al., 2003) .we suggest that an optimal therapeutic strategy could involve the simultaneous administration of a cocktail of inhibitors that could boost up each individual antiviral property. based on the reweighted virtual screening results (table 3) , obtained though the evaluation of the previous literature, we propose the concurrent administration of four compounds: phthalocyanine, hypericin, tmc-647055 and quarfloxin, to be used as a possible antiviral treatment against sars-cov-2. their already observed antiviral properties, although mostly assessed on different targets and viruses, add an important value to these drugs, since they could interfere with sars-cov-2 infection also with other mechanisms independent from the hypothesized inhibition of spike glycoprotein fusion to the host cell.to evaluate the feasibility of the simultaneous localization of different compounds inside the pocket we also performed sequential molecular docking simulations of these four selected drugs (fig. s4) . results showed that the compounds could fit together inside the pocket still maintaining a high affinity for the hr1 regions and the overall binding pocket, where evaluated interaction energies are: phthalocyanine -16.7, hypericin -13.7, tmc-647055 -12.7 and quarfloxin -11.6 kcal/mol. furthermore, the results obtained carrying out the sequence alignments strongly indicate that the hypothesized inhibition mechanism described in this work may be extended to all the identified sars-cov-2 isolates, to the closely related sars-cov, and potentially even to other known members of the betacoronavirus family.concluding, the hypotheses arising from this simulation research can represent a valid contribution to the international community for the modulation of the sars-cov-2 infection, and could also be useful against other enveloped viruses sharing the same infection mechanism. the authors declare they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose. representations have been obtained from the drugbank database (wishart et al., 2018) (https://www.drugbank.ca/). drugs order follows that of table s1 . table 3 . final virtual screening ranking, obtained after applying the reweighting scoring function. binding energies are calculated as an average from 3 repeated molecular docking simulations.neutralizing antibody responses to coronaviruses mainly target the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the trimeric spike. here, we characterized polyclonal iggs and fabs from covid-19 convalescent individuals for recognition of coronavirus spikes. plasma iggs differed in their focus on rbd epitopes, recognition of alpha-and beta-coronaviruses, and contributions of avidity to increased binding/neutralization of iggs over fabs. using electron microscopy, we examined specificities of polyclonal plasma fabs, revealing recognition of both s1 a and rbd epitopes on sars-cov-2 spike. moreover, a 3.4å cryo-em structure of a neutralizing monoclonal fab-spike complex revealed an epitope that blocks ace2 receptor binding. modeling based on these structures suggested different potentials for inter-spike crosslinking by iggs on viruses and that characterized iggs would not be affected by identifieda newly-emergent betacoronavirus, sars-cov-2, resulted in a pandemic in 2020, causing the respiratory disease covid-19 (wu et al., 2020b; . sars-cov-2 is the third zoonotic betacoronavirus to infect humans this century, following sars-cov and mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome) infections in 2003 and 2012 , respectively (de wit et al., 2016 . in addition, four globally-distributed human coronaviruses, hcov-oc43, hcov-hku1 (betacoronaviruses), and hcov-nl63, hcov-229e (alphacoronaviruses), contribute to 15-30% of common colds (fung and liu, 2019) .the neutralizing antibody response to coronaviruses is primarily directed against the trimeric spike glycoprotein (s) on the viral membrane envelope, which serves as the machinery to fuse the viral and host cell membranes (fung and liu, 2019) .coronavirus s proteins contain three copies of an s1 subunit comprising the s1 a through s1 d domains, which mediates attachment to target cells, and three copies of an s2 subunit, which contains the fusion peptide and functions in membrane fusion ( figure 1a ). neutralizing antibody responses against sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov s proteins often target the receptor-binding domain (rbd; also called the s1 b domain) (hwang et al., 2006; pinto et al., 2020; prabakaran et al., 2006; reguera et al., 2012; rockx et al., 2008; walls et al., 2020; walls et al., 2019; widjaja et al., 2019; wrapp and mclellan, 2019; wrapp et al., 2020) .the s proteins of sars-cov-2 (1273 residues, strain wuhan-hu-1) and sars-cov (1255 residues, strain urbani) share 77.5% amino acid sequence identity, while the s proteins of sars-cov-2 and mers-cov (1353 residues, strain emc2012) are more distantly related, sharing only 31% identity (figure 1b, c) . sequence identities between sars-cov-2 and common cold coronavirus s proteins are even lower, varying between 25% and 30%.phylogenetic analyses confirm that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are more closely related to each other than to other human coronaviruses ( figure 1b ). the rbd/s1 b domains show varying degrees of sequence identity, ranging from 13% (sars-cov-2 and hcov-nl63) to 74%here, we analyzed purified igg and fabs from the plasmas of 10 covid-19 convalescent individuals (robbiani et al., 2020) for binding to trimeric s and monomeric rbd/s1 b domains of six human coronaviruses and for neutralization of sars-cov-2 pseudoviruses. to better understand recognition by polyclonal antibodies, we further characterized plasma fabs from two individuals using negative-stain electron microscopy polyclonal epitope mapping (nsempem),showing that the polyclonal landscape includes antibodies that target epitopes in both sars-cov-2 s1 a and rbd domains. in addition, we solved a 3.4 å single-particle cryo-em structure of an s trimer bound to a neutralizing monoclonal antibody (mab), which targeted an epitope on an "up" rbd that overlapped with the rbd epitope identified by nsempem and would sterically block ace2 receptor binding. the epitopes we found represent binding classes defined by distinct vh gene segments, suggesting that these recurring classes are commonly represented in neutralizing antibodies against sars-cov-2 and providing criteria for evaluating neutralizing antibodies raised by infection or vaccination. finally, we used modeling to suggest that distinct binding orientations allow for differential avidity effects, demonstrating the potential for interspike crosslinking that would increase effective affinities for some anti-s iggs on sars-cov-2 virions.coronaviruses and effects of avidity. convalescent plasma samples were collected from individuals who had recovered from covid-19 at rockefeller university hospital (robbiani et al., 2020) . we isolated polyclonal iggs from 10 convalescent plasmas (figure 2 ), most of which had relatively high neutralizing titers (robbiani et al., 2020) , and compared binding of their iggs to purified s proteins from sars-cov-2, sars-cov, mers-cov, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, and hcov-229e ( figure s1 ) by elisa (figure 3 ; figure s2 ). purified plasma iggs recognized s proteins from all coronaviruses evaluated, with weaker binding observed for most samples to mers-cov ( figure 3c ) and common cold coronavirus s proteins ( figure 3d -f). amongst the plasmas (cov21, cov57, and cov107) chosen for further analysis based on elisa ec 50 values and neutralization potencies (robbiani et al., 2020) , iggs from cov21 and cov57showed the strongest binding to the s proteins from sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, with only the elisas against rbd (or s1 b domain for two of the common cold coronavirus s proteins) showed the strongest binding to sars-cov-2 rbd for cov21, followed by cov57 and then cov107 iggs, with the proportion of rbd versus s binding from cov21, cov72, and cov47suggesting that the majority of the igg responses from these plasmas were focused on the rbd, often a target of neutralizing antibodies in coronavirus infections (hwang et al., 2006; pinto et al., 2020; prabakaran et al., 2006; reguera et al., 2012; rockx et al., 2008; walls et al., 2020; walls et al., 2019; widjaja et al., 2019; wrapp et al., 2020) . the only appreciable reactivity with sars-cov or mers-cov rbds was exhibited by cov21 igg, which bound to sars-cov rbd ( figure 3b ). although we cannot determine whether the same iggs are binding all three s proteins, the potential for cross-reactive binding of sars-cov antibodies was demonstrated for a mab that was isolated from a sars-infected individual, which was shown to recognize sars-cov and sars-cov-2 rbds (pinto et al., 2020) . no reactivity with mers-cov rbd was observed for any of the polyclonal iggs ( figure 3c ). for most of the plasma iggs, binding to the rbd was substantially weaker than binding to the counterpart s protein, with the exception of the strong cov21 and cov72 responses to the sars-cov-2 rbd. most of the plasma iggs exhibited stronger binding to the common cold s1 b /rbds than to the counterpart s protein trimers ( figure 3d -f).to assess the degree to which cross-reactive recognition contributed to binding of plasma iggs to rbd/s1 b domains, we repeated the elisas before and after adsorption with sars-cov-2 rbd-coupled resin or a control resin for five plasma igg samples ( figure s3 ). as a positive control, purified plasma iggs incubated with the rbd resin showed little or no sars-cov-2 rbd binding ( figure s3a ). binding to sars-cov rbd was also reduced for the iggs remaining after sars-cov-2 rbd adsorption ( figure s3b) , suggesting cross-reactive recognition consistent with the 78% sequence conservation and structural homology of sars-cov-2 rbd and sars-cov rbd . by contrast, adsorption of plasma iggs with sars-cov-2 rbd resins had only a modest effect on binding to common cold coronavirus rbds ( figure s3d -f), consistent with little to no cross-reactive antibody recognition, likely due to the low conservation between the sars-cov-2 rbd and mild coronavirus rbds (premkumar et al., 2020) . we also note that iggs from control plasmas collected from individuals not exposed to sars-cov-2 exhibited binding to common cold coronavirus rbds that was not affected by sars-cov-2 rbd adsorption ( figure s3 ), again consistent with pre-exposure to mild coronaviruses rather than cross-reactivity with sars-cov-2 rbd.taken together, these results suggest: (i) the binding strengths and patterns of different coronavirus s protein recognition were diverse across covid-19 individual plasma samples, (ii) convalescent covid-19 individuals harbor antibodies to the sars-cov-2 s protein, and to a lesser extent, the rbd/s1 b , as well as reactivity to other coronaviruses, which likely represents previous exposure to common cold viruses, (iii) polyclonal iggs from individual plasma samples that bind to s proteins from mers-cov and/or sars-cov may display cross-reactive recognition, since the plasma donors were unlikely to have been infected with either of these coronaviruses, and (iv) compared to the cov57 and cov107 plasmas, the cov21 igg response had a higher proportion of iggs that recognized the sars-cov-2 rbd.we further evaluated the degree to which avidity effects contributed to the strength of binding of plasma iggs to s proteins and rbds by comparing the binding of bivalent polyclonal iggs to binding of monovalent fabs prepared by proteolytic cleavage of purified polyclonal iggs ( figure   2a -c). differential effects were evident in igg to fab comparisons: most of the sars-cov-2 anti-s response was reduced by at least 50% in the case of monovalent fabs for all plasmas except for cov57 ( figure 3a ). recognition of the other coronavirus s proteins was also diminished for fabs compared to intact iggs ( figure 3b -f). for the three plasma iggs that were further evaluated, the largest relative differences in igg versus fab binding to sars-cov-2 s protein was observed for cov21 and cov107; the igg versus fab binding difference for cov57 was less pronounced ( figure 3a) . notably, the sars-cov-2 s protein and rbd elisas showed that a higher fraction of the cov21 plasma iggs were rbd-specific compared with the cov57 iggs ( figure 3a ,b) (robbiani et al., 2020) .in summary, the elisa data indicate that iggs in plasma samples differ in their degree of focus upon epitopes within the s protein rbd/s1 b domain, their relative amounts of reactivity with sars-cov, mers-cov, and common cold coronaviruses, and the extent to which avidity effects contribute to the tighter binding of polyclonal bivalent iggs as compared with monovalent fabs.plasma iggs are more potent neutralizers than plasma fabs. to investigate whether the bivalent architecture or larger size of iggs compared with fabs resulted in increased neutralization potencies, we measured the potencies of purified plasma iggs and fabs using in vitro neutralization assays ( figure 3g ). sars-cov-2 pseudoviruses were constructed as described (robbiani et al., 2020) , and the concentrations of iggs and fabs at which 50% neutralization was achieved (ic 50 values) were calculated. all tested plasma iggs neutralized pseudoviruses at lower molar concentrations than their fab counterparts, with increased potencies ranging from 6-to 100-fold ( figure 3h ). the increased potency of the iggs compared to fabs was statistically significant (p = 0.0003), even when accounting for two fabs per igg.we conclude that bivalent iggs more effectively neutralize sars-cov-2 pseudoviruses than monovalent fabs.we next used negative stain polyclonal electron microscopy (nsempem) (bianchi et al., 2018; nogal et al., 2020) to map epitopes from fabs isolated from convalescent covid-19 plasma iggs onto the sars-cov-2 s protein. in this method, fabs that bind to an antigenic target are separated from non-binding fabs in a polyclonal mixture by size-exclusion chromatography (sec), fab-antigen complexes are imaged by em, and 2d/3d classification are used to identify predominant epitopes (bianchi et al., 2018; nogal et al., 2020) (figure 2a-c) . typically, fabs are incubated at 1000-2000x above ec 50 values calculated from binding assays (bianchi et al., 2018; nogal et al., 2020) . for most covid-19 plasmas, anti-s fab ec 50 values were estimated to be >50 µg/ml ( figure s2 ). purified polyclonal fabs from cov21 and cov57 plasmas, which had approximate ec 50 s ranging from 20-50 µg/ml, showed stable binding by sec after incubation with sars-cov-2 s trimers ( figure 2d ), and 2d class averages showed evidence of bound fabs ( figure s4 ). by contrast, purified fabs from cov107 (ec 50 >50 µg/ml) showed no evidence of binding to s by sec (data not shown) or in a 3d reconstruction ( figure 4a ).in order to verify that extra densities in nsempem 3d reconstructions corresponded to bound fab(s), we first solved a 3d reconstruction of sars-cov-2 s alone, revealing the expected low resolution structure of the closed, prefusion s trimer ( figure 4a ). a 3d reconstruction of cov21 fabs complexed with s showed recognizable density for the s trimer with a single extending density at the apex of the trimer corresponding to a fab or mixture of fabs bound to a similar epitope ( figure 4a ). the density could be fit to an s trimer with a fab bound to a single rbd in an "up" position using coordinates from sars-cov-2 s trimer structures wrapp et al., 2020) , consistent with elisa results mapping the cov21 response to the sars-cov-2 rbd ( figure 3a ). the complex structure and the position of the cov21 fab(s) closely resembled a structure of sars-cov s bound to a fab from the s230 mab isolated from a sars-cov-infected individual, whose epitope overlaps with the binding site for the ace2 receptor ( figure 4b ). interestingly, s230 binding was shown to functionally mimic ace2 binding, allowing cleavage of the sars-cov s protein to promote fusogenic conformational rearrangements . while the cov21 fab complex reconstruction showed occupancy for one s-protomer with an rbd in an "up" position ( figure   4a ), cov21 fab(s) might also bind analogous to the s230 fab-sars-cov s complex, where classes of s trimer structures were found with two "up"/one "down" and three "up" rbd conformations .moreover, antibody s230, whose binding orientation resembles the position observed in the cov21 fab(s) reconstruction ( figure 4b ), appears to be a member of a class of recurrent anti-sars mabs. it belongs to a set of 10 non-clonally-related vh3-30-derived mabs isolated from an individual infected with sars-cov, which represented 40% of the clones isolated from this individual (pinto et al., 2020) . notably, these clones contained similar 9 amino acid light chain complementarity determining 3 (cdrl3) sequences (consensus sequence mqgthwppt), suggesting that this group of mabs has a common mode of binding, partially dependent on vh3-30-derived features. rbd residues 473 and 475 contacted by the antibody heavy chain in the s230 fab-sars-cov structure are conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2, and these residues are in the vicinity of antibody heavy chain residues n57 and k58. the only vh gene segments encoding the n57/k58 pair are vh3-30, vh3-30-3, and vh3-33 (lefranc et al., 2015) . when mabs were isolated after single b cell sorting using sars-cov-also found in sequenced antibodies from five other donor plasmas (robbiani et al., 2020) . the similarity in binding orientation of cov21 fab(s) with s230 ( figure 4b ) suggests that cov21 fab(s) may be members of the s230 recurrent class. consistent with this hypothesis, 38 of 127 sequenced antibodies from the cov21 donor were derived from vh3-30 or from the closelyrelated vh3-30-3 or vh3-33 vh gene segments (robbiani et al., 2020) .the cov57 fab(s)-s structure also showed recognizable density for both the s trimer and a single bound fab(s) ( figure 4c ). however, in this complex, the s trimer appeared closed with no rbds in an "up" position, and the fab density was not associated with an rbd, but rather with one of the s1 a subunits. in the complex, the fab(s) pointed downwards (i.e., towards the viral membrane) rather that upwards (away from the viral membrane), as seen for the cov21 fab(s). the cov57 fab(s) density was in the vicinity of loops on the s1 a domain that were disordered in sars-cov-2 s trimer structures wrapp et al., 2020) . such flexibility could explain the diffuse nature of the cov57 fab(s) density in this reconstruction.interestingly, characterization of cov57 neutralization showed less correlation with rbdspecific antibodies relative to cov21 (robbiani et al., 2020) , consistent with the elisas ( figure   3a ) and nsempem characterizations ( figure 4c ) reported here. this suggests that targeting s1 regions outside of the rbd may represent alternative modes for potent neutralization of sars-cov-2, as found for neutralizing antibodies isolated after vaccination against mers-cov in nonhuman primates .fab(s)-s reconstruction. although we could not resolve densities for bound fabs in the cov107-s nsempem reconstruction ( figure 4a ), rbd-binding mabs isolated from the cov107 individual were potently neutralizing (robbiani et al., 2020) . we determined a 3.4 å singleparticle cryo-em structure of the complex of one such antibody (c105; ic 50 for neutralization of sars-cov-2 pseudovirus = 26.1 ng/ml) (robbiani et al., 2020) bound to the sars-cov-2 s protein using a 1.8 å crystal structure of the unbound c105 fab for fitting to the cryo-em density ( figure 5 ; figures s5, s6 , tables s1,s2).we found two populations of c105 fab-s complexes: an asymmetric s trimer with two "up" rbds, each of which was complexed with a fab (state 1; 3.4 å resolution), and a symmetric trimer with three rbds in the same "up" conformation, again with each rbd complexed with a fab (state 2; 3.7 å resolution) ( figure 5a ). a subset of complexes in the cryo-em structure of the s230 mab bound to sars-cov s trimer were also found with three "up" rbds bound to three fabs , although in that structure, as in the c105-s structure, the majority of complexes had their rbds in a two "up," one "down" configuration.the c105-rbd interfaces were similar across the five examples in the state 1 and state 2 complex structures ( figure s5 ), thus we describe the interface for one of the fab-rbd complexes in the state 1 complex in which the resolution at the interface was improved by performing a focused, local refinement (punjani et al., 2017) on the c105 fab-rbd portion of the complex ( figure s5 ). the c105 fab uses its three heavy chain complementarity determining regions (cdrh1, cdrh2, and cdrh3) and two of its light chain cdrs (cdrl1 and cdrl3) to rest against the receptor-binding ridge of the rbd ( figure 5b ,c). the majority of the antibody contacts are made by cdrh1, cdrh2, and cdrl1, with cdrh3 and cdrl3 playing minor roles. the c105 epitope overlaps with the cov21 epitope defined by nsempem, which also rests against the receptor-binding ridge in the rbd, although the fab(s) in the cov21 reconstruction are predicted to adopt a different angle of approach ( figure 5d ).interestingly, the c105-rbd interaction closely resembles the rbd interaction of another covid-19 donor-derived neutralizing mab, b38 ( figure 5e ), as reported in a recent fab-rbd crystal structure (wu et al., 2020c) . the heavy chains of both b38 and c105 are derived from the vh3-53 gene segment, whereas the light chain gene segments differ: kv1-9 for b38 (wu et al., 2020c) and lv2-8 for c105 (robbiani et al., 2020) . accordingly, the cdrh1 and cdrh2 loops of both neutralizing antibodies share similar conformations and contribute more to the antibody-rbd interface than their cdrh3 loops ( figure 5b ,e).the common epitope of c105 and b38 overlaps with the binding site for ace2 ( figure 5f ), rationalizing their potent neutralizing activities (robbiani et al., 2020; wu et al., 2020c) . given that cov21 was one of the more potent neutralizing plasmas of the 149 that were collected (robbiani et al., 2020) , the overlap in the c105/b38 neutralizing epitope with the nsempemdefined predominant cov21 epitope suggests that recognition of the cov21 epitope by s230like antibodies would also be neutralizing.2 rbd neutralizing antibodies. the shared binding mode of c105 and b38, both vh3-53derived mabs, defines a recurrent class of anti-sars-cov-2 mabs. among a large set (n=534) of cloned anti-sars-cov-2 mabs against the rbd, those derived from the vh3-53 and vh3-66 gene segments were over-represented (robbiani et al., 2020) . other studies have also reported anti-sars-cov-2 mabs derived from these genes (brouwer et al., 2020; cao et al., 2020; chi et al., 2020; ju et al., 2020; rogers et al., 2020; seydoux et al., 2020; wu et al., 2020c; zost et al., 2020) . the vh3-53 and vh3-66 vh gene segments encode v regions that differ in only one amino acid position, which is not in a cdr. thus, they are functionally equivalent in terms of vgene-determined mab classes. when grouping vh3-53 and vh3-66, over-representation of vh3-53/vh3-66-derived mabs is significant (p = 0.035). a notable characteristic of the vh3-53/vh3-66-derived subset (75 mabs) within the 534 anti-rbd mabs (robbiani et al., 2020 ) was a bias towards shorter cdrh3s (as defined by imgt) (lefranc et al., 2015) : 75% had lengths between 9 and 12 residues, which is significantly different from the human antibody repertoire and from the entire set of 534 anti-sars-cov-2 rbd mabs (two sample kolmogorov-smirnov test, p = 0.017) ( figure s7a ).superposition of vh domains from unrelated antibodies with longer cdrh3s suggests that rbd residues 456-457 and/or 484-493 present a steric barrier limiting the cdrh3 loop lengths that are compatible with this binding orientation ( figure s7b ). a recent report identified a clonallyunrelated group of vh3-53/vh3-66 anti-sars-cov-2 mabs based on cdrh3 sequence similarity to the anti-sars-cov mab m396 (derived from vh1-69) . the structure of a sars-cov rdb complex with m396 (pdb code 2dd8) (prabakaran et al., 2006) shows that mab m396 does not share the b38/c105 binding mode. we suggest that the key feature of the vh3-53/vh3-66 mabs identified based on cdrh3 sequence similarity to m396 is their cdrh3 length (11 residues), and that these mabs will share the c105/b38 binding mode, not the m396 binding mode.identified s mutations are unlikely to affect epitopes revealed by nsempem and singleparticle cryo-em. a recent report suggested that a mutation in the s protein (d614g) increases transmissibility of sars-cov-2 (korber et al., 2020) , and it has been speculated that this substitution, or others found in different s protein sequences, could affect antibody recognition.in cryo-em structures of the prefusion s trimer wrapp et al., 2020) and in our c105-s complex ( figure 5 ), s protein residue d614 is located in s1 d , where it makes contact with an adjacent protomer. to address whether the d614g mutation could affect binding of antibodies, we marked the location of the d614 residues and other residues that were reported to mutate (korber et al., 2020) on the cov21 and cov57 nsempem reconstructions ( figure   6a ,b) and on the c105-s cryo-em structure ( figure 6c ). the rbd-binding cov21 fab(s) and the c105 fab are distant from residue d614 ( figure 6a ,c). therefore, if the cov21 reconstruction reflects the predominant epitope in the cov21 plasma, it is unlikely that antibodies elicited in the cov21 individual would be sensitive to the d614g substitution.indeed, in the absence of large conformational changes, all anti-rbd antibodies, including c105 (robbiani et al., 2020) and b38 (wu et al., 2020c) , would be unaffected by this substitution.mutations in the sars-cov-2 rbd identified by genome sequencing also include n439k, v483a, and v367f (tables s3,s4 ), but the affected residues are not within the epitopes of the cov21 fab(s) ( figure 6a ,b) or the c105 fab ( figure 6c ), and residue 483 is disordered in unliganded s protein structures wrapp et al., 2020) . the predominant epitope in the cov57 fab(s) is closer to s protein d614, but this residue appears to be outside of the binding interface. in addition, mutations in the s1 a domain identified by genome sequencing (tables s3,s4) reside outside of the cov57 fab(s) epitope ( figure 6a ,b). thus in the absence of major conformational changes induced by mutation, the observed substitutions, particularly the d614g mutation, are unlikely to affect antibodies elicited in the cov21 or cov57 individuals or in rbd-binding mabs such as c105.s protein epitopes offer different possibilities for avidity effects during igg and receptor binding. iggs contain two identical antigen-binding fabs, thus offering the opportunity to bind pathogens with regularly-spaced antigenic sites using avidity effects, either through inter-spike crosslinking (binding the same epitope on adjacent spikes) and/or intra-spike crosslinking (binding the same epitope on identical subunits of a single multimeric spike) (klein and bjorkman, 2010) .to address whether inter-spike crosslinking by anti-sars-cov-2 iggs could occur, we modeled adjacent s proteins on a virion membrane assuming a minimum inter-spike separation distance of ~15 nm, as observed from cryo-electron tomography analyses of sars-cov and other coronaviruses (neuman et al., 2011) . by including a bound fab on each s trimer in the position of the cov21 fab(s) from the nsempem reconstruction, we addressed whether the fabs from a single igg could bind to two adjacent s trimers. the modeling predicts that inter-spike crosslinking could occur for the cov21 epitope ( figure 7a ). by contrast, the downward-pointing fab(s) in the cov57-s nsempem reconstruction appear unlikely to participate in inter-spike crosslinking by an igg due to the fab orientations being unable to accommodate an fc in a position that could join two fabs ( figure 7a ). these predictions are consistent with elisa results demonstrating diminished binding for cov21 fabs compared with their igg counterparts, but less pronounced differences for the fab versus igg comparison for cov57 ( figure 2 ).we also used modeling to predict whether avidity effects could influence the interaction between ace2, an integral membrane protein that dimerizes on the target cell surface , with viral s trimers. starting with a cryo-em structure of dimeric full-length ace2 associated with the integral membrane protein b o at1 bound to monomeric sars-cov-2 rbds , we modeled bound s trimers from a cryo-em structure of sars-cov s trimers with two rbds in an "up" position (kirchdoerfer et al., 2018) . assuming there are adjacent ace2-b o at1 complexes in the host cell membrane, the modeling predicts that inter-spike crosslinking is possible ( figure 7b ). in addition, intra-spike cross-linking could also occur if the rbds in a two "up"/one "down" s trimer can each rotate ( figure 7c ). thus if s trimers can indeed crosslink adjacent ace2 receptors or bind as a single trimer to both ace2 subunits in an ace2 dimer, they could take advantage of avidity effects to bind more tightly than predicted from affinity measurements involving the interactions of monomeric ace2 ectodomains to monomeric coronavirus rbds walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) .the possibility of avidity effects during the interactions of sars-cov-2 s with ace2 dimers has implications for interpretation of pseudovirus assays to measure coronavirus infectivity in the presence and absence of potential inhibitors such as antibodies. in vitro neutralization assays for sars-cov-2 include pseudoviruses based on hiv lentiviral particles crawford et al., 2020; ou et al., 2020; robbiani et al., 2020; wu et al., 2020a) , murine leukemia virus retroviral particles (pinto et al., 2020; quinlan et al., 2020) , and vesicular stomatitis virus (hoffmann et al., 2020; nie et al., 2020; xiong et al., 2020) . each of these pseudovirus types could potentially incorporate different numbers of spikes, in which case the overall spike density would alter sensitivity to antibody avidity. in any case, the effects of avidity on igg binding to a tethered antigen are a complicated mixture of intrinsic fab-antigen affinity, kinetics, input concentration, and incubation time (klein and bjorkman, 2010; wu et al., 2005) , thus neutralization potencies of some, but not all, iggs could be affected in in vitro neutralization assays. in addition, when considering therapeutic applications of convalescent plasma or purified antibodies, avidity effects would be difficult to predict given uncertainties about antibody concentrations, viral titers, and potentially different s trimer spacings and densities on infectious virions.our results provide a glimpse into diverse antibody responses in neutralizing plasmas from donors who recovered from covid-19. we characterized polyclonal plasma iggs that exhibited different degrees of cross-reactive binding between s proteins from sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov and showed that the plasma iggs also included non-cross-reactive antibodies against common cold virus rbds. by mapping sars-cov-2 s epitopes targeted by convalescent plasma iggs, we not only observed the expected targeting of the s protein rbd, but also discovered an s1 a epitope outside of the rbd, which may represent an alternative binding site for neutralizing antibodies. the rbd-binding fab(s) from cov21 plasma resembled binding of s230, a vh3-30 mab isolated from a sars-cov patient that blocks ace2 receptor binding (rockx et al., 2008) .we found another type of ace2 receptor-blocking anti-sars-cov-2 antibody in our analysis of a neutralizing mab derived from the cov107 individual. in a 3.4 cryo-em structure of the sars-cov-2 s protein bound to the c105 mab, we observed an epitope on the rbd that overlapped with the binding site for cov21 fab(s) and closely resembled the binding of b38, another mab isolated from a covid-19 patient (wu et al., 2020c) . like c105, b38 is also derived from the vh3-53 vh gene segment. our structural studies support the hypothesis that recurrent classes of anti-sars-cov-2 neutralizing antibodies derived from the vh3-53/vh3-66 and vh3-30 gene segments use the distinct rbd-binding modes of the b38/c105 and s230 mabs, respectively, providing valuable information for evaluating antibodies raised by infection or vaccination by sequences alone. finally, the rbd and s1 a epitopes we mapped by nsempem and singleparticle cryo-em are unlikely to be affected by common mutations in different sars-cov-2 isolates, offering hope that antibody therapeutics and/or a vaccine might be effective in combatting the current pandemic. wrote the paper with contributions from other authors.in connection with this work, the rockefeller university has filed a provisional patent application on which d.f.r. and m.c.n. are inventors. (goddard et al., 2007; pettersen et al., 2004) , displayed as cartoons (s1 a :blue, s1 b : red, s2: gray). (b) for cov21, the volume was best-fitted with pdb 6vyb (sars-cov-2, one "up" s1 b conformation, inset). overlay of pdb 6nb6 showed similarities in s1 b epitope targeting of cov21 fab (orange) and the human sars-cov neutralizing antibody, s230 (magenta, cartoon). (c) cov57 was fitted with pdb 6vxx (closed, prefusion conformation, inset). fab density (green) was focused on the s1 a domain. see also figure s4 . plasmas (indicated by numbers) and control plasmas (indicated as "con") were adsorbed with one of two resins: a sars-cov-2 rbd resin (iggs remaining after rbd adsorption; light gray bars) and a 2g12 mab control resin (iggs remaining after control adsorption; dark gray bars).iggs remaining after adsorption were evaluated in elisas against the indicated rbd (or s1 b )domains. binding of iggs after adsorption to ioma, an antibody against hiv-1 (gristick et al., 2016) , was used as a control in each assay. results are presented as area under the curve (auc; shown as mean and ± s.d. of experiments conducted in duplicate). workflow for classification and refinement of selected particles. briefly, after selection of good 2d class averages, an ab initio model was generated, which was then homogeneously refined before further 3d classification. to improve features at the sars-cov-2 rbd-c105 fab interface, particles from states 1 and 2 were combined and used for non-uniform, focused refinement to yield a state 1-like reconstruction to an fsc=0.143 resolution of 3.4 å. (wu et al., 2020c) . in cases in which there was more than one fab in the crystallographic asymmetric unit, each vh was evaluated and enumerated separately. cdrh3 clashes were defined if any cdrh3 atom was within 2.0 å of an atom in the rbd, a stringent criterion devised to account for not allowing cdr flexibility or different side chain rotamer conformations.further information and requests for reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, pamela bjorkman (bjorkman@caltech.edu).expression plasmids generated in this study for human cov proteins and the c105 fab will be shared upon request. unique reagents generated in this study (purified human plasma iggs and sars-cov-2 pseudoviruses) are available from the lead contact with a completed material transfer agreement. table s4 .samples of peripheral blood were obtained upon written consent from community participants under protocols approved by the institutional review board of the rockefeller university (dro-1006). details on the demographics of the cohort are provided in (robbiani et al., 2020) .hek293t cells for pseudovirus production and hek293t ace2 cells for pseudovirus neutralization experiments were cultured at 37°c and 5% co 2 in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem, gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (fbs, sigma-aldrich) and 5 µg/ml gentamicin (sigma-aldrich). the medium for the 293t ace2 cells additionally contained 5µg/ml blasticidin (gibco). for constitutive expression of ace2 in 293t cells, a cdna encoding ace2, carrying two inactivating mutations in the catalytic site (h374n & h378n) , was inserted into csib (kane et al., 2016) 3' to the sffv promoter (robbiani et al., 2020) . 293t ace2 cells were generated by transduction with csib based virus followed by selection with 5 µg/ml blasticidin (gibco). expi293f cells (gibco) for protein expression were maintained at 37°c and 8% co 2 in expi293 expression medium (gibco), transfected using expi293 expression system kit (gibco) and maintained under shaking at 130 rpm. the gender of the hek293t, hek293t ace2 and expi293f cell lines is female. cell lines were not specifically authenticated.e. coli dh5 alpha (zymo research) for propagation of expression plasmids were cultured at 37˚c in lb broth (sigma-aldrich) with shaking at 250 rpm.to generate pseudotyped viral stocks, hek293t cells were transfected with pnl4-3∆envnanoluc and psars-cov2-s trunc (robbiani et al., 2020) using polyethylenimine, leading to production of hiv-1-based virions carrying the sars-cov-2 s protein at the surface. eight hours after transfection, cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (pbs) andfresh media was added. supernatants containing virions were harvested 48 hours post transfection, filtered and stored at -80°c. infectivity of virions was determined by titration on 293t ace2 cells.convalescent and healthy donor plasma samples were collected and processed as described (robbiani et al., 2020) . the convalescent plasma samples used for nsempem were from residents in the state of new york: cov21 (a 54-year-old male hispanic, collection 27 days after symptom onset), cov57 (a 66-year-old male caucasian, collection 21 days after symptom onset), and cov107 (a 53-year-old female caucasian, collection 29 days after symptom onset).an analysis of sars-cov-2 genomes in the gisaid database with sample collection dates inmarch 2020 (contemporaneous with the infections of individuals cov21, cov57, and cov107) was performed to identify any viral spike mutations likely to have been present. for sars-cov-2 genomes of new york state residents from march 2020, 468 of 475 contained the d614g mutation. thus, based on state-level mutant frequencies, these individuals were likely to have been infected with d614g-containing viruses. all other spike mutations in these genomes had a frequency below 2%. all participants provided written informed consent before sample collection at the rockefeller university hospital and the study was conducted in accordance with good clinical practice. anti-coagulated plasma was heat-inactivated (56˚c for 1 hour) prior to shipment to caltech and stored at 4˚c thereafter (robbiani et al., 2020) .sequence alignments of s proteins and rbd/s1 b domains were made with clustal omega (sievers et al., 2011) . phylogenetic trees were calculated from these amino acid alignments using phyml 3.0 (guindon et al., 2010) and visualized with presto (http://www.atgcmontpellier.fr/presto).codon-optimized nucleotide sequences encoding the sars-cov-2 s ectodomain (residues 16-1206 of an early sars-cov-2 sequence isolate; genbank mn985325.1, which has an asp at position 614, so does not include the d614g mutation described as possibly more transmissible in (korber et al., 2020) ), sars-cov s (residues 12-1193; genbank aap13441.1), mers-cov s (residues 19-1294; genbank jx869059.2), hcov-oc43 (residues 15-1263; genbank aat84362.1), hcov-nl63 (residues 16-1291; genbank aas58177.1), and hcov-229e(residues 17-1113; genbank aak32191.1) were synthesized and subcloned into the mammalian expression ptwist-cmv betaglobin vector by twist bioscience technologies. the s proteins were modified as previously described . briefly, the s ectodomain constructs included an n-terminal mu-phosphatase signal peptide, 2p stabilizing mutations (pallesen et al., 2017) and a c-terminal extension (gsg-renlyfqg (tev protease site), gggsg-yipeaprdgqayvrkdgewvllstfl (foldon trimerization motif), g-hhhhhhhh (octa-histidine tag), and glndifeaqkiewhe (avitag)).for sars-cov-2, mers-cov, hcov-nl63 and hcov-oc43 mutations to remove the s1/s2 furin cleavage site were introduced.codon-optimized nucleotide sequences encoding the receptor binding domain (rbd) for sars-cov-2 (residues 331-524) sars-cov s (residues 318-510), mers-cov s (residues 367-588),hcov-nl63 (residues 481-614), and corresponding s1 b domains for hcov-oc43 (residues 324-632), and hcov-229e (residues 286-434) were synthesized and subcloned into the mammalian expression ptwist-cmv betaglobin vector by twist bioscience technologies. the rbd/s1 b constructs included an n-terminal human il-2 signal peptide and dual c-terminal tags (g-hhhhhhhh (octa-histidine), and glndifeaqkiewhe (avitag)).the s protein and rbd/s1 analyzed by sds-page, and fractions corresponding to s trimers or monomeric rbd/s1 b proteins were pooled and stored at 4˚c.purified cov-s trimers were concentrated to 1 mg/ml and loaded onto a superose 6 increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare life sciences) and passed through a wyatt dawn coupled to a wyatt ut-rex differential refractive index detector (wyatt technology). data were analyzed using astra 6 software (wyatt technology) to determine glycoprotein molecular weights.iggs were purified from plasma samples using 5- plasmids for sars-cov-2 rbd 6xhistag constructs (residues 319-541, genbank: protocol. control resin was made using the same procedure to covalently couple 2g12, an hiv-1 mab, as described (scharf et al., 2015) .for rbd-absorption elisa experiments to evaluate binding of purified polyclonal iggs to cov s1 b /rbd proteins after absorption of sars-cov-2 rbd-specific antibodies, biotinylated-s1 b /rbd proteins were captured on high-capacity streptavidin coated 96-well plates (thermo scientific) by incubating with 100 µl of 2 µg/ml protein solution in tbs overnight at 4˚c. plates were washed 3x in washing buffer and blocked as described above. for absorption of rbdspecific antibodies, 100 µl of sars-cov-2 rbd-coupled resin or 2g12 control resin was incubated with 100 µl of purified iggs diluted to ~1 mg/ml for 1 h at rt with agitation. after incubation, sars-cov-2 rbd-coupled resin was gently centrifuged at 250 x g for 2 min, and non-absorbed iggs were removed by careful pipetting of the aqueous layer above the pelleted rbd-coupled resin. unadsorbed and absorbed igg samples were assayed at a 50 µg/ml starting concentration and seven 4-fold serial dilutions as described above.pseudoviruses based on hiv lentiviral particles were prepared as described (robbiani et al., 2020 purified cov-s trimers were adsorbed to freshly-glow discharged purec 300 mesh carboncoated copper grids (emd sciences) for 1 min followed by 2% uranyl formate (electron microscopy sciences) staining. micrographs were recorded using digital micrograph software on a 120kv fei tecnai t12 equipped with a gatan ultrascan 2k x 2k ccd at a 52,000x nominal magnification.methods were adapted from (bianchi et al., 2018) . to form polyclonal fab-s complexes, 30 µg of sars-cov-2 s trimers were incubated overnight at rt with 30-50 mg/ml fabs in 100 µl total volume (corresponding to ~1000x the ec 50 values for elisas using purified polyclonal fabs), and the complexes were purified by sec on a superose 6 increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare life sciences). fractions containing complexes were pooled and concentrated to 50 µg/ml and passed through a 0.1 µm filter before deposition on 300 mesh carbon-coated copper grids (ted pella) and stained with 1% (w/v) uranyl formate (electron microscopy sciences). grids were imaged at 300 kev using a titan krios transmission electron microscope (thermo fisher) operating at rt, equipped with a k3 direct electron detector (gatan) using serialem 3.7 (mastronarde, 2005) . images were processed in cryosparc v 2.14, and a reference-free particle stack was generated using a gaussian blob picker (punjani et al., 2017) .particles corresponding to s-fab complexes were identified by extensive 2d classification to identify class averages that displayed structural elements interpreted as fab density and also represented different views. extracted particles were used to generate ab initio models in cryosparc that were further processed by 3d classification to separate out complexes and s trimer structures alone. figures were prepared using ucsf chimera (goddard et al., 2007; pettersen et al., 2004) .the fab from the c105 monoclonal igg was expressed, purified, and stored as described (scharf et al., 2015; schoofs et al., 2019 (adams et al., 2010) and cycles of manual building in coot (emsley et al., 2010) ( table s1 ).purified c105 fab was incubated with sars-cov-2 s trimer at a 2:1 molar ratio per protomer on ice for 30 minutes prior to purification by sec on a superose 6 increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare life sciences). fab-s complexes were concentrated to 1.6 mg/ml in trisbuffered saline (tbs). immediately before deposition onto a 300 mesh, 1.2/1.3 auultrafoil grid (electron microscopy sciences) that had been freshly glow-discharged for 1 min at 20 ma using a pelco easiglow (ted pella), 3 µl of complex was mixed with 0.5 µl of a 0.5% w/v octylmaltoside, fluorinated solution (anatrace). samples were vitrified in 100% liquid ethane using a mark iv vitrobot (thermo fisher) after blotting for 3 s with whatman no. 1 filter paper at 22°c and 100% humidity.for the c105-s trimer complex, micrographs were collected on a titan krios transmission electron microscope (thermo fisher) operating at 300 kv using serialem automated data collection software (mastronarde, 2005) . movies were obtained on a gatan k3 summit direct electron detector operating in counting mode at a nominal magnification of 105,000x (superresolution 0.418 å/pixel) using a defocus range of −1 to −2.5 µm. movies were collected with an 1.9 s exposure time with a rate of 22 e -/pix/s, which resulted in a total dose of ~60 e-/å 2 over 40 frames. the 5,940 cryo-em movies were patch motion corrected for beam-induced motion including dose-weighting within cryosparc v2.15 (punjani et al., 2017) after binning super resolution movies by 2 (0.836 å/pixel). the non-dose-weighted images were used to estimate ctf parameters using ctffind4 (rohou and grigorieff, 2015) , and micrographs with power spectra that showed poor ctf fits or signs of crystalline ice were discarded, leaving 5,316micrographs. particles were picked in a reference-free manner using gaussian blob picker in cryosparc (punjani et al., 2017) . an initial 565,939 particle stack was extracted, binned x2(1.68 å/pixel), and subjected to iterative rounds of reference-free 2d classification to identify class averages corresponding to intact s-trimer complexes with well-defined structural features.this routine resulted in a new particle stack of 71,289 particles, which were unbinned (0.836 å/pixel) and re-extracted using a 352 box size. two ab initio volumes were generated, with one class of 61,737 particles revealing an s-trimer complexed with two c105 fabs.particles were further 3d classified (k=3) and heterogeneously refined to reveal two distinct states of the c105-s trimer complex. state 1 (37,615 particles) displaying 2 "up" rbd conformations bound by 2 c105 fabs, and state 2 (14,119 particles) that displayed 3 "up" rbd conformations bound by 3 c105 fabs. particles from states 1 and 2 were separately refined using non-uniform 3d refinement imposing either c1 or c3 symmetry, respectively, to final resolutions of 3.6 å (state 1; 37,615 particles) and 3.7 å (state 2; 14,119 particles) according to the gold-standard fsc (bell et al., 2016) . given that the rbd "up" conformations with c105fabs bound were similar in both states 1 and 2, improvements to the resolution at the rbd-c105 fab interface were achieved by combining the entire particle stack (~52k particles) for a focused, non-uniform 3d refinement. a soft mask was generated from the state 1 volume (5pixel extension, 10-pixel soft cosine edge) for the s1 subunits and c105 fab variable domains.these efforts resulted in a modest improvement in the rbd-c105 fab interface ( figure s6d ), and an overall resolution of 3.4 å according to the gold-standard fsc.initial coordinates were generated by docking individual chains from reference structures into cryo-em density using ucsf chimera (goddard et al., 2007) . the following coordinates were used: sars-cov-2 s trimer: pdb code 6vyb, "up" rbd conformations: pdb code 7bz5, c105fab: this study. these initial models were then refined into cryo-em maps using one round of rigid body refinement followed by real space refinement. sequence-updated models were built manually in coot (emsley et al., 2010) and then refined using iterative rounds of refinement in coot and phenix (adams et al., 2010) . glycans were modeled at possible n-linked glycosylation sites (pngss) in coot using 'blurred' maps processed with a variety of b-factors (terwilliger et al., 2018 ). validation of model coordinates was performed using molprobity and is reported in table s3 .structural figures were made using pymol (version 1.8.2.1 schrodinger, llc) or ucsf chimera (goddard et al., 2007) . local resolution maps were calculated using cryosparc v 2.15 (punjani et al., 2017) .for elisas to evaluate plasma igg binding to human cov proteins, the average signals from independent experiments were plotted as area under the curve (auc) using matlab r2019a(mathworks). the number of replicates for each experiment is described in the figure or table legends. statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05. the comparison of the neutralization potencies of plasma iggs and fabs (n=12) was performed using a two-tailed paired t-test. the frequency of vh3-53/vh3-66 gene usage among the cloned anti-sars-cov-2 mabs in 6individuals was compared to human repertoire v gene usage using a two-tailed t-test with unequal variances as described (robbiani et al., 2020) . the two-sample kolmogorov-smirnov test to compare the cdrh3 length distribution of vh3-53 and vh3-66 mabs (together) with the 534 set or the human repertoire was performed using the quest graph™ kolmogorov-smirnov (k-s) test calculator, aat bioquest, inc, https://www.aatbio.com/tools/kolmogorov-smirnov-k-stest-calculator. the vh3-53/vh3-66 cdrh3 length comparison with the 534 set was also evaluated using the two-tailed mann-whitney u test, which indicated p < 0.001. tables   table s1 . crystallographic data collection and refinement statistics for c105 fab structure (related to figure 5 ). (12-1, ssrl unit cell (å) table s2 . cryo-em data collection and refinement statistics for c105-s complex structure (related to figure 5 ). table s3 . s protein mutations found in different sars-cov-2 isolates (related to figure   6 ).list of sars-cov-2 spike mutations with a frequency ≥ 0.1% in a set of 15335 isolates downloaded from the global initiative for sharing all influenza data (gisaid) sars-cov-2 sequence database on 5/3/20 (elbe and buckland-merrett, 2017; shu and mccauley, 2017) .the genomes were processed with the nextstrain augur pipeline (https://github.com/nextstrain/augur) (hadfield et al., 2018) , using mafft v7.464 (katoh and standley, 2013) for sequence alignment and fasttree (price et al., 2010) to generate a phylogenetic tree. the resulting data were then analyzed with a custom swift program.supplemental table 3 . s protein mutations found in different sars-cov-2 isolates. list of sars-cov-2 spike mutations with a frequency ≥ 0.1% in a set of 15335 isolates downloaded from gisaid on 5/3/20. coronaviruses are enveloped viruses containing positive-sense rna genomes. four human 16 coronaviruses generally cause mild respiratory illness and circulate annually. however, sars- is the causative agent of the ongoing covid-19 pandemic 3, 4 . as of may 26, 2020, the who has 21 reported over 5 million cases and 350,000 deaths worldwide. effective vaccines, therapeutic 22 antibodies and small-molecule inhibitors are urgently needed, and the development of these 23 interventions is proceeding rapidly.coronavirus virions are decorated with a spike (s) glycoprotein that binds to host-cell 25 receptors and mediates cell entry via fusion of the host and viral membranes 5 . s proteins are 26 trimeric class i fusion proteins that are expressed as a single polypeptide that is subsequently 27 cleaved into s1 and s2 subunits by cellular proteases 6, 7 . the s1 subunit contains the receptor-28 binding domain (rbd), which, in the case of sars-cov-2, recognizes the angiotensin-29 converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor on the host-cell surface [8] [9] [10] . the s2 subunit mediates 30 membrane fusion and contains an additional protease cleavage site, referred to as s2′, that is 31 adjacent to a hydrophobic fusion peptide. binding of the rbd to ace2 triggers s1 dissociation, 32 4 essential for the viral life cycle, making the s protein a primary target of neutralizing antibodies 38 and a critical vaccine antigen 12, 13 .a stabilized prefusion conformation of class i fusion proteins is desirable for vaccine 40 development because this conformation is found on infectious virions and displays most or all of 41 the neutralizing epitopes that can be targeted by antibodies to prevent the entry process [14] [15] [16] . we here, we employ structure-based design to increase the yield and stability of the sars- 58 cov-2 spike ectodomain in the prefusion conformation. we report multiple prolines, disulfide 59 bonds, salt bridges, and cavity-filling substitutions that increase expression and/or stability of the 60 6 one common strategy to stabilize class i fusion proteins, such as the spike, is to covalently link a 84 region that undergoes a conformational change to a region that does not via a disulfide bond. for 85 instance, the q965c/s1003c substitution attempts to link hr1 to the central helix, whereas 86 g799c/a924c aims to link hr1 to the upstream helix. these two variants boosted protein 87 expression 3.8-fold and 1.3-fold compared to s-2p, respectively (fig. 2b) . however, the size-88 exclusion chromatography (sec) traces of both variants showed a leftward shift compared to s-89 2p, indicating that the proteins were running larger than expected, which agreed well with 90 negative stain electron microscopy (nsem) results that showed partially misfolded spike particles 91 (fig. s1 ). in contrast, s884c/a893c and t791c/a879c variants eluted on sec at a volume 92 similar to s-2p and were well-folded trimeric particles by nsem (fig. 2e) . these variants link 93 the same α-helix to two different flexible loops that pack against a neighboring protomer (fig.   94   1) . notably, s884c/a893c had two-fold higher expression than s-2p with increased 95 thermostability (fig. 2f) . 96 cavity-filling substitutions and salt bridges can also enhance protein stability without 97 disturbing the overall fold. cavity filling has been particularly helpful in stabilizing the prefusion 98 conformations of rsv f and hiv-1 env 23,24 . we found many cavity-filling and salt bridge 99 designs that improved protein expression compared to s-2p (fig. 2g) . for example, l938f and 100 t961d both produced ~2-fold increases in protein yield and maintained the correct quaternary 101 structure ( fig. 2c and 2e) , although the thermostability of both variants as assessed by 102 differential scanning fluorimetry (dsf) was unchanged compared to s-2p (fig. 2f) . 103 previous successes using proline substitutions inspired us to investigate 14 individual 104 variants wherein a proline was substituted into flexible loops or the n-termini of helices in the 105 fusion peptide, hr1, and the region connecting them (cr) (table 1 and fig. 1g ). as expected, 7 multiple proline variants boosted the protein expression and increased the thermostability (fig.   107 2d and 2f). two of the most successful substitutions, f817p and a942p, exhibited 2.8 and 6.0-108 fold increases in protein yield relative to s-2p, respectively. the a942p substitution further 109 increased the melting temperature (tm) by ~3 °c, and both variants appeared as well-folded 110 trimers by nsem ( fig. 2e and fig. s2 ).multi-substitution spike variants 112 we next generated combination ("combo") variants that combined the best-performing 113 modifications from our initial screen. the combo variants containing two disulfide bonds 114 generally expressed 2-fold lower than the single-disulfide variants, suggesting that they 115 interfered with each other (table s2) . adding one disulfide (s884c/a893c) to a single proline 116 variant (f817p) also reduced the expression level, although the quaternary structure of the spikes 117 was well maintained (table s2 , combo40). the beneficial effect of a disulfide bond was most 118 prominent when combined with l938f, a cavity-filling variant. combo23 (s884c/a893c, 119 l938f) had higher protein yields than either of its parental variants, but the tm of combo23 did 120 not increase compared to s884c/a893c (fig. s3b ). in addition, mixing one cavity-filling 121 substitution with one proline substitution (combo20) increased the expression compared to 122 l938f alone (table s2) . 123 combining multiple proline substitutions resulted in the most drastic increases in 124 expression and stability (fig. 3a) . combo14, containing a892p and a942p, had a 6.2-fold 125 increase in protein yield compared to a892p alone ( fig. 3b and 3c) . adding a third proline, 126 a899p, increased thermostability (+1.2 °c tm) but did not further increase expression (fig. 3c) proline substitutions in s-2p. hexapro expressed 9.8-fold higher than s-2p, had ~5 °c increase 131 in tm, and retained the trimeric prefusion conformation (fig. 3d, fig. s2 ). we focused on this 132 construct for additional characterization. fig. 4c and 4d) . 144 the binding kinetics of hexapro to the human ace2 receptor were comparable to that of s-2p 145 ( fig. 4e and 4f) , with affinities of 13.3 nm and 11.3 nm, respectively. hexapro remained 146 folded in the prefusion conformation after 3 cycles of freeze-thaw, 2 days incubation at room 147 temperature or 30 minutes at 55 °c ( fig. 4g and 4h) . in contrast, s-2p showed signs of 148 aggregation after 3 cycles of freeze-thaw, and began unfolding after 30 min at 50 °c.collectively, these data indicate that hexapro is a promising candidate for sars-cov-2 vaccine 150 development. to confirm that our stabilizing substitutions did not lead to any unintended conformational 153 changes, we determined the cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 s hexapro. from a single 154 dataset, we were able to obtain high-resolution 3d reconstructions for two distinct conformations (table s1) , and the q965c/s1003c substitution led to partially mis-folded spikes (fig. 2b) . 182 inter-protomer disulfides have been shown to improve the trimer integrity of hiv-1 env and the 183 stability of rsv f 25,26 , but the inter-protomeric t961c/s758c substitution ablated expression 184 (table s1 ). in contrast, we found that stabilizing the flexible loops located in the protomer 185 interfaces was beneficial. both s884c/a893c and t791c/a879c increased thermostability or 186 expression and resulted in native trimer structures. it is possible that anchoring flexible loops to a 187 relatively rigid α-helix favors protomer assembly.introducing a salt bridge at the hiv-1 gp120-gp41 interface not only boosted the protein 189 expression but also enhanced the binding of trimer-specific antibodies, suggesting improved 190 retention of the native quaternary structure 24 . based on a similar principle, the t961d 191 substitution was introduced to form an electrostatic interaction with arg765 from a neighboring 192 protomer ( fig. 1) . likewise, the g769e substitution was designed to form an inter-protomeric 193 salt bridge with arg1014. both variants increased expression and resembled well-folded trimeric 194 spikes (fig. 2e, fig. s2 , table s1 ). in addition to salt bridges, filling loosely packed the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 30, 2020. . substitution was designed to fill a cavity formed in part by hr1, the fp and a β-hairpin (fig. 1) . 198 this variant had a 2-fold increase in expression (fig. 2c ) and appeared to have additive effects 199 when paired with disulfide or proline substitutions (table s2) . 200 among the best single-substitution variants we discovered were f817p and a942p (fig hydrophobic residues near the fusion peptide was a concern for influenza ha stem-only 206 designs 32 , and similarly we addressed this issue by replacing the exposed phe817 with pro ( fig.   207 5c). the a942p substitution imposes rigidity to the flexible loop between the connector region 208 and hr1, and is similar to that of the t577p substitution found to be helpful for stabilizing ebola 209 gp 28 .in our hexapro cryo-em dataset we observed a third of the particles in a two-rbd-up 211 conformation. this had not been previously observed for sars-cov-2 spikes until a recent 212 structure was determined of a modified spike containing four hydrophobic substitutions that 213 brought subdomain 1 closer to s2 33 . we hypothesize that the more stable s2 in hexapro allowed 214 us to capture this relatively unstable conformation that may transiently exist prior to triggering 215 and dissociation of s1. this is similar to what was observed in the structures of the mers-cov 216 s-2p spike, where even the 3-rbd-up conformation could be observed 15 . additionally, hexapro 217 spikes were able to retain the prefusion state after freeze-thaws, room temperature storage, and 218 heat stress, which should aid in the development of hexapro spikes as subunit vaccine antigens.hexapro spikes may also improve dna or mrna-based vaccines by producing more antigen table s3 . cryo-em data collection and refinement statistics.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the sars-cov-2 s-2p variant was used as the base construct for all subsequent designs 21 . the pairs of residues with cβ atoms less than 4.6 å apart were considered for disulfide bond designs. 316 we particularly targeted the regions that move drastically during the pre-to postfusion transition 317 such as the fusion peptide, connector region and hr1. salt bridge variants required that the 318 charged groups of the substituted residues were predicted to be within 4.0 å. for residues in 319 loops, a slightly longer distance than 4.0 å was allowed. core-facing residues with sidechains 320 adjacent to a pre-existing internal cavity were examined for potential substitutions to bulkier table s3 . 383 cryo-em data processing 384 motion correction, ctf-estimation and particle picking were performed in warp 34 . particles side view of the trimeric sars-cov-2 spike ectodomain in a prefusion conformation (pdb id: 6vsb). the s1 domains are shown as a transparent molecular surface. the s2 domain for each protomer is shown as a ribbon diagram. each inset corresponds to one of four types of spike modifications (proline, salt bridge, disulfide, cavity filling). side chains in each inset are shown as red spheres (proline), yellow sticks (disulfide), red and blue sticks (salt bridge) and orange spheres (cavity filling). . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.30.125484 doi: biorxiv preprint table s3 . cryo-em data collection and refinement statistics. coronaviruses are enveloped viruses containing positive-sense rna genomes. four human 16 coronaviruses generally cause mild respiratory illness and circulate annually. however, sars- 17 cov and mers-cov were acquired by humans via zoonotic transmission and caused outbreaks 18 of severe respiratory infections with high case-fatality rates in 2002 and 2012, respectively 1,2 . 19 sars-cov-2 is a novel betacoronavirus that emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019 and 20 is the causative agent of the ongoing covid-19 pandemic 3, 4 . as of may 26, 2020 , the who has 21 reported over 5 million cases and 350,000 deaths worldwide. effective vaccines, therapeutic 22 antibodies and small-molecule inhibitors are urgently needed, and the development of these 23 interventions is proceeding rapidly. 24 coronavirus virions are decorated with a spike (s) glycoprotein that binds to host-cell 25 receptors and mediates cell entry via fusion of the host and viral membranes 5 . s proteins are 26 trimeric class i fusion proteins that are expressed as a single polypeptide that is subsequently 27 cleaved into s1 and s2 subunits by cellular proteases 6, 7 . the s1 subunit contains the receptor- 28 binding domain (rbd), which, in the case of sars-cov-2, recognizes the angiotensin- 29 converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor on the host-cell surface [8] [9] [10] . the s2 subunit mediates 30 membrane fusion and contains an additional protease cleavage site, referred to as s2′, that is 31 adjacent to a hydrophobic fusion peptide. binding of the rbd to ace2 triggers s1 dissociation, 32 allowing for a large rearrangement of s2 as it transitions from a metastable prefusion 33 conformation to a highly stable postfusion conformation 6, 11 . during this rearrangement, the 34 fusion peptide is inserted into the host-cell membrane after cleavage at s2′, and two heptad 35 repeats in each protomer associate to form a six-helix bundle that brings together the n-and c- 36 termini of the s2 subunits as well as the viral and host-cell membranes. attachment and entry are 37 essential for the viral life cycle, making the s protein a primary target of neutralizing antibodies 38 and a critical vaccine antigen 12, 13 . 39 a stabilized prefusion conformation of class i fusion proteins is desirable for vaccine 40 development because this conformation is found on infectious virions and displays most or all of 41 the neutralizing epitopes that can be targeted by antibodies to prevent the entry process [14] [15] [16] . we wild-type spike ectodomains 15 , and have been used to determine high-resolution spike structures 51 by cryo-em [17] [18] [19] [20] . importantly, the successful transplantation of this double-proline substitution 52 into the sars-cov-2 spike (sars-cov-2 s-2p) allowed for the rapid determination of high-53 resolution cryo-em structures and accelerated development of vaccine candidates 21, 22 . however, 54 even with these substitutions, the sars-cov-2 s-2p ectodomain is unstable and difficult to 55 produce reliably in mammalian cells, hampering biochemical research and development of 56 subunit vaccines.here, we employ structure-based design to increase the yield and stability of the sars- cov-2 spike ectodomain in the prefusion conformation. we report multiple prolines, disulfide 59 bonds, salt bridges, and cavity-filling substitutions that increase expression and/or stability of the 60 5 spike relative to the s-2p base construct. combining four proline substitutions into a single 61 construct, termed hexapro, stabilized the prefusion state and increased expression 10-fold. a 62 high-resolution cryo-em structure of this variant confirms that the proline substitutions adopt the 63 designed conformations and do not disrupt the conformation of the s2 subunit, thus preserving 64 its antigenicity. this work will facilitate production of prefusion spikes for diagnostic kits and 65 subunit vaccines, and has broad implications for next-generation coronavirus vaccine design.to generate a prefusion-stabilized sars-cov-2 spike protein that expresses at higher levels and 69 is more stable than our original s-2p construct 21 we analyzed the sars-cov-2 s-2p cryo-em 70 structure (pdb id: 6vsb) and designed substitutions based upon knowledge of class i fusion 71 protein function and general protein stability principles. these strategies included the 72 introduction of disulfide bonds to prevent conformational changes during the pre-to-postfusion 73 transition, salt bridges to neutralize charge imbalances, hydrophobic residues to fill internal 74 cavities, and prolines to cap helices or stabilize loops in the prefusion state. we cloned 100 75 single s-2p variants and characterized their relative expression levels (table s1) , and for those 76 that expressed well we characterized their monodispersity, thermostability, and quaternary 77 structure. given that the s2 subunit undergoes large-scale refolding during the pre-to-postfusion 78 transition, we exclusively focused our efforts on stabilizing s2. substitutions of each category 79 were identified that increased expression while maintaining the prefusion conformation ( fig. 1   80 and 2a). overall, 26 out of the 100 single-substitution variants had higher expression than s-2p 81 (table s1) . 82 single-substitution spike variants 83 6 one common strategy to stabilize class i fusion proteins, such as the spike, is to covalently link a 84 region that undergoes a conformational change to a region that does not via a disulfide bond. for 85 instance, the q965c/s1003c substitution attempts to link hr1 to the central helix, whereas 86 g799c/a924c aims to link hr1 to the upstream helix. these two variants boosted protein 87 expression 3.8-fold and 1.3-fold compared to s-2p, respectively (fig. 2b) . however, the size-88 exclusion chromatography (sec) traces of both variants showed a leftward shift compared to s-89 2p, indicating that the proteins were running larger than expected, which agreed well with 90 negative stain electron microscopy (nsem) results that showed partially misfolded spike particles 91 (fig. s1 ). in contrast, s884c/a893c and t791c/a879c variants eluted on sec at a volume 92 similar to s-2p and were well-folded trimeric particles by nsem (fig. 2e) . these variants link 93 the same α-helix to two different flexible loops that pack against a neighboring protomer ( fig.   94   1) . notably, s884c/a893c had two-fold higher expression than s-2p with increased 95 thermostability (fig. 2f) . 96 cavity-filling substitutions and salt bridges can also enhance protein stability without 97 disturbing the overall fold. cavity filling has been particularly helpful in stabilizing the prefusion 98 conformations of rsv f and hiv-1 env 23,24 . we found many cavity-filling and salt bridge 99 designs that improved protein expression compared to s-2p (fig. 2g) . for example, l938f and 100 t961d both produced ~2-fold increases in protein yield and maintained the correct quaternary 101 structure ( fig. 2c and 2e) , although the thermostability of both variants as assessed by 102 differential scanning fluorimetry (dsf) was unchanged compared to s-2p (fig. 2f) . 103 previous successes using proline substitutions inspired us to investigate 14 individual 104 variants wherein a proline was substituted into flexible loops or the n-termini of helices in the 105 fusion peptide, hr1, and the region connecting them (cr) (table 1 and fig. 1g ). as expected, 7 multiple proline variants boosted the protein expression and increased the thermostability (fig.   107 2d and 2f). two of the most successful substitutions, f817p and a942p, exhibited 2.8 and 6.0-108 fold increases in protein yield relative to s-2p, respectively. the a942p substitution further 109 increased the melting temperature (tm) by ~3 °c, and both variants appeared as well-folded 110 trimers by nsem ( fig. 2e and fig. s2 ).multi-substitution spike variants 112 we next generated combination ("combo") variants that combined the best-performing 113 modifications from our initial screen. the combo variants containing two disulfide bonds 114 generally expressed 2-fold lower than the single-disulfide variants, suggesting that they 115 interfered with each other (table s2) . adding one disulfide (s884c/a893c) to a single proline 116 variant (f817p) also reduced the expression level, although the quaternary structure of the spikes 117 was well maintained ( table s2 , combo40). the beneficial effect of a disulfide bond was most 118 prominent when combined with l938f, a cavity-filling variant. combo23 (s884c/a893c, 119 l938f) had higher protein yields than either of its parental variants, but the tm of combo23 did 120 not increase compared to s884c/a893c (fig. s3b ). in addition, mixing one cavity-filling 121 substitution with one proline substitution (combo20) increased the expression compared to 122 l938f alone (table s2) . 123 combining multiple proline substitutions resulted in the most drastic increases in 124 expression and stability (fig. 3a) . combo14, containing a892p and a942p, had a 6.2-fold 125 increase in protein yield compared to a892p alone ( fig. 3b and 3c) . adding a third proline, 126 a899p, increased thermostability (+1.2 °c tm) but did not further increase expression (fig. 3c) . in tm, and retained the trimeric prefusion conformation (fig. 3d, fig. s2 ). we focused on this 132 construct for additional characterization. the binding kinetics of hexapro to the human ace2 receptor were comparable to that of s-2p 145 ( fig. 4e and 4f) , with affinities of 13.3 nm and 11.3 nm, respectively. hexapro remained 146 folded in the prefusion conformation after 3 cycles of freeze-thaw, 2 days incubation at room 147 temperature or 30 minutes at 55 °c ( fig. 4g and 4h ). in contrast, s-2p showed signs of 148 aggregation after 3 cycles of freeze-thaw, and began unfolding after 30 min at 50 °c.collectively, these data indicate that hexapro is a promising candidate for sars-cov-2 vaccine 150 development.to confirm that our stabilizing substitutions did not lead to any unintended conformational 153 changes, we determined the cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 s hexapro. from a single 154 dataset, we were able to obtain high-resolution 3d reconstructions for two distinct conformations (table s1) , and the q965c/s1003c substitution led to partially mis-folded spikes (fig. 2b) . 182 inter-protomer disulfides have been shown to improve the trimer integrity of hiv-1 env and the 183 stability of rsv f 25, 26 , but the inter-protomeric t961c/s758c substitution ablated expression 184 (table s1 ). in contrast, we found that stabilizing the flexible loops located in the protomer 185 interfaces was beneficial. both s884c/a893c and t791c/a879c increased thermostability or 186 expression and resulted in native trimer structures. it is possible that anchoring flexible loops to a 187 relatively rigid α-helix favors protomer assembly.introducing a salt bridge at the hiv-1 gp120-gp41 interface not only boosted the protein 189 expression but also enhanced the binding of trimer-specific antibodies, suggesting improved 190 retention of the native quaternary structure 24 . based on a similar principle, the t961d 191 substitution was introduced to form an electrostatic interaction with arg765 from a neighboring 192 protomer (fig. 1) . likewise, the g769e substitution was designed to form an inter-protomeric 193 salt bridge with arg1014. both variants increased expression and resembled well-folded trimeric 194 spikes (fig. 2e, fig. s2, table s1 ). in addition to salt bridges, filling loosely packed 195 hydrophobic cores that allow the protein to refold can help stabilize the prefusion state, as shown 196 by previous cavity-filling substitutions in rsv f and hiv-1 env 14, 23, 27 . here, the l938f 197 substitution was designed to fill a cavity formed in part by hr1, the fp and a β-hairpin (fig. 1) . 198 this variant had a 2-fold increase in expression (fig. 2c ) and appeared to have additive effects 199 when paired with disulfide or proline substitutions (table s2) . 200 among the best single-substitution variants we discovered were f817p and a942p (fig   201   2) . by further combining them with a892p and a899p substitutions, we generated the highest hydrophobic residues near the fusion peptide was a concern for influenza ha stem-only 206 designs 32 , and similarly we addressed this issue by replacing the exposed phe817 with pro ( fig.   207   5c ). the a942p substitution imposes rigidity to the flexible loop between the connector region 208 and hr1, and is similar to that of the t577p substitution found to be helpful for stabilizing ebola 209 gp 28 .in our hexapro cryo-em dataset we observed a third of the particles in a two-rbd-up 211 conformation. this had not been previously observed for sars-cov-2 spikes until a recent 212 structure was determined of a modified spike containing four hydrophobic substitutions that 213 brought subdomain 1 closer to s2 33 . we hypothesize that the more stable s2 in hexapro allowed 214 us to capture this relatively unstable conformation that may transiently exist prior to triggering 215 and dissociation of s1. this is similar to what was observed in the structures of the mers-cov table s3 . cryo-em data collection and refinement statistics.the sars-cov-2 s-2p variant was used as the base construct for all subsequent designs 21 pairs of residues with cβ atoms less than 4.6 å apart were considered for disulfide bond designs. 316 we particularly targeted the regions that move drastically during the pre-to postfusion transition 317 such as the fusion peptide, connector region and hr1. salt bridge variants required that the 318 charged groups of the substituted residues were predicted to be within 4.0 å. for residues in 319 loops, a slightly longer distance than 4.0 å was allowed. core-facing residues with sidechains 320 adjacent to a pre-existing internal cavity were examined for potential substitutions to bulkier table s3 . cryo-em density of each reconstruction is shown and colored according to local resolution, with a central slice through the density shown to the right. is a well-known virus escape mechanism, it is critical to understand the mechanism by which these dynamics are controlled.structural studies of the β-cov s-protein have focused primarily on a soluble, ectodomain construct with and without stabilizing proline mutations (2p). this includes structures for sars-2 1,2 , sars 3-7 , mers 3, 8 , and other human 9,10 and murine 11 β-cov ectodomains. structures for the sars and mers ectodomains revealed the presence of one and two rbd 'up' states with a three rbd 'up' state observed in the mers ectodomain demonstrating the breadth of rbd configurations available to the spike. interestingly, these states were not observed in the human β-covs hku1 and oc43 nor in a murine β-cov, suggesting mutations in the spike protein can confer dramatic differences in the propensity of the rbd to sample its available conformational space.our quantitative examination of the available β-cov s-protein structures recently revealed the s1 and s2 subunit domains of different β-cov viruses occupy a diverse array of configurations 12 . based upon this analysis we predicted the s-protein conformation was particularly sensitive to mutations at the interfaces between domains and subunits. indeed, mutations at these sites had major impacts on the configuration of the protein, especially on the rbd 'up'/'down' distribution 12 . while these and other studies 13, 14, 15 have demonstrated the role of protein-protein contacts in determining the conformation of the s-protein, the influence on rbd configuration of glycosylation at or near interfacial domain regions is poorly understood. like other class i viral fusion proteins, the β-cov s-proteins are heavily glycosylated, obscuring the spike surface and limiting the targetable area for immune responses. a recent site-specific analysis of the glycosylation patterns of the sars-2 s-protein revealed extensive variation in the glycan type, indicating marked differences in processing enzyme accessibility at each site 16 . together, the wide variation in spike conformation coupled with the presence of glycans adjacent to the rbd suggests, among the many factors affecting the rbd position, glycosylation patterns may provide a means by which to control its conformational equilibrium.in this study we have investigated the potential for two sars-2 ntd glycans in close proximity to the rbd to influence the conformational distribution of the rbd 'up' and 'down' states. analysis of the available sars-2 'up' state structures suggested n165 and n234 glycans may interact with the 'up' state rbd acting as both direct stabilizers of the 'up' state and as steric blocks to transitions to the 'down' state. we combined binding studies by surface plasmon resonance, with structural studies using negative stain electron microscopy (nsem) and single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) to define shifts in the 'up'/'down' state equilibrium in glycan-deleted mutants of the sars-2 spike ectodomain. together, our results demonstrate that rbd proximal glycans can influence the propensity of the s-protein adopt multiple configurations suggesting a means for viral escape and therefore the need to consider non-rbd neutralizing responses in vaccine design.in order to establish whether glycans may indeed alter the rbd orientation, we first examined the sars-2 glycan density at positions 165 and 234 in the cryo-em maps from three previously published sars-2 structures 2,17 . in the 'down' state, the n234 glycan resides in a cleft formed by the ntd and rbd (supplemental figure 1a ) while in the 'up' state, it occupies the region of the rbd 'down' state ( figure 1a ). this suggests that the solvated 'up' state configuration is preferred and must be shifted in order to accommodate the 'down' state.the presence of this glycan may act as a hinderance to 'up'-to-'down' state transitions while sterically hindering the 'down' state by limiting rbd to ntd packing. an additional glycan at n165 residing toward the apical position of the ntd is in close proximity to the rbd and therefore may also influence the rbd position. unlike the n234 glycan, the position of the n165 glycan presents no apparent restriction to the rbd positioning in the 'down' state (supplemental figure 1b) . however, clear density for this glycan is observed occupying the region the rbd rest in the closed state, potentially forming interactions with the 'up' state rbd ( figure 1a ). this suggests this glycan may act to stabilize the rbd 'up' state. alternatively, its presence near the rbd in the 'down' state may confer a degree of stability to the fully closed state. together, these observations combined with our recent results suggesting remarkable conformational sensitivity to mutations suggest these glycans may act to stabilize the observed rbd 'up'/'down' equilibrium. we next asked whether rbd proximal ntd glycans occur in other β-covs for which high-resolution structural data is available. for this, we examined structures for mers, sars, oc43, hku1, and a murine β-cov s-protein ectodomains (pdb ids 5w9h, 6crw, 6ohv, 5i08, and 3jcl, respectively), identifying three mers (n155, n166, and n236), two sars-2 synonymous sars (n158 and n227), and one oc43 (n133), and two hku1 (n132 and n19) glycosylation sites proximal to their respective rbds ( figure 1b) . no rbd adjacent glycosylation sites were observed in the murine s-protein. while the mers and sars glycans display similar extensions into the rbd space in the one 'up' state, the lack of 'up' state structures for oc43 and hku1 precludes examination of their rbd adjacent ntd glycans in the absence of the rbd. however, the hku1 n132 and oc43 n133 glycans extend upward, away from the rbd suggesting these glycans are unlikely to exert a strong influence on the rbd conformation (supplemental figure 1c) . interestingly, while cryo-em reconstructions for sars-2, mers, and sars yield 'up' state rbds, these states were not reported for any of the oc43, hku1, or murine datasets. together, these observations suggest rbd proximal ntd glycans may indeed affect the conformational distribution of 'up'/'down' rbd states.in order to examine the extent to which the n234 and n165 glycans influence the conformational distribution of the s-protein, we produced di-proline (2p) stabilized 8 s-protein ectodomain 2 n234a and n165a mutants. the protein yields after streptactin purification were 2.0 mg and 0.8 mg per 1l culture supernatant, respectively for the n234a and the n165a mutant. (supplemental figures 2 and 3) . to assess the reactivity of the glycan-deleted spike ectodomain mutants to the ace-2 receptor, we tested binding of the spike to an ace-2 ectodomain construct bearing a c-terminal mouse fc tag immobilized on an anti-fc surface. spr binding assays showed that while the n165a mutant displayed ~10-20% increased binding levels to the unmutated construct, the n234a mutant showed a decrease of ~50-60% (figure 2a and supplemental figure 2b ). because ace-2 binding requires the rbd be in the up position, the spr data suggests that the n165a mutant displays more 'up' (or open) states, whereas the n2345a mutant displays more 'down' (or closed) states.we next examined the 'up'/'down' state distribution of both mutants via negative stain electron microscopy (nsem). heterogenous classification of the n234a mutant particles revealed a dramatic shift from a ~1:1 'up' v. 'down' state distribution in the unmutated 2p 12,17 to a ratio of ~1:4 in the down state ( figure 2a) .remarkably, the n165a mutant shifted the distribution in the opposite direction, displaying a higher propensity to adopt rbd "up" states yielding a ~2:1 -'up' state to 'down' state ratio, with ~ 17% of the "up' population being a 2-rbd "up" class ( figure 2a) . together, the ace-2 binding and the nsem results demonstrated that both ntd n-glycan deletions have distinct impacts on the rbd distribution. high-resolution cryo-em structures of the n-glycan deleted constructs indicates modest perturbation to s-protein configuration we next turned to cryo-em for high resolution structure determination to visualize the impact of the glycan deletions on the local and global configuration of the s-protein domains. we collected and processed 7,269 and 8,068 images for the n165a and n234a mutant, respectively, to yield particle stacks cleaned by 2d classification and multiple rounds of ab initio classification and heterogenous refinement in cryosparc 18 using 20 å low pass filtered 'up' state and 'down' state maps generated from available sars-2 structures. initial maps for high resolution refinement were generated from sorted particles via ab initio reconstruction (supplemental figures 4 and 5). the resulting particle distribution for the n234a mutant was predominantly 'down' with a minor, ~6%, 'up' state population while that of the n165a mutant was ~50% 'down' and 50% one 'up' as was observed for the unmutated spike previously 12, 17 . we were unable to identify a particle subset corresponding to a two 'up' state in the cryo-em dataset. the 'up'/'down' state populations obtained via nsem for unmutated 12 , glutaraldehyde fixed sars-2 s-protein ectodomain match the previously observed cryo-em distribution 17 . here, using the same approach, we find that these distributions are dramatically and differentially shifted with mutation of either the n165 or n234 to alanine with the spr, nsem, and cryo-em distribution tracking in the same direction with the exception of the n165a cryo-em particles for which a two rbd 'up' state was not observed. considering the concordance between the spr and nsem results, this may be due to particle processing and the potential for a relatively disordered 'up' state rbds in the two 'up' state with the glycan deletion.we next examined the high-resolution details of the cryo-em maps. refinement of the n234a mutant 'down' state using c3 symmetry resulted in a 3.0 å map with coordinates fit to this map yielding a structure aligning to the unmutated 2p structure (pdb id 6vxx) with a ~0.6 å rmsd. alignment of the s2 subunit revealed the structures to be nearly identical in these regions (rmsd ~0.4 å). examination of the ntd to rbd interface using this alignment revealed a shift of the ntd toward the rbd ( figure 3a-d) . weak density for the n165 glycan was observed suggestive of an overall similar position relative to that observed previously ( figure 3b and c) the one rbd 'up' state map was refined to 4.8 å resolution using c1 symmetry. comparison of the one rbd 'up' state structure fit to this map to its unmutated counterpart (pdb id 6vyb) suggests a slight shift of the rbd with the n234a mutation ( figure 3e and f). however, the limited resolution of this structure limits close examination of this movement. nevertheless, density for the n165 glycan was observed for the ntd adjacent to figure 6b ). this shift in not observed in either of the other two ntds indicating the ntd shift is sensitive to s1 and s2 subunit arrangements (supplemental figure 6c and d). the 1-'up' rbd resides in largely the same position as that of the unmutated spike with only minor differences due potentially to the lower relative resolution of this region ( figure 4e-h) . density for the n234 glycan was not observed for any of the protomers, consistent with the 'down' state map. together, the results of the n165a and n234a structural analysis results suggest that these two glycans play a differential role in influencing the sars-cov-2 rbd arrangement, shifting the ntd toward or away from the adjacent rbds.viral fusion proteins are often heavily glycosylated with the sars-2 s-protein being no exception.though decorated with fewer glycans than the hiv-1 envelope protein, with 22 glycans per protomer 16 , the sars-2 spike is well shielded from immune surveillance. the sars-2 spike protein has proven remarkably sensitive to domain-domain interfacial mutations [12] [13] [14] [15] 19 which led us to ask whether glycans near the ntd-rbd interface might also impact the configuration of the spike. here, we have investigated the role of two ntd context can be expected. indeed, a recent report for a detergent solubilized, full-length sars-2 spike suggested greater stability in the 'down' state rbd 21 . yet our experimental results revealing the role of the n165 and n234 glycans in modulating the conformational landscape of the s protein, taken together with the findings from the computational analysis performed in the context of the full-length spike 20 , and our analysis of the rbd-proximal ntd glycans of diverse β-covs (figure 1 ), provides strong support for a role for these glycans in controlling the virion bound s-protein conformation and dynamics. the differences in glycosylation in this region in different cov spikes could be a contributor to determining their receptor specificity and thus their transmission. toward the second question related to the utility for vaccine design, building upon our previous study where we demonstrated conformational control of rbd dynamics in the s protein ectodomain by modulating inter-domain protein-protein contacts, here we expand the tools for achieving such control to glycan-protein interactions, and demonstrate that rbd dynamics can be modulated by targeting key glycans at interdomain contacts. in so doing, we create two new ectodomain constructs with differential exposure of the immunodominant rbd for use as immunogens in vaccination regimens. taken together, these investigations further demonstrate the remarkable plasticity of this conformational machine and suggest the s-protein has a diverse landscape of conformational escape mutations from which to select as genetic drift and host immune pressures direct its evolution. cryo-em reconstructions were deposited in the electron microscopy data bank with emdb accession codes <tbd> and in protein data bank with pdb ids <tbd>.the sars-cov-2 ectodomain constructs were produced and purified as described previously 2 . briefly, a gene encoding residues 1−1208 of the sars-cov-2 s (genbank: mn908947) with proline substitutions at residues 986 and 987, a "gsas" substitution at the furin cleavage site (residues 682-685), a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization motif, an hrv3c protease cleavage site, a twinstreptag and an 8xhistag was synthesized and cloned into the mammalian expression vector pαh. all mutants were introduced in this background. expression plasmids encoding the ectodomain sequence were used to transiently transfect freestyle293f cells using turbo293 (speedbiosystems). protein was purified on the sixth day posttransfection from the filtered supernatant using streptactin resin (iba).the ace-2 gene was cloned as a fusion protein with a mouse fc region attached to its c-terminal end.a 6x his-tag was added to the c-terminal end of the fc domain. ace-2 with mouse fc tag was purified by ni-nta chromatography.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173765 doi: biorxiv preprintthe thermal shift assay was performed using tycho nt. 6 (nanotemper technologies). spike variants were diluted (0.15 mg/ml) in ncov buffer (2mm tris, ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl, 0.02% sodium azide) and run in duplicates in capillary tubes. intrinsic fluorescence was recorded at 330 nm and 350 nm while heating the sample from 35-95 °c at a rate of 3 °c/min. the ratio of fluorescence (350/330 nm) and the ti were calculated by tycho nt. 6.purified sars-cov-2 spike preparations were diluted to a concentration of ~1 mg/ml in 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3. 2.5 µl of protein was deposited on a cf-1.2/1.3 grid that had been glow discharged for 30 seconds in a pelco easiglow™ glow discharge cleaning system. after a 30 s incubation in >95% humidity, excess protein was blotted away for 2.5 seconds before being plunge frozen into liquid ethane using a leica em gp2 plunge freezer (leica microsystems). frozen grids for the n234a mutant were imaged in a titan krios (thermo fisher) equipped with a k3 detector (gatan) while those for the n165a mutant were image in a titan krios equipped with a falcon 3ec detector. data were acquired using the leginon system 23 (n234a) or the epu software (thermo fisher scientific; n165a). the dose was fractionated over 50 raw frames and collected at 50ms framerate. this dataset was energy-filtered with a slit width of 30 ev for the n234a mutant. individual frames were aligned and dose-weighted 24 . ctf estimation, particle picking, 2dclassifications, ab initio model generation, heterogeneous refinements, homogeneous 3d refinements and local resolution calculations were carried out in cryosparc 25 .structures of the all 'down' state (pdb id 6vxx) and single rbd 'up' state (pdb id 6vyb) from the previously published sars-cov-2 ectodomain were used to fit the cryo-em maps in chimera 26 . mutations were made in pymol 27 . coordinates were fit to the maps first using isolde 28 followed by iterative refinement using phenix 29 real space refinement and subsequent manual coordinate fitting in coot as needed. structure and map analysis were performed using pymol, chimera 26 and chimerax 30 . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 30, 2020. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), the causative pathogen of covid-19 1,2 , induces fever, severe respiratory illness and pneumonia. sars-cov-2 utilizes an extensively glycosylated spike (s) protein that protrudes from the viral surface to bind to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), the host cell receptor, to mediate cell entry 3 . the s protein is a trimeric class i fusion protein that is composed of two functional subunits responsible for receptor binding (s1 subunit) and membrane fusion (s2 subunit). remarkably, the surface of the virally encoded envelope spike is dominated by an array of host-derived glycans with each trimer displaying 66 n-linked glycosylation sites. this extensive glycosylation has important implications for vaccine design.as obligate parasites, many viruses exploit host-cell machinery to glycosylate their own proteins. numerous viral envelope proteins, including hiv-1 envelope (env), influenza hemagglutinin (ha) and lassa virus glycoprotein complex (gpc), possess genetically encoded n-linked glycan sequons (n-x-s/t motifs, where x is any amino acid except proline). viral glycosylation has wide-ranging roles in viral pathobiology, including mediating protein folding and stability, and shaping viral tropism. the genetically encoded sequons can be under significant selective pressure as a mechanism for immune evasion by shielding specific epitopes from antibody neutralization. however, we note the currently reported low mutation rate of sars-cov-2, and as yet that there have been no observed mutations to n-linked glycosylation sites 4 . surfaces with an unusually high density of glycans can also enable immune recognition [5] [6] [7] . the role of glycosylation in immune evasion by camouflaging immunogenic protein epitopes has been well studied for other coronaviruses 4,8,9 . as the principal antigen presented on the surface of sars-cov-2 virions, the s protein is a key target in vaccine design efforts. it is apparent that the viral spike will be targeted by the full assortment of vaccine strategies from nucleic-acid based approaches 10 , whereby the viral protein is expressed in vivo, to recombinant strategies whereby viral glycoproteins are delivered with appropriate adjuvants. such strategies aim to elicit neutralizing adaptive immunity with an emphasis on achieving an antibody response at the sites of viral entry.understanding the glycosylation of recombinant viral spikes can both reveal fundamental features of viral biology and can guide vaccine design strategies and manufacturing. as glycans are enzymatically elaborated in the golgi apparatus, some features of processed, so-called complex-type, glycosylation will necessarily be influenced by the [11] [12] [13] [14] . however observations of hybrid-and complex-type glycans on virally derived material suggests that the viral glycoproteins are subjected to golgi resident processing enzymes 8, 15 .as impaired glycan maturation can be a sensitive reporter of local viral protein architecture 16 , detailed site-specific analysis has emerged as an indicator of native-like architecture and is increasingly used to compare different immunogens and in the monitoring of manufacturing processes. importantly, in addition to these structural insights, the presence of oligomannose-type glycans on viral spike-based immunogens has also been shown to enhance trafficking of glycoprotein to germinal centers via interaction with lectins such as mannose-binding lectin 17 . it is therefore of considerable importance to understand the glycosylation of recombinant mimetics of the virus spike.here, we apply mass spectrometry to understand both the site-specific n-linked glycan composition and the degree of sequon occupancy on a soluble, native-like sars-cov-2 s protein. the native-like folding of trimeric recombinant material has been recently revealed by detailed structural analysis by cryo-electron microscopy 18, 19 . we have previously validated our glycopeptide analysis methodology and applied this approach to the study of a range of other viral glycoprotein immunogens 4,20-23 , which enables cross-viral comparisons of glycosylation to be made. we report here the site-specific glycosylation at each of the 22 n-linked glycan sites found on the sars-cov-2 s protomer. as observed on other viral glycoproteins, there is an elevation in oligomannose-and hybrid-type glycans compared to host-derived glycoproteins, although compared to many other viruses there are still a large population of complex-type glycans displayed across the trimer surface. we also report that for each of the 22 glycan sites the occupancy is nearly fully complete, which means that any epitopes shielded from the . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.010322 doi: biorxiv preprint immune system on the virus will also likely be shielded on the immunogen. site-specific glycan analysis of sars-cov-2 immunogens will help guide vaccine design and manufacturing.to resolve the site-specific glycosylation of sars-cov-2 s protein and visualize the distribution of glycoforms across the protein surface, we expressed and purified recombinant soluble material in an identical manner to that which was used to obtain the high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) structure, albeit without glycan processing blockade using kifunensine 18 . this soluble recombinant variant of the s protein contains all 22 glycans on the sars-cov-2 s protein ( figure 1a) . stabilization of the trimeric prefusion structure was achieved using the "2p" stabilizing mutations 24 at residues 986 and 987 in addition to a cterminal trimerization motif. this ensures that the quaternary structure remains intact during glycan processing, as in the case of hiv env mimetics, this is known to influence glycosylation of certain sites 16, 25 . prior to analysis, supernatant containing the recombinant sars-cov-2 was purified using a c-terminal streptag followed by size-exclusion chromatography to ensure only native-like trimeric sars-cov-2 s protein is analyzed ( figure 1b) . the trimeric conformation of the purified material was validated using negative stain electron microscopy ( figure 1c ).. cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.010322 doi: biorxiv preprint trypsin, chymotrypsin, and alpha-lytic protease were employed to generate three glycopeptide samples. these proteases cleave at different sites and were selected in order to generate glycopeptides that contain a single n-linked glycan sequon. the glycopeptide pools were analyzed by lc-ms, with high-energy collision-induced dissociation (hcd). cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.010322 doi: biorxiv preprint fragmentation, and the glycan compositions at each site were determined for all 22 n-linked glycan sites on the sars-cov-2 s protein (figure 2) . a diverse range of glycan compositions were observed across the different glycosylation sites. in order to convey the main processing features at each site, the abundances of each glycan are summed into oligomannose-, hybridand complex-type glycosylation. in addition, the diverse signals arising from heterogeneous complex-type glycosylation are simplified by the summation of glycan intensities into a more limited range of structural categories.there are three sites on sars-cov-2 that are predominantly oligomannose-type: n234, n709 and n801. the predominant structure observed at each site, with the exception of n234, is man5glcnac2, which demonstrates that these sites are largely accessible to a 1,2mannosidases but are poor substrates for glcnact-i, which is the gateway enzyme in the formation of hybrid-and complex-type glycans in the golgi apparatus. the stage at which processing is impeded is a signature related to the density and presentation of glycans on the viral spike. for example, the more densely glycosylated spikes of hiv-1 env and lassa virus gpc give rise to numerous sites dominated by man9glcnac2 [20] [21] [22] 26 .interestingly, there are several sites which possess significant populations of hybridtype glycans, most notably at n657. this phenomenon has been observed on other viral glycoproteins, such as hiv-1 env 20,26 , and these structures are not particularly prevalent on mammalian glycoproteins 27, 28 . such hybrid-type glycans have been shown to be targeted by anti-hiv antibodies 29 and could also be important for immunogen trafficking since they have mannose-terminating moieties 17 .a mixture of oligomannose-type glycans and complex-type glycans can be found at sites n61, n122, n165, n603, n657, n717 and n1074 (figure 2) . of the 22 sites on the s protein, 10 contain significant populations of oligomannose-type glycans, highlighting how the processing of the sars-cov-2 s glycans is divergent from host glycoproteins. the remaining 12 sites are dominated by processed, complex-type glycans. the predominant category of complex-type glycans observed on the s protein are fucosylated biantennary structures, very similar to those abundant on mammalian glycoproteins.a further feature that can be interrogated using this methodology is the extent of unoccupancy of glycosylation sites, where a sequon is present but a glycan has not been attached. in hiv immunogen research, the holes generated by unoccupied glycan sites have been shown to be immunogenic and potentially give rise to distracting epitopes 30 . while using the cryo-em structure of the trimeric sars-cov-2 s protein (pdb id 6vsb) 18 , we generated a model to map the glycosylation status of the coronavirus spike mimetic onto the experimentally determined 3d structure (figure 3) . this combined mass spectrometric and cryo-em analysis reveals how the n-linked glycans occlude distinct regions across the surface of the sars-cov-2 spike. glycans were modelled onto each site using predominant glycans observed (figure 2) and colored according to the prevalence of oligomannose-type glycans.shielding of the receptor binding sites on the sars-cov-2 spike by proximal glycosylation sites (n165, n234, n343) can be observed, especially when the receptor binding domain is in the "down" conformation. the shielding of receptor binding sites by glycans is a common feature of viral glycoproteins and has been observed for sars-cov s 4,8 , hiv-1 env 31 , influenza ha 32,33 , and lasv gpc 21 . given the functional constraints of receptor binding sites and the subsequent low mutation rates of these residues, it is likely that there has been selective pressure to utilize n-linked glycans as a method to camouflage one of the most conserved and potentially vulnerable areas of their respective glycoproteins 34, 35 .it is interesting to note the absence of a specific glycan cluster that is responsible for the presence of the oligomannose-type glycans but rather there is a dispersion of these glycans across both the s1 and s2 subunits. this is in significant contrast to other viral glycoproteins, for example the density of glycans clusters in hiv have even enabled structural classification of their different modes of interaction 36 . in sars-cov-2 the oligomannose-type structures are probably protected, to some extent, by the protein component, as exemplified by the n234 glycan which is partially sandwiched between the n-terminal and receptor-binding domains (figure 3) . we characterized the n-linked glycans on extended loop structures that were not resolved in the cryo-em maps 18 (n74 and n149) . these were determined to be complex-type glycans, consistent with the inherent flexibility of these regions and resulting accessibility of these residues to glycan processing enzymes. fig. 1) . oligomannose-type glycans comprise 32% of the total glycan pool, with hybrid-type and complex-type glycans comprising 7% and 62%, respectively (sup. fig. 1) . despite the potential impact of different local protein structure on glycan processing, the overall glycosylation of sars-cov-2 is comparable with sars-cov-1 s protein and other coronavirus s proteins 4, 8, 9, 15 . we have previously reported that a recombinant sars-cov-1 s mimetic also contained 32% oligomannose-type glycans showing a remarkable conservation in glycan processing across these coronaviruses. whilst the oligomannose-type glycan content is well above that observed on typical host glycoproteins, it is significantly lower than is found on other viral glycoproteins. for example, one of the most densely glycosylated viral spike proteins is hiv-1 env, which contains ~60% oligomannose-type glycans 20, 37 . this suggests that sars-cov-2 s protein is less densely glycosylated and that the glycans form much less of a shield compared with other viral glycoproteins including hiv env and lasv gpc, which may be beneficial for the elicitation of potent neutralizing antibodies.in addition to oligomannose-type glycans, the processing of complex-type glycans is an important consideration in immunogen engineering. across the 22 n-linked glycosylation sites, 16% of the glycans contain at least one sialic acid residue and 48% are fucosylated (figure 4) . these data suggest high levels of fucosylation but low levels of sialylation, considering complex and hybrid type glycans make up 69% of the total glycans of sars-cov-2. understanding the distribution of glycan modifications across the viral spike illustrates the differential susceptibility to different processing enzymes while the absolute levels can be heavily influenced by the cellular expression system utilized. we have previously demonstrated for hiv-1 env glycosylation that the processing of complex-type glycans is driven by the producer cell but that the levels of oligomannose-type glycans were largely independent of the expression system and is much more closely related to the protein structure and glycan density 38 . fucosylation of the protein-proximal glcnac residue and (c) terminal sialylation. s1 and s2 subunits are colored light grey and dark grey, respectively.our glycosylation analysis of sars-cov-2 offers a detailed benchmark of site-specific glycan signatures characteristic of a natively folded trimeric spike. as an increasing number of glycoprotein-based vaccine candidates are being developed, their detailed glycan analysis offers a route for comparing immunogen integrity and will also be important to monitor as manufacturing processes are scaled for clinical use. glycosylation will therefore also be an important measure of antigen quality in the manufacture of serological testing kits, particularly as some s protein fragments may offer advantages in terms of production yield but lack effective glycan mimicry of the natively folded trimeric spike. the lower levels of mannose-. cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.010322 doi: biorxiv preprint terminating glycans on sars-cov-2 compared to many other viral spikes may indicate that glycan engineering should be considered in the scenario where first-generation glycoproteinbased vaccine candidates be poorly immunogenic. finally, with the advent of nucleotide-based vaccines it will be important to understand how those delivery mechanisms impact immunogen processing and presentation.to express the prefusion s ectodomain, a gene encoding residues 1−1208 of sars-cov-2 s (genbank: mn908947) with proline substitutions at residues 986 and 987, a "gsas" substitution at the furin cleavage site (residues 682-685), a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization motif, an hrv3c protease cleavage site, a twinstreptag and an 8xhistag was synthesized and cloned into the mammalian expression vector pαh. this expression vector was used to transiently transfect freestyle293f cells (thermo fisher) using polyethylenimine. protein was purified from filtered cell supernatants using streptactin resin (iba) before being subjected to additional purification by size-exclusion chromatography using a superose 6 10/300 column (ge healthcare) in 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3.purified sars-cov-2 spike was diluted to a concentration of 0.04 mg/ml using 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3 before being applied to a plasma cleaned cf400-cu grid (electron microscopy sciences). protein was then stained using methylamine tungstate (nanoprobes) before being allowed to dry at room temperature for 15 minutes. this grid was imaged in a talos tem (thermo fisher scientific) equipped with a ceta 16m detector.micrographs were collected using tia v4.14 software at a nominal magnification of 92,000×, corresponding to a calibrated pixel size of 1.63 å/pix. ctf estimation, particle picking and 2d class averaging were performed using cistem 39 .three 30 μg aliquots of sars-cov-2 s protein were denatured for 1h in 50 mm tris/hcl, ph 8.0 containing 6 m of urea and 5 mm dithiothreitol (dtt). next, the s protein were reduced and alkylated by adding 20 mm iodoacetamide (iaa) and incubated for 1h in the dark, . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.010322 doi: biorxiv preprint followed by a 1h incubation with 20 mm dtt to eliminate residual iaa. the alkylated env proteins were buffer-exchanged into 50 mm tris/hcl, ph 8.0 using vivaspin columns (3 kda) and digested separately overnight using trypsin chymotrypsin or alpha lytic protease (mass spectrometry grade, promega) at a ratio of 1:30 (w/w). the next day, the peptides were dried and extracted using c18 zip-tip (merckmilipore). the peptides were dried again, re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by nanolc-esi ms with an easy-nlc 1200 (thermo fisher glycopeptide fragmentation data were extracted from the raw file using byonic tm (version 3.5) and byologic tm software (version 3.5; protein metrics inc.). the glycopeptide fragmentation data were evaluated manually for each glycopeptide; the peptide was scored as true-positive when the correct b and y fragment ions were observed along with oxonium ions corresponding to the glycan identified. the ms data was searched using the protein metrics 305 n-glycan library. the relative amounts of each glycan at each site as well as the unoccupied proportion were determined by comparing the extracted chromatographic areas for different glycotypes with an identical peptide sequence. all charge states for a single glycopeptide were summed. the precursor mass tolerance was set at 4 ppm and 10 ppm for fragments. a 1% false discovery rate (fdr) was applied. the relative amounts of each glycan at each site as well as the unoccupied proportion were determined by comparing the extracted ion chromatographic areas for different glycopeptides with an identical peptide sequence. glycans were categorized according to the composition detected. hexnac(2)hex(9−5) was classified as m9 to m5. hexnac(3)hex(5−6)x was classified as hybrid with hexnac(3)fuc(1)x classified as fhybrid. complex-type glycans were classified according to the number of processed antenna . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.010322 doi: biorxiv preprint and fucosylation. if all of the following compositions have a fucose they are assigned into the fa categories. hexnac(3)hex(3-4)x is assigned as a1, hexnac(4)x is a2/a1b, hexnac(5)x is a3/a2b, and hexnac(6)x is a4/a3b. as this fragmentation method does not provide linkage information compositional isomers are group, so for example a triantennary glycan contains hexnac 5 but so does a biantennary glycans with a bisect. any glycan containing at least one sialic acid was counted as sialylated.structural models of n-linked glycan presentation on sars-cov-2 were created using electron microscopy structures (pdb id: 6vsb) along with complex-, hybrid-, and oligomannose-type n-linked glycans (pdb id 4byh, 4b7i, and 2wah). the most dominant glycoform presented at each site was modelled on to the n-linked carbohydrate attachment sites in coot 40 .severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), the causative pathogen of covid-19 1,2 , induces fever, severe respiratory illness and pneumonia. sars-cov-2 utilizes an extensively glycosylated spike (s) protein that protrudes from the viral surface to bind to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), the host cell receptor, to mediate cell entry 3 . the s protein is a trimeric class i fusion protein that is composed of two functional subunits responsible for receptor binding (s1 subunit) and membrane fusion (s2 subunit). remarkably, the surface of the virally encoded envelope spike is dominated by an array of host-derived glycans with each trimer displaying 66 n-linked glycosylation sites. this extensive glycosylation has important implications for vaccine design.as obligate parasites, many viruses exploit host-cell machinery to glycosylate their own proteins. numerous viral envelope proteins, including hiv-1 envelope (env), influenza hemagglutinin (ha) and lassa virus glycoprotein complex (gpc), possess genetically encoded n-linked glycan sequons (n-x-s/t motifs, where x is any amino acid except proline). viral glycosylation has wide-ranging roles in viral pathobiology, including mediating protein folding and stability, and shaping viral tropism. the genetically encoded sequons can be under significant selective pressure as a mechanism for immune evasion by shielding specific epitopes from antibody neutralization. however, we note the currently reported low mutation rate of sars-cov-2, and as yet that there have been no observed mutations to n-linked glycosylation sites 4 . surfaces with an unusually high density of glycans can also enable immune recognition [5] [6] [7] . the role of glycosylation in immune evasion by camouflaging immunogenic protein epitopes has been well studied for other coronaviruses 4,8,9 . as the principal antigen presented on the surface of sars-cov-2 virions, the s protein is a key target in vaccine design efforts. it is apparent that the viral spike will be targeted by the full assortment of vaccine strategies from nucleic-acid based approaches 10 , whereby the viral protein is expressed in vivo, to recombinant strategies whereby viral glycoproteins are delivered with appropriate adjuvants. such strategies aim to elicit neutralizing adaptive immunity with an emphasis on achieving an antibody response at the sites of viral entry.understanding the glycosylation of recombinant viral spikes can both reveal fundamental features of viral biology and can guide vaccine design strategies and manufacturing. as glycans are enzymatically elaborated in the golgi apparatus, some features of processed, so-called complex-type, glycosylation will necessarily be influenced by the producer cell-line. however, the presence of glycans typical of the early stages of the secretory pathway on otherwise mature glycoproteins often closely relate to fundamental features of viral spike architecture. high viral glycan density, or extensive packing of the glycan to the protein surface, can impair the normal glycan maturation pathway by steric interference of host enzymes. under-processed oligomannose-and hybrid-type glycans are found on the majority of viral envelope proteins such as hiv-1 env, influenza ha and lassa virus gpc 5 . these viral glycoproteins traffic through the secretory system and the glycosylation processing of recombinant material often closely captures the glycan maturation state of the virion. this can be particularly important for viruses such as hiv-1, where viral glycans can also be targeted by neutralizing antibodies. coronaviruses have been reported to form virions by budding into the lumen of endoplasmic reticulum-golgi intermediate compartments (ergic) [11] [12] [13] [14] . however observations of hybrid-and complex-type glycans on virally derived material suggests that the viral glycoproteins are subjected to golgi resident processing enzymes 8, 15 .as impaired glycan maturation can be a sensitive reporter of local viral protein architecture 16 , detailed site-specific analysis has emerged as an indicator of native-like architecture and is increasingly used to compare different immunogens and in the monitoring of manufacturing processes. importantly, in addition to these structural insights, the presence of oligomannose-type glycans on viral spike-based immunogens has also been shown to enhance trafficking of glycoprotein to germinal centers via interaction with lectins such as mannose-binding lectin 17 . it is therefore of considerable importance to understand the glycosylation of recombinant mimetics of the virus spike.here, we apply mass spectrometry to understand both the site-specific n-linked glycan composition and the degree of sequon occupancy on a soluble, native-like sars-cov-2 s protein. the native-like folding of trimeric recombinant material has been recently revealed by detailed structural analysis by cryo-electron microscopy 18, 19 . we have previously validated our glycopeptide analysis methodology and applied this approach to the study of a range of other viral glycoprotein immunogens 4,20-23 , which enables cross-viral comparisons of glycosylation to be made. we report here the site-specific glycosylation at each of the 22 n-linked glycan sites found on the sars-cov-2 s protomer. as observed on other viral glycoproteins, there is an elevation in oligomannose-and hybrid-type glycans compared to host-derived glycoproteins, although compared to many other viruses there are still a large population of complex-type glycans displayed across the trimer surface. we also report that for each of the 22 glycan sites the occupancy is nearly fully complete, which means that any epitopes shielded from the immune system on the virus will also likely be shielded on the immunogen. site-specific glycan analysis of sars-cov-2 immunogens will help guide vaccine design and manufacturing.to resolve the site-specific glycosylation of sars-cov-2 s protein and visualize the distribution of glycoforms across the protein surface, we expressed and purified recombinant soluble material in an identical manner to that which was used to obtain the high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) structure, albeit without glycan processing blockade using kifunensine 18 . this soluble recombinant variant of the s protein contains all 22 glycans on the sars-cov-2 s protein ( figure 1a) . stabilization of the trimeric prefusion structure was achieved using the "2p" stabilizing mutations 24 at residues 986 and 987 in addition to a cterminal trimerization motif. this ensures that the quaternary structure remains intact during glycan processing, as in the case of hiv env mimetics, this is known to influence glycosylation of certain sites 16, 25 . prior to analysis, supernatant containing the recombinant sars-cov-2 was purified using a c-terminal streptag followed by size-exclusion chromatography to ensure only native-like trimeric sars-cov-2 s protein is analyzed ( figure 1b) . the trimeric conformation of the purified material was validated using negative stain electron microscopy ( figure 1c ). trypsin, chymotrypsin, and alpha-lytic protease were employed to generate three glycopeptide samples. these proteases cleave at different sites and were selected in order to generate glycopeptides that contain a single n-linked glycan sequon. the glycopeptide pools were analyzed by lc-ms, with high-energy collision-induced dissociation (hcd) fragmentation, and the glycan compositions at each site were determined for all 22 n-linked glycan sites on the sars-cov-2 s protein (figure 2) . a diverse range of glycan compositions were observed across the different glycosylation sites. in order to convey the main processing features at each site, the abundances of each glycan are summed into oligomannose-, hybridand complex-type glycosylation. in addition, the diverse signals arising from heterogeneous complex-type glycosylation are simplified by the summation of glycan intensities into a more limited range of structural categories.there are three sites on sars-cov-2 that are predominantly oligomannose-type: n234, n709 and n801. the predominant structure observed at each site, with the exception of n234, is man5glcnac2, which demonstrates that these sites are largely accessible to a 1,2mannosidases but are poor substrates for glcnact-i, which is the gateway enzyme in the formation of hybrid-and complex-type glycans in the golgi apparatus. the stage at which processing is impeded is a signature related to the density and presentation of glycans on the viral spike. for example, the more densely glycosylated spikes of hiv-1 env and lassa virus gpc give rise to numerous sites dominated by man9glcnac2 [20] [21] [22] 26 .interestingly, there are several sites which possess significant populations of hybridtype glycans, most notably at n657. this phenomenon has been observed on other viral glycoproteins, such as hiv-1 env 20,26 , and these structures are not particularly prevalent on mammalian glycoproteins 27, 28 . such hybrid-type glycans have been shown to be targeted by anti-hiv antibodies 29 and could also be important for immunogen trafficking since they have mannose-terminating moieties 17 .a mixture of oligomannose-type glycans and complex-type glycans can be found at sites n61, n122, n165, n603, n657, n717 and n1074 (figure 2) . of the 22 sites on the s protein, 10 contain significant populations of oligomannose-type glycans, highlighting how the processing of the sars-cov-2 s glycans is divergent from host glycoproteins. the remaining 12 sites are dominated by processed, complex-type glycans. the predominant category of complex-type glycans observed on the s protein are fucosylated biantennary structures, very similar to those abundant on mammalian glycoproteins.a further feature that can be interrogated using this methodology is the extent of unoccupancy of glycosylation sites, where a sequon is present but a glycan has not been attached. in hiv immunogen research, the holes generated by unoccupied glycan sites have been shown to be immunogenic and potentially give rise to distracting epitopes 30 using the cryo-em structure of the trimeric sars-cov-2 s protein (pdb id 6vsb) 18 , we generated a model to map the glycosylation status of the coronavirus spike mimetic onto the experimentally determined 3d structure (figure 3) . this combined mass spectrometric and cryo-em analysis reveals how the n-linked glycans occlude distinct regions across the surface of the sars-cov-2 spike. glycans were modelled onto each site using predominant glycans observed (figure 2) and colored according to the prevalence of oligomannose-type glycans.shielding of the receptor binding sites on the sars-cov-2 spike by proximal glycosylation sites (n165, n234, n343) can be observed, especially when the receptor binding domain is in the "down" conformation. the shielding of receptor binding sites by glycans is a common feature of viral glycoproteins and has been observed for sars-cov s 4,8 , hiv-1 env 31 , influenza ha 32,33 , and lasv gpc 21 . given the functional constraints of receptor binding sites and the subsequent low mutation rates of these residues, it is likely that there has been selective pressure to utilize n-linked glycans as a method to camouflage one of the most conserved and potentially vulnerable areas of their respective glycoproteins 34, 35 .it is interesting to note the absence of a specific glycan cluster that is responsible for the presence of the oligomannose-type glycans but rather there is a dispersion of these glycans across both the s1 and s2 subunits. this is in significant contrast to other viral glycoproteins, for example the density of glycans clusters in hiv have even enabled structural classification of their different modes of interaction 36 . in sars-cov-2 the oligomannose-type structures are probably protected, to some extent, by the protein component, as exemplified by the n234 glycan which is partially sandwiched between the n-terminal and receptor-binding domains (figure 3) .we characterized the n-linked glycans on extended loop structures that were not resolved in the cryo-em maps 18 (n74 and n149) . these were determined to be complex-type glycans, consistent with the inherent flexibility of these regions and resulting accessibility of these residues to glycan processing enzymes. . 1) . oligomannose-type glycans comprise 32% of the total glycan pool, with hybrid-type and complex-type glycans comprising 7% and 62%, respectively (sup. fig. 1) . despite the potential impact of different local protein structure on glycan processing, the overall glycosylation of sars-cov-2 is comparable with sars-cov-1 s protein and other coronavirus s proteins 4, 8, 9, 15 . we have previously reported that a recombinant sars-cov-1 s mimetic also contained 32% oligomannose-type glycans showing a remarkable conservation in glycan processing across these coronaviruses. whilst the oligomannose-type glycan content is well above that observed on typical host glycoproteins, it is significantly lower than is found on other viral glycoproteins. for example, one of the most densely glycosylated viral spike proteins is hiv-1 env, which contains ~60% oligomannose-type glycans 20, 37 . this suggests that sars-cov-2 s protein is less densely glycosylated and that the glycans form much less of a shield compared with other viral glycoproteins including hiv env and lasv gpc, which may be beneficial for the elicitation of potent neutralizing antibodies.in addition to oligomannose-type glycans, the processing of complex-type glycans is an important consideration in immunogen engineering. across the 22 n-linked glycosylation sites, 16% of the glycans contain at least one sialic acid residue and 48% are fucosylated (figure 4) . these data suggest high levels of fucosylation but low levels of sialylation, considering complex and hybrid type glycans make up 69% of the total glycans of sars-cov-2. understanding the distribution of glycan modifications across the viral spike illustrates the differential susceptibility to different processing enzymes while the absolute levels can be heavily influenced by the cellular expression system utilized. we have previously demonstrated for hiv-1 env glycosylation that the processing of complex-type glycans is driven by the producer cell but that the levels of oligomannose-type glycans were largely independent of the expression system and is much more closely related to the protein structure and glycan density 38 . fucosylation of the protein-proximal glcnac residue and (c) terminal sialylation. s1 and s2 subunits are colored light grey and dark grey, respectively.our glycosylation analysis of sars-cov-2 offers a detailed benchmark of site-specific glycan signatures characteristic of a natively folded trimeric spike. as an increasing number of glycoprotein-based vaccine candidates are being developed, their detailed glycan analysis offers a route for comparing immunogen integrity and will also be important to monitor as manufacturing processes are scaled for clinical use. glycosylation will therefore also be an important measure of antigen quality in the manufacture of serological testing kits, particularly as some s protein fragments may offer advantages in terms of production yield but lack effective glycan mimicry of the natively folded trimeric spike. the lower levels of mannose-terminating glycans on sars-cov-2 compared to many other viral spikes may indicate that glycan engineering should be considered in the scenario where first-generation glycoproteinbased vaccine candidates be poorly immunogenic. finally, with the advent of nucleotide-based vaccines it will be important to understand how those delivery mechanisms impact immunogen processing and presentation.to express the prefusion s ectodomain, a gene encoding residues 1−1208 of sars-cov-2 s (genbank: mn908947) with proline substitutions at residues 986 and 987, a "gsas" substitution at the furin cleavage site (residues 682-685), a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization motif, an hrv3c protease cleavage site, a twinstreptag and an 8xhistag was synthesized and cloned into the mammalian expression vector pαh. this expression vector was used to transiently transfect freestyle293f cells (thermo fisher) using polyethylenimine. protein was purified from filtered cell supernatants using streptactin resin (iba) before being subjected to additional purification by size-exclusion chromatography using a superose 6 10/300 column (ge healthcare) in 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3.purified sars-cov-2 spike was diluted to a concentration of 0.04 mg/ml using 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl and 0.02% nan3 before being applied to a plasma cleaned cf400-cu grid (electron microscopy sciences). protein was then stained using methylamine tungstate (nanoprobes) before being allowed to dry at room temperature for 15 minutes. this grid was imaged in a talos tem (thermo fisher scientific) equipped with a ceta 16m detector.micrographs were collected using tia v4.14 software at a nominal magnification of 92,000×, corresponding to a calibrated pixel size of 1.63 å/pix. ctf estimation, particle picking and 2d class averaging were performed using cistem 39 .three 30 μg aliquots of sars-cov-2 s protein were denatured for 1h in 50 mm tris/hcl, ph 8.0 containing 6 m of urea and 5 mm dithiothreitol (dtt). next, the s protein were reduced and alkylated by adding 20 mm iodoacetamide (iaa) and incubated for 1h in the dark, followed by a 1h incubation with 20 mm dtt to eliminate residual iaa. the alkylated env proteins were buffer-exchanged into 50 mm tris/hcl, ph 8.0 using vivaspin columns (3 kda) and digested separately overnight using trypsin chymotrypsin or alpha lytic protease (mass spectrometry grade, promega) at a ratio of 1:30 (w/w). the next day, the peptides were dried and extracted using c18 zip-tip (merckmilipore). the peptides were dried again, re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by nanolc-esi ms with an easy-nlc 1200 (thermo fisher glycopeptide fragmentation data were extracted from the raw file using byonic tm (version 3.5) and byologic tm software (version 3.5; protein metrics inc.). the glycopeptide fragmentation data were evaluated manually for each glycopeptide; the peptide was scored as true-positive when the correct b and y fragment ions were observed along with oxonium ions corresponding to the glycan identified. the ms data was searched using the protein metrics 305 n-glycan library. the relative amounts of each glycan at each site as well as the unoccupied proportion were determined by comparing the extracted chromatographic areas for different glycotypes with an identical peptide sequence. all charge states for a single glycopeptide were summed. the precursor mass tolerance was set at 4 ppm and 10 ppm for fragments. a 1% false discovery rate (fdr) was applied. the relative amounts of each glycan at each site as well as the unoccupied proportion were determined by comparing the extracted ion chromatographic areas for different glycopeptides with an identical peptide sequence. glycans were categorized according to the composition detected. hexnac(2)hex(9−5) was classified as m9 to m5. hexnac(3)hex(5−6)x was classified as hybrid with hexnac(3)fuc(1)x classified as fhybrid. complex-type glycans were classified according to the number of processed antenna and fucosylation. if all of the following compositions have a fucose they are assigned into the fa categories. hexnac(3)hex(3-4)x is assigned as a1, hexnac(4)x is a2/a1b, hexnac(5)x is a3/a2b, and hexnac(6)x is a4/a3b. as this fragmentation method does not provide linkage information compositional isomers are group, so for example a triantennary glycan contains hexnac 5 but so does a biantennary glycans with a bisect. any glycan containing at least one sialic acid was counted as sialylated.structural models of n-linked glycan presentation on sars-cov-2 were created using electron microscopy structures (pdb id: 6vsb) along with complex-, hybrid-, and oligomannose-type n-linked glycans (pdb id 4byh, 4b7i, and 2wah). the most dominant glycoform presented at each site was modelled on to the n-linked carbohydrate attachment sites in coot 40 .the pandemic corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute 30respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is an urgent public health emergency 31 and made a serious impact on global health and economy (1). to date, more than 86,000 32 deaths and 1.5 million confirmed positive cases were reported globally, making the most 33 contagious pandemic in the last decade (www.coronavirus.gov). since the initial reports on 34 2 this pneumonia-causing novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) in wuhan, china , mortality and 35 morbidity are increasing exponentially around the globe despite several antiviral and 36 antibody treatments (2). most available neutralising antibodies in use are targeting the sars-37cov-2 spike glycoprotein, which is essential for host cell adhesion via ace2 and cd26 38 receptors (3, 4), but infection control is still insignificant. meanwhile, several antiviral drugs 39 (ritonavir, lopinavir, chloroquine, remdesivir and others) targeting different host and viral 40 proteins are been clinically evaluating and repurposing to combat sars-cov-2 infection (2, 41 5). with the drastic increasing number of the positive cases around the world (www.cdc.gov), 42 moderate response to antivirals under clinical trials and poor response to antibodies targeting 43 spike sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein is a serious concern and warrants detail understanding 44 of the molecular and structural features of sars-cov-2 structural proteins in native 45 condition and post-viral infection. this will abet in understanding the dynamics and 46 mechanism of viral action on the human cell. the overall complex structure shows three furin proteases binding to the mid or 89 equatorial region (mid region of s1 and s2 domain (s1/s2)) of sars-cov-2 spike 90 glycoprotein homo-trimer at the off-centric and adjacent side of spike trimer ( fig. 1 r298, w328 and q346 (10, 11) ( fig. 2 and s2) . interestingly, these residues are also well-100 positioned to interact with the viral spike protein cleavage site in our complex structure and 101 the entire substrate-binding pocket of furin protease appears like a canyon-like crevice, 4 which can accommodate a large portion of target protein/peptide. the results show that the 103 sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein amino acid residues n657 to q690 are the prime interacting 104 residues with the furin protease. the position and orientation of these unique residues 105 involved in furin recognition are well exposed and organise in a flexible loop. the spike 106 protein residues n657, n658, e661, y660, t678, n679, s680, r682, r683, r685, s689, 107 q690 makes the strong interaction with the furin protease ( fig. 2a) . the interaction between 108 the viral spike glycoprotein and furin protease is mediated via several van der waals or by 109 hydrogen bonding. furthermore, the entire cleavage loop of viral spike protein fits into the 110 canyon-like substrate-binding pocket of furin protease. it is quite interesting to notice that 111 none of the previously known coronaviruses had this novel furin protease cleavage site in the 112 spike glycoprotein, which accentuates the novelty and uniqueness of sars-cov-2. in 113 addition, previous reports on the glycosylation of spike glycoprotein show that furin 114 cleavage site in the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein is not targeted by the glycosylation, 115 hence this cleavage loop is completely solvent-exposed (4). this further corroborates the 116 potential attack of furin protease over the s1/s2 cleavage site in the sars-cov-2 spike 117 glycoprotein. based on the furin binding mode and structural interaction, we propose the 118 following supposition. the binding and cleaving (priming) the spike glycoprotein at s1/s2 119 region by furin protease might cut the spike glycoprotein into n-terminal s1 domain 120 spike glycoproteins also could make the ace2 and cd26 inhibitors of least effective, as 129 upon cleavage the n-terminal s1 domains are not required for the cell penetration. this also 130 raises a caution that while making neutralizing antibodies targeting sars-cov-2 spike 131 glycoprotein, these cleavage activities need to be considered. hence, we speculate that 132 antibodies against s2 domain and drugs targeting s1 trimerization could be more promising. q2 the two major ebola virus outbreaks in africa [1] , the zika virus in brazil [2] and the current severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [3] , which was declared by the world health organization (who) as a pandemic [4, 5] , have all occurred in the past decade. in each case there is a strong sense of déjà vu for those scientists involved in drug discovery. a lack of available antivirals to treat the infected patients leads to a clamoring to test anything available, and some pharmaceutical companies charge in to offer their drugs. we also seem to see similar patterns in response across outbreaks. there is a rush to be 'first' and this sense of priority might not lead to the best or even any outcome for patients. always, there is the immediate proposal to create a vaccine and pronouncements that this will be available in a short time or by the end of the year of the actual outbreak in question; and it never happens within these optimistic artificial deadlines. again, we have experienced this with the current outbreak. for ebola the vaccine was ready for the second outbreak and has now been approved [6] .governments are out to calm their populations while, at the same time, needing to be seen to do something that will vanquish the virus. in the case of sars-cov-2 it results in pneumonia [7] and shares aspects of pathology and pathogenesis with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) [8] . sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov belong to the same family coronaviridae and genus betacoronavirus. several drug companies immediately made their antivirals available. for example, abbvie made their hiv approved drug lopinavir/ritonavir combination available to the chinese government [9] . this drug had previously been suggested as promising based on combination study results from a marmoset study [10] . publications have already appeared describing the use of this drug in a patient in korea, significantly decreasing the viral load [11] . simultaneously, gilead made available remdesivir, which had previously failed in clinical trials for ebola [12] but had recently shown activity against mers in rhesus macaques [13] . remdesivir, chloroquine and several other drugs were tested in vitro against sars-cov-2 (table 1 ) and shown to be active [14] . some researchers had also suggested as early as january 2020 what treatment options might be most likely and these included lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir, favilavir, arbidol, as well as a broad array of nucleoside analogs, neuraminidase inhibitors, peptides, rna synthesis inhibitors, anti-inflammatory drugs and traditional chinese medicines [15] [16] [17] .the need for other treatment options will be important as we learn more about its transmission [18] and as we see increases in the number of travel-related infections [19] . already in the past weeks we have seen the rapid spread to italy and from there to many other countries including brazil and beyond. such virus outbreaks are greatly straining the healthcare systems of affected countries and will test every aspect of our infrastructure, supply chains and preparedness [20] . this raises the question of what we can learn from our past drug discovery efforts in an attempt to develop additional drugs for sars-cov-2 more efficiently. the acceleration of global sars-cov-2 data generation, effectively just in a couple of months, has been remarkable. however, scientific information gaps that impede progress toward small-molecule treatments can still be perceived. many of these persist from when they were first outlined for ebola back in 2015 [21] . we can thus make some 'then-and-now' comparisons (see supplementary material figs. s1-s4 and table s1 online) as well as share our own experiences of research on these virus outbreaks.our efforts in ebola drug discovery initially started in 2014 with a computational pharmacophore analysis of a small number of in vitro ebola active compounds [22] . this was followed by identifying and summarizing all the fda-approved drugs that could be used against the virus [23, 24] and highlighting various strategies for the next virus outbreak [21] . these steps preceded a pivotal point for us in developing machine learning models for the ebola virus derived from in vitro data [25, 26] .an early drug [22] identified by these screens was the antimalarial amodiaquine, which was subsequently shown to be associated with decreased mortality [27] , as the drug (artesunate/ amodiaquine) was used for malaria treatment in some ebola patients, whereas others took a different malaria medicine (artemether/lumefantrine) [27] . our ebola machine learning models were used to select three molecules for in vitro testing [28] . we identified pyronaridine, tilorone and quinacrine as having good in vitro activity (nm) against the ebola virus [28] . these preliminary data enabled us to obtain funding from the nih to take one of the compounds through in vivo testing. we also leveraged nih support to a collaborator to test the other two compounds as well. these molecules were then each tested in the mouse model for ebola infection and demonstrated significant efficacy [29] [30] [31] . pyronaridine is currently being pursued in larger animal models of ebola virus infection. working on computational models through to in vitro testing happened in the space of a few months, whereas it took several years to obtain funding for our first mouse studies. this is by no means a streamlined approach to drug discovery but it was cost effective for the amount of data ultimately generated and led to revitalized interest in these molecules.in 2016 we pulled together a team of researchers in brazil and the usa to provide some suggestions for an open drug discovery effort for the zika virus. these included various computational strategies to repurpose molecules and docking into the zika proteins [32] . we also described resources and molecules that could be prioritized for testing. this was followed by our homology modeling of every zika virus protein [33] weeks before the first crystal structures for zika proteins were released. all of this work was performed in the open and it attracted the attention of the ibm world community grid team who requested we submit a proposal to them for a zika project using their distributed computing facilities. this became the openzika project led by our team in brazil and the usa and it involved the docking of millions of molecules from the zinc database in all zika virus and related flavivirus protein crystal structures [34] . we have since also performed further modeling of zika proteins [35] and an analysis of the first 2 years following the outbreak [36] . our most recent efforts have led to the discovery of an inhibitor for ns3 helicase [37] . what we can learn from the openzika project to streamline future open science projects would be as follows. we would pick fewer targets to dock molecules into as the openzika project created billions of docking results for tens of targets that will take many years to process. we would also suggest that it is best to work with high-resolution crystal structures versus homology models as soon as possible. we would also start with a library of commercially available drugs and antivirals, this would massively limit the number of molecules docked to a few thousand because we found that docking of the zinc library available at that time led to compounds that were not readily available. focused libraries are interesting options to perform target-directed virtual screening. examples are chemdiv [38] and asinex [39] databases, which have specific subsets for protease inhibitors, for example facilitating and accelerating the experimental screening. during openzika we learnt that having multiple biology labs committed to doing testing in vitro is also very important to have access to experimental results more quickly to validate the computational approach. working with the ibm world community grid did not include any funding. we found it very difficult to obtain nih funding to support this project from the very beginning (because it was computational) and also attempted small business grants with academic collaborators without success, even though we were leveraging massive computational resources through the world community grid. we would recommend that open efforts like this need some funding for in vitro validation. millions of dollars have been invested by the nih to fund other zika research projects since the 2016 outbreak and there is as yet no small molecule of note in the drug discovery pipeline [36] . there is still therefore an unmet medical need for treatments for zika virus and computational efforts could aid this and be cost-effective.the whole genome sequences for sars-cov-2 were isolated from patients from several countries, such as brazil, canada, china, germany, korea and usa, and were made rapidly available at the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gsaid) platform [40] . there were 135 genomes sampled between december 2019 and february 2020. the samples were found to be closely related with few mutations relative to a common ancestor. preliminary genetic analysis indicates that the brazilian genome differs by three mutations to the wuhan reference strain [41] . two of these mutations are shared with its closest sequence-the germany strain [41] .in the space of a few weeks after the acknowledgement of the latest coronavirus outbreak, several laboratories started to deposit homology models for the main viral protease [42, 43] , and then for all the sars-cov-2 proteins using the server i-tasser [44] . others performed docking in these models [45] or developed their own models to understand how the virus enters cells by modeling the spike (s) protein and human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) protein interaction [46] . at the time of writing there were structures available for the sars-cov-2 main protease in complex with an inhibitor n3 (pdb id 6lu7) [47] and s1 and s2 subunits of spike glycoprotein receptor-binding domain up (6vsb), the post fusion core subunit (6lxt) and the hr2 domain (6lvn) [48, 49] . a useful overview is provided by searching the entire virus sequence against the protein data bank (pdb) (see supplementary material fig. s2 online). in comparison, for zika it took several months from the beginning of the outbreak until there was a single protein available in the pdb [50] .the spike glycoprotein is responsible for the fusion of the viral membrane with the host-cell membrane. during virus maturation, it is cleaved to its subunits: s1, which attaches the virion to the cell membrane by interacting with the host receptor; and s2, which mediates the fusion of the virion and cellular membranes. a recent study reports that sars-cov-2 spike protein binds ace2 with higher affinity than sars-cov [48] .because there was only one cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein with low resolution (3.46 å ) without the human ace2 protein [48] at the time of writing this paper, we preferred to build a model by homology modeling (see supplementary material methods online). using our sars-cov-2 spike protein model and the available sars-cov spike protein crystal structure (pdb: 2ajf), we aligned both structures to compare the residues in the spike-ace2 interface residues for both viruses. as can be seen in fig. 1 , the residues for sars-cov are asn473, tyr475, tyr440, tyr436, tyr484, leu472, tyr442 and asn479 and for sars-cov-2 are asn167, tyr169, tyr133, tyr129, gln178, phe166, leu135 and gln173. moreover, some sars-cov-2 residues, such as gln178, phe166, leu135 and gln173, are not conserved but have the same physical-chemical features, except the residues sars-cov-2 gln178 (polar) and sars tyr484 (hydrophobic) (fig. 1) .the main protease (m pro ) of coronaviruses is a cysteine protease that participates in the viral replication, cleaving the polyprotein. m pro is organized into three domains and is active in a homodimer form [51] . we aligned the crystal structures of m pro of sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 to compare the structures and the residues of the catalytic site. the catalytic site for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are the same: his41-cys145 [52] , whereas for mers-cov it is his41-cys148 [52] (fig. 2) . this catalytic site is localized between the interface of domain i (residues 8-101) and ii (102-184). the third domain (residues 201-303) is c-terminal, and consists of a loop region, required for the dimerization [53] [54] [55] [56] .recently, it has been reported that the structures of m pro of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 have high identity of 96% [43] . the function and the structural equivalence of m pro of sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 demonstrate that the coronavirus proteases are promising targets for development of broad-spectrum antivirals in these viruses.drug repurposing offers a potentially faster approach to identify drugs that are already approved for other uses and might work for the disease of interest [57] [58] [59] . this type of strategy was attempted for mers-cov and sars-cov [60, 61] and the repurposing of hostbased therapies has also been proposed for coronaviruses [62] . several studies have screened a few hundred molecules and tested the activity against mers-cov and sars-cov (table 2) [63, 64] .the first screen of 348 fda-approved drugs identified four fdaapproved drugs including chloroquine, chlorpromazine, loperamide and lopinavir [63] . at the same time, a second study screened 290 compounds and identified 27 fda-and non-fda-approved drugs including chloroquine among the many hits [64] , and the abl2 kinase inhibitors such as imatinib which impacts the early stages of infection after internalization and endosomal trafficking. this latter molecule appears to work by inhibiting fusion at the viral membrane [65] . chloroquine is widely used for malaria and loperamide is used for diarrhea. these represent drugs that are readily available in many locations around the world and for which physicians are also familiar with the side-effect profile. the ligand datasets from these and other screens can be used to apply machine learning methods to produce predictive models that can then be used to screen compound libraries and suggest superposition of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike proteins highlighting the spike-ace2 interface binding pocket. zoom at the residues of sars-cov-2 spike s1 asn167, tyr169, tyr133, tyr129, gln178, phe166, leu135 and gln173 and the correspondent sars-cov spike s1 asn473, tyr475, tyr440, tyr436, tyr484, leu472, tyr442 and asn479.superposition of sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 main proteases, and respective catalytic biding site. sars-cov (pdb id 1q2w) and sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6lu7) share the same residues at the catalytic site: his41-cys145, and mers-cov (pdb id 5wkl) his41 and cys148, situated between domains i and ii. (fig. 3 , the experimental details are described in the supplementary material online; the bayesian models are also available at http://models.collabchem.com/8/). the advantage of this approach is that the method is fast, does not require crystal structures and it enables small-molecule structures to be scored against many models simultaneously.as a well-established principle any sars-cov-2 relevant enzyme assay, protein-protein interaction antagonism or viral infectivity determination can be run against a collection of approved drugs. however, it is neither trivial to get a definitive list of these structures in silico prepared for docking or to acquire these as a physical collection ready for screening (even though there are various repurposing subsets available from vendors). notwithstanding, an approximation to a definitive approved set can be an alternative to screening every approved drug is to take one class of compounds. for example we have now taken the opportunity to dock fda-approved hiv-1 protease inhibitors (amprenavir, atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir and tipranavir) and hepatitis c ns3/4a protease inhibitors (asunaprevir, boceprevir, grazoprevir, paritaprevir, simeprevir and telaprevir) into the m pro structure of sars-cov-2.the docking was performed with two different commercial docking software products: biovia discovery studio and schrödinger glide [70] [71] [72] [73] , and the best docking results were compared (see supplementary material table s2 online). the results of both docking approaches indicated that azatanavir and lopinavir could be of most interest for in vitro or in vivo testing (fig. 4) . atazanavir can interact with m pro by h-bonding at cys145 and the amide group. the aromatic ring of atazanavir (ligandfit score of 191.196) also formed hydrophobic interactions with residues cys44, met49, leu50, tyr54 and cys145. in relation to lopinavir (ligandfit score of 175.497), h-bonds were established between residues cys145 and glu166 and nitrogen atoms of carbamate groups. similar hydrophobic interactions were observed with lopinavir (fig. 4) . in china and south korea lopinavir 200 mg/ ritonavir 50 mg has already been used for the treatment of covid-19. from the day after lopinavir/ritonavir administration, the viral load started to decrease and no detectable or little coronavirus titers have been observed since then [11] . lopinavir, co-formulated with ritonavir is commercially available and known as kaletra1 around the world-it is on formularies for hiv. by contrast, atazanavir is less commonly used. kaletra1 can be widely produced and distributed quickly through existing channels but it will be important to ensure hiv patients do not lose access to the medications they need. it is also a medication that clinicians are familiar with in terms of side effects, unlike other less commonly used medications. a broader analysis of all fda-approved drugs docked in this protease structure could point to further drugs worth testing. we have also performed docking calculations of sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein complexed with the host ace2 protein against all fda-approved drugs ($2400 molecules) using schrödinger glide software [70] [71] [72] [73] . because there was only one cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein with low resolution (3.46 å ) without the human ace2 protein [48] at the time of doing this analysis, we preferred to build a model by homology modeling, because lower-resolution structures (3 å or higher) show the basic contours of the protein chain and the atomic structure must be inferred. we built the sars-cov-2 spike subunit s1 model using the swissmodel server [74] . the template used was the sars-cov spike s1 protein (pdb id 2ghv) [75] , which has resolution of 2.2 å and 73.22% of sequence identity with sars-cov-2 spike protein. after the protein refinement, we added the human ace2 protein to the model, based on the sars-cov spike-ace2 structure (pdb id 2ajf) [76] , and built the full sars-cov-2 spike s1-ace2 model (see fig. s5 in supplementary material online). the quality statistics of the intermolecular 3d and 2d interactions of atazanavir (a) and lopinavir (b) with the main protease structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6lu7) obtained by docking. in the 3d representation (left), h-bonds are presented as magenta dashed lines and the color code of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen atoms are grey, red, blue and white, respectively. in the 2d interaction diagrams (right) h-bonds are presented as magenta arrows. the pymol software [79] was used for the visual inspection of 3d docking poses and to render the 3d molecular images. 3d and 2d intermolecular interactions of rizatriptan (a), dasabuvir (b), pravastatin (c) and empagliflozin (d) with the spike-ace2 interface (light blue and green, respectively). in 3d representation (left), h-bonds are presented as magenta dashed lines and the color code of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen atoms is grey, red, blue and white, respectively. the sars-cov-2 spike (s1 subunit) is colored in blue and human ace2 in light blue. in the 2d ligand-interaction diagram (right), h-bonds, p-p stacking and p-cation interactions are presented as magenta, green and red lines, respectively. glide software [71, 80] was used to dock the ligands in a grid centered at asn167, tyr169, tyr133, tyr129, gln178, phe166, leu135 and gln173 residues.www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 9 modeled sars-cov-2 spike-ace2 were good: 96.53% of the residues lie in the most favorable regions of the ramachandran plot and the molprobity score was 1.66. our sars-cov-2 spike-ace2 model is available (see supplemental material pdb file online). subsequently, we performed docking-based virtual screening with a grid centered at the spike-ace2 interface. as can be seen in table 3 , docking scores indicated that rizatriptan (an antimigraine agent, glide score = à7.49 kcal mol à1 ), dasabuvir (an antiviral for hepatitis c, glide score = à7.92 kcal mol à1 ), pravastatin (a lipid-lowering agent, glide score = à7.81 kcal mol à1 ) and empagliflozin (a hypoglycemic agent, glide score = à7.09 kcal mol à1 ) could be of interest for in vitro testing. details of intermolecular interactions of these drugs with the interface of spike-ace2 are shown in fig. 5 . in summary, these drugs form p-cation interactions with lys31a, pp interactions with phe170b and h-bonds with his34a, asp38a, gly176b and ser174b. in good agreement with our results, a previous study suggests that an early and high dose of a statin (such as pravastatin) could be crucial to surviving mers-cov infection [77] . these suggested molecules could be validated in future in vitro experiments.modern drug discovery efforts try to eliminate inefficiency by increasing knowledge, through extensive utilization of generated data to guide new experiments. therefore, we have also taken a drug repurposing approach based on polypharmacology using a method called the 'molecular and biological signature' [78] . this is a profiling approach, guided by artificial intelligence, capable of presenting the complex relationships between the chemical substance with molecular targets, cells and/or organs. this could create a more complete understanding of the 'multi-biological profile' caused by the drug analyzed in response to a disease. as an example, we have applied the drugs ritonavir [9] , favipiravir, ribavirin and chloroquine as scaffolds to find new potential molecular and biological signature profiles, to search for non-obvious, mechanism-of-action-based associations between drugs, molecular targets and diseases ( fig. 6; and supplementary material fig. s6 and table s3 online). comparing the molecular and biological signature of ritonavir with other drugs, we found that the drugs cobicistat, carfilzomib and ombitasvir presented the highest matching scores (81-71%), suggesting that those drugs could be of further interest for sars-cov-2. molecular and biological signature profiles generated for ritonavir compared with other drugs, using artificial intelligence to create thousands of decisionmakers that mimic a biological response through the interaction of a small molecule with multiple enzyme targets, off-targets and in vitro and in vivo endpoints. the drugs cobicistat, carfilzomib and ombitasvir presented the higher matching scores (81-71%) with ritonavir.although there are already several drugs being assessed clinically for sars-cov-2, there is still a need to identify additional treatments as alternatives (to offset drug shortages) and possibly discover molecules with increased efficacy, safety and costeffectiveness. we have previously proposed and applied computational drug discovery approaches such as machine learning and docking to aid in the discovery of new candidate molecules for ebola and zika, respectively. what we have learnt in these efforts can be applied to sars-cov-2 as we have demonstrated here. however, the research in this case has moved at a much faster pace initially, delivering a first crystal structure in just a few weeks after first public notification of the virus. companies have mobilized to bring their drugs to patients and clinicians have used prior in vitro research that proposed compounds active against mers-cov and sars-cov to suggest treatments for sars-cov-2. we currently do not clinically use any broad-spectrum antivirals in the usa but they would be invaluable in situations like this for sars-cov-2 and other viruses. identifying medications with side-effect profiles known by clinicians that are already produced at scale and available at local pharmacies around the world will allow more patients to be treated, especially as travel restrictions and quarantines could reduce production and distribution of certain drugs. it will remain important that those who need these medications at baseline, such as hiv patients who take ritonavir/lopinavir, are able to continue to access the medications they need or else there is a risk of poor clinical outcomes and antiviral resistance in these patients. although other viruses such as the flu might have killed more patients in the usa this season so far, the crippling financial impact of sars-cov-2 remains to be seen globally. if past ebola, zikv, mers-cov and sars-cov outbreaks are anything to go by this sars-cov-2 pandemic will be far more significant. having multiple effective treatments available for sars-cov-2 that can be rapidly delivered to patients could save lives. we can also supplement these treatments by a combination of computational screening with machine learning and docking to select additional drugs to test as proposed herein and this can be repeated for future virus outbreaks. the sense of déjà vu will probably be repeated again and again with the next virus outbreaks until we develop broaderspectrum antivirals. each time we hope to be better prepared. hope however does not save lives. effective antiviral treatments do, and we need to have them ready in the future. the novel coronavirus known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) or simply covid-19 is the seventh member of the coronavirus family. 1 the other two viruses in this family that infect humans are severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). these are positive-sense, single-strand enveloped rna viruses. the coronavirus particles contain four main structural proteins: the spike, membrane, envelope, and nucleocapsid. 1,2 the spike protein protrudes from the envelope of the virion and consists of two subunits: a receptor-binding domain (rbd) that interacts with the receptor proteins of host cells and a second subunit that facilitates fusion of the viral membrane into the host cell membrane. recent studies showed that the rbd of spike proteins of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 interact with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ace2 belongs to the membrane-bound carboxydipeptidase family. it is attached to the outer surfaces of cells and is widely distributed in the human body. in particular, higher expression of ace2 is observed in organs such as small intestine, colon, kidney, and heart, while ace2 expression is comparatively lower in the liver and lungs. 3, 4 the role of oxidative stress on the binding of viral proteins on the host cell surface receptors is a relatively underexplored area of biomedical research. 5−10 previous studies have indicated that the entry of viral glycoprotein is impacted by thiol−disulfide balance on the cell surface. 5, [7] [8] [9] 11, 12 any perturbations in the thiol−disulfide equilibrium are also found to deter the entry of viruses into their target cells. 5 the first step of the viral entry involves binding of the viral envelop protein onto a cellular receptor. this is followed by endocytosis, after which conformational changes of the viral protein help the induction of the viral protein into the endosomal membrane, finally releasing the viral content into the cell. these conformational changes are mediated by ph changes as well as the conversion of disulfide into the thiol group of the viral spike protein. 7 several cell surface oxidoreductases 9 regulate the thiol−disulfide exchange, responsible for conformational changes of viral proteins needed for virus entry into host cells.in the backdrop of a significant mortality rate for sars-cov-2 (hereinafter referred to as cov-2) infection, it is important to know if the thiol−disulfide balance plays any role in the binding of the spike glycoprotein onto the host cell receptor protein ace2. a recent study with the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov (hereinafter referred to as cov) has exhibited a complete redox insensitivity; 7 despite the reduction of all disulfide bridges of cov to thiols, its binding to ace2 remained unchanged. 7 however, this study did not probe the redox sensitivity of the ace2 receptor. thus, in the present study, we computationally investigated the redox state of both partners (ace2 and cov/cov-2) on their binding affinities. the structure of cov 13 and cov-2 14,15 complexed with ace2 are known, and the noncovalent interactions at the protein−protein interface 16 have been reported recently. using these reported structures, molecular dynamics simulations and electrostatic field calculations were performed to explore the impact of thiol−disulfide balance on cov/cov-2 and ace2 binding affinities. the structural and dynamical changes due to the alteration in the redox states of cysteines in the interacting proteins were analyzed, and their effects on binding free energies were studied.the molecular basis of the binding of spike proteins to ace2 is known from x-ray crystallographic (sars-cov) 13 and cryoelectron microscopic (sars-cov-2) 16 studies. the sequence alignment of cov and cov-2 spike proteins showed a high sequence identity (>75%), indicating that their binding to ace2 receptors will be similar ( figure 1 ). in both bound structures, the rbd of cov and cov-2 is found to be complexed with ace2 ( figure 2 ). both ace2 and cov-2 possess four disulfide bridges, whereas the cov subunit has only two disulfide linkages (table 1 and figure 2a ,b). two large helices of ace2 form a curved surface (figure 2 , illustrated by the dashed curved line) that interacts with the concave region of cov or cov-2 subunit.2.1. structural changes along the trajectory. in all cases, the simulation started with an equilibrated structure that was obtained after minimizing the neutralized solvated protein complex built from the experimentally determined structures. the evolution of the protein structure along the molecular dynamics (md) trajectory was monitored by calculating the root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of each structure from the starting structure as a frame of reference following the standard procedure. 17 briefly, during the md simulation, the protein coordinates were recorded for every 10 ps interval and an rmsd of each frame was calculated from the average rootmean-square displacement of backbone c α atoms with respect to the initial structure. then, the rmsd values, averaged over conformations stored during 1 ns time, were plotted against the simulated time ( figure 3 ). compared to the starting structure, only a moderate backbone fluctuation was noted in all protein complexes during 20 ns simulations, and the maximum of rmsd was in the range of 2.0−3.8 å ( table 2 ). the evolution of dynamics was smooth, and its stability was demonstrated by the standard deviation of the computed figure 1 . sequence alignment (generated by clustal omega 35 ) between the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 proteins. "*" represents the identical residues, ":" and "." represent strongly and weakly similar residues, respectively, and gap represents dissimilar residues. the cysteine residues are highlighted in yellow. rmsds, which was less than 0.3 å. taken together, the results of the simulations showed no unexpected structural deformation of the sars-cov/cov-2···ace2 complex in both, reduced (thiol groups) and oxidized (disulfide bonds) states (table 2) .2.2. thermal fluctuations due to the cleavage of disulfide bridges. the md simulation results indicated that the flexibility of different structural elements of the interacting proteins altered upon the cleavage of disulfide bridges (oxidized state) producing sulfydryl (thiol) groups (reduced state). for each complex, the impact of the reduction of the disulfide bridges was probed by calculating residue-level root-mean-square fluctuations (rmsf) of c α atoms with respect to the average structure from its md simulation trajectory. changes in the backbone flexibility due to complete reduction of all disulfides to thiols of both interacting proteins are shown in figure 4a ,b, where the backbone is color-coded to indicate the magnitude of thermal fluctuations. larger and smaller backbone fluctuations are shown in red and blue, respectively, whereas the medium fluctuation regions are shown in green. the backbone fluctuation analysis demonstrated that the cleavage of disulfide bridges indeed affected the flexibility of the local regions as they became more dynamic (figure 4b) . a significant alteration in backbone flexibility was noticed at the interface of cov and ace2 subunits when both proteins are in the fully reduced states, i.e., all disulfides are changed to sulfydryl groups. as it is evident from figure 4b , the helix (residues 52−64) of ace2 became very mobile, due to the rupture of the nearby c344:::c361 disulfide. the second region belongs to the flexible loop consisting of residues 463− 474 of the cov subunit (residues 478−489 of the cov-2 subunit), which interacts with the n-terminal segment of the ace2. the cleavage of the disulfides c467:::c474 in cov and c480:::c488 in cov-2 resulted in higher thermal fluctuation.2.3. binding study. the computed gibbs binding free energy (δ bind g°) of protein complexes (table 3 ) demonstrated that the binding of cov or cov-2 with ace2 occurs because the attractive electrostatic interactions between the individual subunits prevail over the desolvation due to the complexation. the complex formation results in desolvation from proteins' surfaces at the protein−protein interface, thereby producing a positive δδ solv g corr for all protein systems (table 3 ). for the formation of a stable protein−protein the cysteine residues are highlighted in yellow and disulfide bonds are shown using black solid lines. the start and end residues in the crystal structures are numbered and highlighted in red. the gray highlighted residues are missing in the crystal structure. figure 3 . rmsds, averaged over 1 ns md simulation, of the protein complexes of ace2 and sars-cov or sars-cov-2. disulfidecontaining proteins are referred to as oxidized with a shorthand notation of "ox", while thiol variants are denoted with "red" notation.http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf article complex, this energy has to be counterbalanced by the negative electrostatic interactions, δ coul g, between the interacting proteins.when the disulfides of the rbd of cov and cov-2 were reduced to thiols, the impact of reduction on the binding of these two proteins with ace2 was different. the computed δ bind g°for cov ox ···ace2 ox and cov red ···ace2 ox are −7.3 and −11.2 kcal/mol, respectively (table 3) , indicating a slightly tighter binding of the reduced cov rbd to ace2. the experimentally known k d value for the cov ox ···ace2 ox system is 325 nm, 14 which corresponds to a δ bind g°value of −8.9 kcal/mol. therefore, the computationally determined δ bind g°f or cov ox ···ace2 ox binding is comparable to the experimental value. although there is no experimentally determined k d available for the cov red ···ace2 ox system, the binding assay with cov red rbd was found to have no redox sensitivity for its binding to ace2. 7 the small favorability of cov red ···ace2 ox binding, as observed from the computation, indicates that the reduction of cov did not have much impact on its binding affinity for ace2 and could explain the experimentally observed redox insensitivity. 7 in the case of cov-2, its binding with ace2 became less favorable when all of the disulfides of rbd were reduced to thiols. the computed gibbs binding free energies were increased by ∼4.5 kcal/mol for the reduced cov-2; δ bind g o of cov-2 ox ···ace2 ox and cov-2 red ···ace2 ox are −10.4 and −6.0 kcal/mol, respectively.in contrast, the reduction of disulfides of ace2 impaired the binding significantly for both cov and cov-2 proteins. the gibbs binding free energies of viral spike proteins cov and cov-2 with ace2 red , namely, cov ox ···ace2 red and cov-2 ox ··· ace2 red are −3.4 and −3.8 kcal/mol, respectively. these δ bind g°values are ∼4 to 6 kcal/mol more positive than what were observed for the oxidized forms of ace2 (i.e., cov ox ··· ace2 ox and cov-2 ox ···ace2 ox in table 3 ). however, when all disulfides in cov/cov-2 as well as ace2 were reduced to thiols, the binding became thermodynamically unfavorable. in figure 5 ) that fits into the concave-shaped loop-β-sheet-loop motif (residues 460− 490 of cov and residues 475−505 of cov-2) of rbd of viral spike proteins. the loss of disulfide bridges in ace2 had a strong impact on the junction of the two conjoined helices ( figure 5 , cov red ···ace2 red ). this region is close to the disulfide bridge c344:::c361, and its cleavage has a significant impact on the shape complementarity at the protein−protein interface. similarly, the loss of c467:::c474 disulfide in cov (c480:::c488 in cov-2) resulted in a significant conformational change in the loop region, which was displaced away from the protein−protein interface by ∼6 å, indicating a reduced binding interaction as confirmed by the binding free energy calculations. this conformational change as well as the alteration in the backbone flexibility ( figure 4 ) must have resulted in impaired binding of cov/cov-2 with ace2.the study found that the reduction of all disulfides into sulfydryl groups completely impairs the binding of sars-cov/ cov-2 spike protein to ace2. this is evident from the positive gibbs energy of binding (δ bind g°) obtained for both cov red ··· ace2 red and cov-2 red ···ace2 red complexes. when the disulfides of only ace2 were reduced to sulfydryl groups, the binding becomes weaker, as δ bind g°becomes less negative by 4−6 kcal/mol with respect to the fully oxidized systems. on the other hand, the reduction of disulfides of the rbd of cov-2 has comparatively less effect on δ bind g°, while the reduction of disulfides in cov rbd does not impact the binding with ace2. this finding is consistent with the observed redox insensitivity of the binding between cov and ace2. 7 the redox environment of cell surface receptors is regulated by the thiol−disulfide equilibrium in the extracellular region. 12, 18 this is maintained by glutathione transporters, 19 a number of oxidoreductases 12 including protein disulfide isomerase, 8 and several redox switches. 12 under oxidative stress, the extracellular environment becomes oxidation-prone resulting in more disulfide formation on protein surfaces. 12 therefore, under severe oxidative stress, the cell surface receptor ace2 and rbd of the intruding viral spike protein are likely to be present in its oxidized form having predominantly disulfide linkages. this computational study shows that under oxidative stress, the lack of a reducing environment would result in significantly favorable binding of the viral protein on the cell surface ace2. in terms of energetics, this computational study demonstrates that the oxidized form of proteins with disulfide bridges would cause more than 50 kcal/mol of decrease in gibbs binding free energy. furthermore, ace2, which the viral spike proteins latch on to, is known to be a key player in the remedial of oxidative stress. 20 binding of the viral protein will prevent the key catalytic function of ace2 of converting angiotensin 2 (a strong activator of oxidative stress) to angiotensin 1−7 thereby creating a vicious circle of enhanced viral attack. in summary, the present study demonstrates that the absence of or reduced oxidative stress would have a significant beneficial effect during the early stage of viral infection by preventing viral protein binding on the host cells.4.1. computational setup. setting up of protein systems and all structural manipulations were carried out using visual molecular dynamics (vmd). 21 disulfide groups were modified to thiols during the setting up of structures using standard vmd scripts. molecular optimization and dynamics (md) simulations were carried out using nanoscale molecular dynamics (namd) package using charmm36 force field. 22−26 during md simulations, electrostatic energy calculations were carried out using the particle mesh ewald method. 27 backbone root-mean-square-deviation (rmsd) calculations were performed using vmd. protein−protein interactions were studied using adaptive-basis poisson− boltzmann solver (apbs). 28 electrostatic field calculations were performed using pdb 2pqr program suit. 29 4.2. molecular dynamics simulations. all simulations were performed using the structure of ace2 bound sars-cov (pdb entry: 3d0g) 13 and sars-cov-2 (pdb entry: 6m0j). 15 in all simulations, set up of protein complex systems was carried out following protocols used in the previous studies from this lab. 17, 30 briefly, hydrogens were added using the hbuild module of charmm. ionic amino acid residues were maintained in a protonation state corresponding to ph 7. the protonation state of histidine residues was determined by computing the pk a using the propka option of pdb 2pqr. the protein structures were explicitly solvated with water of the tip3p model and neutralized by adding with 24 sodium atoms. the prepared solvated protein complexes were of dimensions 92 å × 132 å × 104 å for sars-cov and 94 å × 144 å × 100 å for sars-cov-2 systems. 21 all systems were subjected to equilibration for 50 ps. following equilibration, 20 ns md simulations were performed for each system. the velocities and positions of atoms during figure 5 . comparison of the conformational change at the protein− protein interface in cov ox ···ace2 ox (left) and cov red ···ace2 red (right). cov and ace2 subunits in the complex are shown in blue and red colors, respectively, at the center. the structural motif containing the two helices of ace2 and a β sheet of the cov (or cov-2) was monitored before (top) and after (bottom) 20 ns md simulation. the left and right panels show the difference in conformational changes in the oxidized form (cov ox ···ace2 ox ) and reduced form (cov red ···ace2 red ), respectively.http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf article dynamics were calculated using the velocity verlet integration algorithm 31 using a time step of 2.0 fs. all simulations were run with namd implementation of langevin dynamics 32 at a constant temperature of 298 k using periodic boundary conditions. to model, nonbonding interactions, a switching function was turned on with a "switchdist" of 10 å, a cutoff of 14 å, and a "pairlistdist" of 16 å. 4.3. binding free energy calculations. gibbs free energies of binding between the ace2 and sars-cov or cov-2 proteins were calculated using apbs, a standardized method of a treecode-accelerated boundary integral poisson− boltzmann (tabi-pb) equation solver. 33 in this method, the protein surface is triangulated and electrostatic surface potentials are computed. the discretization of surface potentials is utilized to compute the net energy due to solvation as well as electrostatic interactions between the two protein subunits, as outlined in the thermodynamic scheme (scheme 1). following scheme 1, the free energy of binding of the two protein fragments in water can be expressed as a sum of two components (eq 1)where δ coul g represents the coulombic (electrostatic) interactions between the proteins occurring at the protein− protein interface (scheme 1) and δδ solv g is the difference of the solvation energies between the complex and the corresponding free proteins however, the solvation calculation used only part of the entire spike protein as well as the ace2; therefore, δ bind g tabi-pb was calibrated by correcting δδ solv g using experimentally known binding free energy of ace2···cov-2 where k d = 37 nm is the experimental dissociation constant. 16 the corrected free energy of the solvation as shown in eq 4, the combination of the last two terms in eq 5 is equal to δδ solv g corr. therefore, eq 5 can be simplified as and dialysed against pbs. sars-cov-enriched fractions were checked by sds-page and western blotting, and rendered non-infectious by irradiation in a gamma cell on dry ice with a 2 mrad exposure for 90 minutes. the dose was chosen as sufficient for viral inactivation 1 , while retaining antibody 1,2 or enzyme functional activities 3 . previous studies have indicated that viral rna is highly sensitive to radiation and that viruses were by 2 mrad 1 , even when cooled to minimize heat damage to proteins, whereas antigenicity of viral proteins and antibody binding titres were maintained after doses of 3.6 mrad 1 or 5 mrad 3 . irradiated specimens were tested for infectivity by inoculation onto vero e6 cells, and examined for cytopathogenic effects for 10 days, followed by blind passage of the cells and testing for the growth of sars-cov by pcr 4 .cryo-electron microscopy. virus samples (4µl) were applied to glow-discharged holey carbon films supported on 400-mesh copper grids. after blotting immediately for 2-5 seconds with filter paper, grids were plunged into liquid ethane cooled by liquid nitrogen, using a custom built gravity-operated freezing device. specimens were transferred to a tecnai 20 g2 transmission electron microscope (fei) operated at 200kv, equipped with a gatan 626.dh low-temperature specimen holder.observations were made at temperatures of ~ -185°c and images recorded at 29,000x magnification on kodak so -163 electron image film at a dose of 10-20 electrons/å 2 with an exposure of 1-2 seconds.film was developed in kodak d19 for 12 minutes at room temperature. immuno-gold stained samples were imaged at room temperature in the tecnai 20, and digital images were collected using either a gatan msc or amt advantage xr-12 digital cameras.image processing. the exact magnification in the microscope was determined to be 29,968x using a calibration grid ( formvar-carbon coated 400-mesh nickel grids were floated on drops of purified sars-cov (40μl) for 1 minute. all incubations were carried out at 20 °c. grids were then washed in pbs, followed by a 10-minute block in pbs-g-bsa (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine, 2% bsa). after washing in pbs-g (pbs ph7.2, 0.2% glycine), grids were then incubated in primary antibody diluted in pbs-g-bsa or convalescent patient serum diluted in pbs, followed by washes in pbs-g and then incubated in secondary antibody (conjugated to 5 or 10 nm gold), followed again by washing in pbs-g. grids were fixed (1% paraformaldehyde, 1% glutaraldehyde in pbs), washed in deionised water and negatively stained in either 2% uranyl acetate or 2% methylamine tungstate (nanoprobes, yaphank, ny.). in the case of nucleocapsid labelling, specimens were permeabilised by pre-treatment with 0.05% np-40 for in pbs on ice. in all experiments negative controls were run which included omission of the primary antibody to test for non-specific binding.keywords: covid-19; sars-cov-2; coronavirus; receptor-binding domain; receptor binding-motifa novel coronavirus has emerged in human population in the city of wuhan (china) causing severe respiratory illness that the world health organization named 2019 novel coronavirus disease and the pathogen named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (huang et al., 2020; li et al., 2020) . since its emergence in december 2019, the viral infection has already spread in many chinese cities and several countries, and the world health organization has declared it a public health emergency of international concern by the end of january 2020. the situation report 114 of the who (may 13 th , 2020) indicated that more than 4 million confirmed cases had been reported globally with nearly 32% of the cases in the usa alone; the total deaths caused by the disease reached 287 399 cases, mainly in the americas and europe (37% and 55%, respectively) (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200513-covid-19sitrep-114.pdf?sfvrsn=17ebbbe_4).coronaviruses belong to the family coronaviridae in the order nidovirales and can be classified into four genera: alpha-coronavirus, beta-coronavirus, gamma-coronavirus, and delta-coronavirus (cui et al., 2019; perlman and netland, 2009) . they are, enveloped, positive-stranded rna viruses, containing the largest genome among all rna viruses, ranging from 27 to 32 kb (fehr and perlman, 2015) . after the release of the sars-cov-2 genome sequence, it has been classified as beta-coronavirus, closely related to the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) that emerged in 2002 (ksiazek et al., 2003 peiris et al., 2003) .the coronaviruses spike protein (s) forms large protrusions from the virus surface (spikes) giving the viral particles the appearance of having crowns (hence their name coronavirus) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (cui et al., 2019; perlman and netland, 2009; zumla et al., 2016) . these spikes represent the first contact with the host and mediate the virus entry into host cells; besides, the s protein has been linked to host and tissue tropism (du et al., 2009; li, 2016) . structurally, the coronavirus spikes are clove-shaped trimers of the s protein with the asymmetric unit containing a large ectodomain, a single-pass transmembrane anchor, and a short intracellular tail (kirchdoerfer et al., 2016; smith et al., 2016) . the ectodomain consists of a receptorbinding subunit s1 and a membrane-fusion subunit s2, with the s1 subunit containing distinct n-terminal and c-terminal domains (s1-ntd and s1-ctd) (beniac et al., 2006; walls et al., 2016) .one of the major complexities of coronaviruses is their receptor recognition pattern. to date, several receptors have been found to be recognized by different coronaviruses (li, 2015; li, 2016) . among these receptors: zinc peptidases such as angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) (hofmann et al., 2005; li et al., 2003) and aminopeptidase n (apn) (delmas et al., 1993; li et al., 2007) ; dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) (raj et al., 2013; yang et al., 2014) ; carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (ceacam1) (dveksler et al., 1991; williams et al., 1991) ; and sialic acid-containing receptors (schwegmann-wessels and herrler, 2006) . in this report, we compared the composition and the structural features of the s protein receptor-binding domains between the sars-cov-2 and related viruses (especially the sars-cov) and tried to extrapolate the findings to shed some light on possible functioning of this s protein of the new coronavirus, especially the receptor-binding domains.a total of 1652 sequences of s proteins of sars-cov-2 isolates from 29 countries were retrieved. the majority of the sequences were for the usa (1451) followed by china (66) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (supplementary file 1). the sequence identity to the reference sequence (yp_009724390.1) varied from 99.7 to 100%, indicating thus a high degree of conservation. nearly 40% of these sequences were identical to the reference sequence, while the other 60% presented mostly single mutations (one mutated position in each sequence). the mutated positions (77 in total) are reported in supplementary file 1. however, of these mutated positions, three were shared by several sequences: position 791 where thr was mutated to ile in 5 of the taiwanese sequences; position 829 where ala was mutated to thr in 9 sequences from thailand; and more importantly the apparition of gly instead of asp at position 614 in 923 sequences. it is to note that all these three positions are located in the s2 subunit.the s protein of the sars-cov-2 shares 97.41% amino acid similarity with the recently identified bat-cov ratg13 isolate, 80.32% with a bat sars-like cov and only 76.27% identity with the sars-cov gz02 isolate. moreover, compared to the s1 subunit, the s2 subunit of the s proteins was found more conserved in the four strains ( figure 1 and table 1 ).further, by comparing segments of 100aa of the sars-cov-2 s protein to the other three coronaviruses (figure 1a ), the results indicated that the region spanning aa1-400 of the s protein was more similar to the new bat isolate (>90%) than to the sars-or the bat sarslike strains. a more pronounced dissimilarity was noted at the regions spanning aa401-500 and aa601-700, which correspond to the c-terminal domain of the s1 subunit (s1-ctd).the s1-ntd of the sars-cov-2 is highly similar to that of the newly isolated bat coronavirus ratg13 (>98%) but shares roughly 53% and 67% with those of the sars-cov or bat sars-like cov, respectively (table 1) .structurally, we used the dali server for aligning the s1-ntd of the sars-cov-2 with other coronaviruses from the different genera (table 2) . as expected the s1-ntd of the sars-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cov-2 was more similar to those of the beta-coronaviruses, especially the sars-cov (the highest z-score, highest sequence identity and the lowest rmsd). however, all the ntds were aligned with z-scores ranging from 6 to 22.1 and rmsds ranging from 1.1 to 4.2. this similarity is due to the galectin-like topology of the ntds' core structures as previously documented (li, 2012) .the primary sequence alignment also revealed some insertions shared by the sars-cov-2 and bat coronavirus ratg13 but not the sars-cov, located at positions aa72-82, aa144-147, aa244-246 and aa255-257 of the sars-cov-2 s protein ( figure 2 ).to further investigate the structural role of these inserts, we searched the protein data bank using the largest insert 72gtngtkr78 with 5 amino acids extensions on both n-and cterminal sides, leading to 17aa long segment 67aihvsgtngtkrfdnpv83; then we analyzed the hits to see whether the aligned motifs were engaged in any identified structural function.when we searched the protein databank using the gtngtkr motif, the first hit was the structure of the mengo virus vp1 protein ( figure 3a ). the aligned segment was located on the vp1 gh loop, which forms along with the vp3 c-terminal loop a depression on the capsid that has been associated with receptor recognition and binding (kim et al., 1990; krishnaswamy and rossmann, 1990 ). although the depression described in the mengo virus capsid is absent in the s1-ntd of the sars-cov-2, the target motif 72gtngtkrfdn81 forms a similarly exposed loop with two neighboring loops containing the 255ssg257 motif (the identified insert 4) and the n-terminal loop (18ltt20 motif) on both sides ( figure 3b ).whether this formation could play the same role as the mengo virus vp1 and vp3 loops, which would, in turn, allow the sars-cov-2 to interact with the same receptor, need further investigation. moreover, the mengo virus has been found to bind the murine cellular receptor vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (vcam-1) to enter and infect cells (huber, 1994) . this receptor molecule is restricted to endothelial cells and is subject to upregulation under cytokines stimulation (hosokawa et al., 2006; singh et al., 2005) . given the high cytokine amounts stimulated by the sars-cov-2 (huang et al., 2020) and pre-existing heart disease (hypertension and coronary heart disease) being one of the major co-morbidities of the fatality cases (deng and peng, 2020) , it is interesting to explore the possibility of the sars-cov-2 binding the vcam-1 receptor via its s1-ntd.the mouse hepatitis coronavirus (mhv) also binds another cell adhesion molecule, the murine carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1a (mceacam1a), using its s1-ntd (peng et al., 2011) . therefore, as a next step, we compared the mhv and sars-cov-2 s1-ntds. we found that the receptor-binding motif of the mhv s1-ntd also presents a motif 168ntngnk173 with some similarity to insert 1 (72gtngtkr78) of the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd. however, when the s1-ntds were compared in the quaternary structures of the s proteins, the above motifs seem to occupy opposite positions (figure 3c and d). besides, peng et al. identified four receptor binding motifs in the mhv s1-ntd (rbm1-4) (peng et al., 2011) . by comparing the mhv-receptor interaction interface and the exposed amino acids on the receptor-binding surface of the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd, we found that the n-terminal aa15-21 segments adopt different conformations (figure 3d ), and this segment in the mhv (rbm1) contains three residues critical for receptor binding affinity (peng et al., 2011) . therefore, it seems unlikely that the sars-cov-2 would bind the same receptor. however, this observation should be taken with care since it is based on the predicted model of the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd.taken all together, the presence of the gtngtkr motif in the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd seems to be a potentially evolutionary feature that sars-cov-2 acquired to allow its s1-ntd to bind to protein receptors. we believe that the above observations are worth investigating.another structure containing the analyzed motif was the tail spike protein 1 of the bacteriophage cba120 (podoviridae) (chen et al., 2014) . the aligned motif gtngtk was located within the receptor-binding domain, in the inverting region connecting the subdomain d3 and d4. interestingly, unlike other tail spike proteins where the sugar-binding sites were located on the d3 subdomain muller et al., 2008; steinbacher et al., 1996; xiang et al., 2009) , the d3-d4 inverting region of the cba120 tail spike protein generates a hole that forms the sugar-binding site (chen et al., 2014) . although the target motif was not directly involved in the sugar's interactions, the binding site (hole) is formed in the opposite direction of the gtngtk loop, and a quite similar orientation of the motif is observed in the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd ( figure 4) . besides, what could be the counterparts of the sugar-binding pocket of the cba120 tail spike protein is one of the two pockets formed in the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd: the first situated on the top part of the domain and the other located above the β-sandwich core in the opposite direction of the gtngtkr loop ( figure   4c ). this latter pocket is also aligned with the sugar-binding site in the ntd of bovine coronavirus (bcov) (figure 5a and c) . peng et al. (peng et al., 2012) reported that the pocket above the β-sandwich core is the sugar-binding site in bcov ntd and through mutagenesis studies, they identified 4 residues critical for the ntd-receptor interaction y162, e182, w184, and h185 and the binding was stabilized by the loop 10-11 (146ndlnkl151) ( figure 5c) . interestingly, the corresponding pocket in the sars-cov-2 ntd also contains three amino acids (e154, f157, and y160) with the same orientation than the four key residues identified in the bcov ntd. moreover, the positions of e154 and y160 are j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f strikingly similar to that of y162 and e182 in bcov ntd (figure 5d ). besides, a counterpart of the stabilizing loop 10-11 is also present in the sars-cov-2 ntd, although shorter, but seems to share the nxxn motif.these observations suggest that sars-cov-2 ntd might recognize a sugar receptor as well, and it is likely to be the same neu5,9ac2 that bcov ntd binds to (peng et al., 2012) .the tngtrrf motif was also present in the infectious bronchitis coronavirus (ibv) spike protein. despite the low primary sequence identity (11%), the pairwise structural alignment revealed that the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd shared a relatively high structural similarity with the s1-ntd of the ibv with a dali z-score of 8.6 and rmsd of 3.1 over 159 aligned residues ( table 2 ). the aligned motif tngtrrf was located within the s1-ctd of the ibv, in the subdomain connecting s1 and s2 (shang et al., 2018) . although no functional features have been described for the subdomains of the s1-ntds and s1-ctds in the coronaviruses spikes, the target motif was found protruding from the surface of the trimer (figure 6a) , suggesting that such protrusion might interact with the surrounding environment.the aligned fragment was also located at the c-terminal of the mimivirus cyclophilin but it was missing from the deposited structure (thai et al., 2008) . further, the authors did not link any structural function of the segment of interest. however, it is to note that this is the first virus-encoded cyclophilin but it lacks peptidyl-prolyl isomerase, an activity that several viruses such human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and sars-cov exploit the host cyclophilin for (chen et al., 2005; sorin and kalpana, 2006) . interestingly, the viral cyclophilin was located on the surface of mature mimivirus virions, and given the absence of the catalytic activity, the authors suggested that the protein may play a structural role yet to be identified in the mimivirus life cycle (thai et al., 2008) . since the mimivirus can cause j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pneumonia in humans (la scola et al., 2005; saadi et al., 2013) , and the exact position of the cyclophilin is yet to be determined, a question could be asked whether the 221ngtkrf226 motif could play a role in the virus pathogenesis that could be shared by the sars-cov-2.besides viruses, the search for a functional gtngtkr motif in the deposited protein structures revealed a similar motif in the folylpolyglutamate synthetase (fpgs) of lactobacillus casei, an enzyme that catalyzes the mgatp-dependent glutamylation of folate coenzymes (figure 6b ). the aligned motif 42ihvtgtng49 was located on the putative nucleotide-binding p loop (gtngkgs) that resembles the consensus p-loop sequence found in many other adenylate and uridylate kinase (smith and rayment, 1996; sun et al., 1998) .moreover, a ω loop near the p loop binding site was also suggested to play a role in the activity of the fpgs, especially the serine residue. interestingly, a similarly shaped loop is also found in the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd adjacent to the gtngtkr loop, formed by the insert 4 (254sssg257) also rich in serine residues (figure 6c and d) .given the severity and the widespread nature of the infection, it is safe to assume that the sars-cov-2 has a more efficient way to penetrate and infect cells. besides, based on the comparison of the sars-cov-2 and sars-cov receptor-binding domains, it seems that sars-cov-2 evolved in a way that allowed it to maintain and enhance the binding of the ace2 receptor via its s1-ctd, but also acquired a different s1-ntd that according to our analysis might bind other receptors (protein or sugar receptor). more precisely, the acquisition of the gtngtkr motif, found at the active sites of structural and nonstructural proteins of other viruses and organisms, might allow the sars-cov-2 to recognize other receptors/co-receptors besides the ace2.moreover, our results suggest that the apparition of the gtngtkr motif points more toward an evolutionary trait of the sars-cov-2 rather than the hypothesis of an engineered virus;under functional constraints, proteins tend to evolve in a way that their tertiary structures could perform the needed functions regardless of the changes in their primary sequences (goldstein, 2008; siltberg-liberles et al., 2011; worth et al., 2009) and the two main factors driving the evolution of the s proteins are the need for better adaptation to the host receptors and the need to evade the immune system of the host to ensure better infectivity (li, 2015; li, 2016) . therefore, it is more plausible to assume that the sars-cov-2 acquired the gtngtkr motif during its evolutionary parkour under functional constraints. as for the exact mechanism of acquisition and the origin of this motif, we believe that further investigations are needed not only in the context of the sars-cov-2 infection but as a pertinent motif for viral proteins activity in general.a total of 1652 sars-cov-2 s protein complete sequences available at the ncbi virus portal were retrieved. the sequences of sars-cov gc02 isolate (ay390556) and two bat isolates: a bat sars-like coronavirus (mg772934) and the recently isolated ratg13 bat coronavirus (mn996532) were also retrieved, and their s glycoproteins were compared to that of the sars-cov-2 (refseq: yp_009724390.1).first, we performed a multiple alignment of the s proteins of the 1652 sars-cov-2 strains to see if any dissimilarities were present and analyzed the occurrence of mutations in comparison to the reference sequence. next, we compared the similarity of the s glycoprotein of the sars-cov-2 (refseq: yp_009724390.1) to that of the selected 4 related coronaviruses strains mentioned above: 1) aligning the full-length proteins of the 4 stains j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f altogether; 2) aligning the full-length sars-cov-2 s protein to that of each of the related strains separately; 3) aligning portions (100aa windows) of the sars-cov-2 s protein by to that of each of the related strains separately.all sequence alignments were performed using the muscle algorithm implemented in the mega-x software or blastp suite of the u.s. national library of medicine.for the search of motifs similar to the gtngtkr motif in the protein data bank deposited structures, the blastp suite of the u.s. national library of medicine was used by adjusting parameters to search for a short input sequence.three crystal structures of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (containing the s1-ntd) were retrieved from the protein data bank (pdb id: 6vyb, 6vxx, and 6vsb). since all of these structures lacks some fragments of interest (especially the gtngtkr motif), the sequence of s glycoprotein of the sars-cov-2 (reference id: yp_009724390.1) was submitted to i-tasser (https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/i-tasser/) and swiss-model (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/) servers for the prediction of complete 3d structure models (waterhouse et al., 2018; yang and zhang, 2015) . the quality of the predicted 3d structures was evaluated using the molprobity server (http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu) (williams et al., 2018) and the best models were selected for the analysis.all structural alignments were performed using the dali server (http://ekhidna2.biocenter.helsinki.fi/dali/) (holm, 2020) regions identified in the similarity analysis were mapped on the sars-cov-2 s protein trimer predicted by the swiss-model server: region aa1-400 is depicted in blue, region aa401-500 is depicted in red, region 501-600 is depicted in cyan, region aa601-700 is depicted in hot pink, and the c-terminal region starting from aa701 is depicted in yellow. 4h14). b) the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd in the same orientation as the bcov s1-ntd in (a), with the 72gtngtkr78 in the far side colored in red and the counterpart of the loop 10-11 with a conserved nxxn motif in the front (also colored in red). c and d) different orientations of the bcov and sars-cov-2 s1-ntds obtained by a 70° rotation of the x-axis of (a) and (b) respectively; the key residues for the interactions with sugar moieties in the bcov s1-ntd and their possible counterparts in the sars-cov-2 s1-ntd are shown as red sticks in (c) and (d), respectively. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 has emerged as an unprecedented global pandemic 1, 2, 3 and as of june 8, 2020 , there are nearly 7 million confirmed cases worldwide, leading to 400,857 deaths(who).the infection of sars-cov-2 causes fever, dry cough, severe respiratory illness and pneumonia, a disease recently named covid-19 4 . pathological studies have revealed all features of diffuse alveolar damage (dad) with excessive fluid in the lungs and critically ill patients often need ventilators to support oxygen. furthermore, a frequent complication of covid-19 that blood clotted abnormally is observed in many hospitalized patients 5 . therefore, there is an urgent need for a mechanistic understanding of the pathogenicity of sars-cov-2 and its concomitant complications to be able to treat hospitalized patients.during the sudden emergency and rapid spread of sars-cov-2, global efforts have identified human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2(ace2) as the entry receptor for this new coronavirus 2 , which was also the entry receptor for sars-cov 6, 7, 8 . structural studies revealed that sars-cov-2 spike (s) glycoprotein binds ace2 with higher affinity (~15-40nm) than sars-cov spike protein 9, 10, 11, 12 . the overall structure of sars-cov-2 s resembles that of sars-cov s with the rbd domain of one protomer in spike protein trimer tightly interacting ace2 extracellular enzymatic domain. physiologically, ace2 is a zinc metalloprotease (carboxypeptidase), a homolog to dipeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) but with different substrate specificity 13 . ace cleaves the c-terminal dipeptide from ang i to produce the potent vasopressor octapeptide ang ii, whereas ace2 further cleaves the carboxylterminus to produce ang 1-7 to deactivate ang ii. therefore, ace and ace2 together play important roles in regulating vasoconstriction and vasodilatation in the rennin-angiotensin system (ras). in the meanwhile, ace and ace2 plays critical role in kinin-kallikrein system to control vascular permeability and vasodilatation 14 . ace deactivates bradykinin nonapeptide, the ligand for constitutively expressed bradykinin receptor b2. bradykinin can be further processed by carboxypeptidase n or m to form des-arg9-bradykinin, which is a potent ligand for inflammation-inducible bradykinin receptor b1 15 renin-angiotensin and kinin-kallikrein systems, ace2 also cleaves other biological peptides such as apelin-13 that activates apelin receptor to cause vasodilatation. however, there is limited information on the level of these substrates during sars-cov-2 infection given the fact that ace2 is the major entry receptor for this new coronavirus.compared to relatively low expression of ace, ace2 is predominantly expressed in the lung on pneumocytes ii, which explains that lung is the major organ infected by sars-cov-2. critical clinical observations showed that covid-19 patients often had dyspnea and accumulation of fluid in the lungs representing local angioedema, which clearly suggests the pathological involvement of vascular permeability and vasodilatation during sars-cov-2 infection. however, there was no direct assessment of ace2 enzymatic activity during coronavirus infection. here we examined how the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein would affect the intrinsic enzymatic activity of ace2 using one well characterized fluorogenic ace2 substrate, the caspase-1 substrate (mca-yvadapk-dnp) 13 . in comparison, ace substrate, a bradykinin analog (mca-rppgfsafk-dnp) was also included in the enzymatic activity assessment 16 . to our surprise, sars-cov-2 spike enhanced ace2 proteolytic activity to cleave mca-yvadapk-dnp, which was mediated by ace2 binding of rbd. furthermore, sars-cov-2 rbd enhanced ace2 activity to hydrolyze the bradykinin-analog better than sars-cov rbd. measurements of kinetic constants also showed that sars-cov-2 spike protein altered the binding affinity (k m ) of ace2 to the caspase-1 substrate or bradykinin-analog. we propose that this new line of evidence that sars-cov-2 spike protein significantly alters ace2 activity and specificity could be clinically relevant to the understanding of the pathogenesis of covid-19.genetic analysis revealed that sars-cov-2 was highly homologous to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) that infected human cells with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2(ace2) receptor 2, 8 . after the outbreak of covid-19, ace2 was quickly identified as the entry receptor for sar-cov-2 as well. further structural studies demonstrated that both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov utilized their rbd domain to interact with ace2 at a very similar binding mode. however, sars-cov-2 spike protein displays a much higher binding affinity to ace2 compared with sars-cov. given the nanomolar affinity between ace2 and sars-cov-2 s spike protein, we wonder how the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein to ace2 would affect its enzymatic activity since ace2 is a critical component in both the rennin-angiotensin and kinin-kallikrein system as a carboxypeptidase 14, 17 .as previously reported, ace2 efficiently hydrolyzes biological peptides with a consensus sequence of pro-x(1-3 residues)-pro-hydrophobic at p5-p1' positions 13 , with cleavage between proline and the hydrophobic residue as exemplified by ang ii (drvyihp↓f) and des-arg 9 -bk (rppgfsp↓f). ace2 also cleaves peptides with a basic residue at p1' position such as dynorphin a (yggflrrirpkl↓k) and neurotensin 1-8(pe-lyenkp↓r). to rapidly and continuously assess enzyme activity, fluorogenic peptide substrates were normally used. therefore, we monitored ace2 proteolytic activity by measuring the degradation of fluorogenic capase-1 substrate mca-yvadapk(dnp) 13 . in addition, a bradykinin figure 1a) . similarly, sars-cov-2 spike protein enhanced ace2 cleavage of bradykinin analog mca-rppgfsafk(dnp)-oh to produce ~3 times more rfu within 2 hours ( figure 1b) . previous enzymatic assays showed that ace2 activity increased with the concentrations of nacl between 0.15m to 1m. we then carried out the same enzymatic assays at increased concentration of nacl. consistently, sars-cov-2 spike protein enhanced ace2 activity at 0.3m and 1m nacl and enabled ace2 to cleave bradykinin-analog as well (supplementary figure 1) , indicating the enhancement was resulted by the interaction between sars-cov-2 spike protein and ace2.furthermore, the enhancement of ace2 activity by sars-cov-2 spike protein was at a concentration dependent manner. in the enzymatic assays, we added various concentrations of sars-cov-2 spike protein ranging from 70ug/ml to 0.4ug/ml. the dilution of sars-cov-2 spike protein in the assays gradually mitigated the enhancement of ace2 activity with a clear transition between 3.5ug/ml and 7ug/ml of sars-cov-2 spike protein (figure 1 c and d) . the dose dependent enhancement of ace2 activity by sars-cov-2 spike protein was in line with the binding affinity between ace2 and sars-cov-2 spike protein, which was reported to be 14.7nm, equivalent to ~7ug/ml. previous studies showed that sars-cov infection may lead to the internalization of ace2 receptor and thus decrease the cell surface level of ace2 6 . however, examining the lung tissue 3 days post infection of sars-cov-2 virus in ace2 transgenic mice showed colocalization of sars-cov-2 spike protein and ace2 receptor on the cell surface 7, 18 , further supporting sars-cov-2 spike formed a stable interaction with ace2 for the cell entry. in addition, the lasting interaction between sars-cov-2 spike and ace2 on the cell surface suggests that the observed enhancement of ace2 activity in solution might happen in vivo as well.sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike protein were highly homologous in their prefusion trimeric architectures with one receptor binding domain (rbd) for ace2 binding. however, sars-cov-2 spike protein binds to ace2 at ~5-10 fold higher affinity than sars-cov spike 9, 11 . we then determined whether rbd domain itself would be sufficient to boost ace2 activity. the results showed that both sars-cov-2 rbd and sars-cov rbd enhanced ace2 cleavage of caspase-1 substrate (figure 2 a and b), demonstrating that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov rbd alone is sufficient to enhance ace2 activityace2. the enhancement of ace2 activity by sars-cov-2 rbd protein showed a concentration dependent saturation with half maximal enhancement at ~70nm, whereas sars-cov rbd protein enhances ace2 activity almost linearly between 63nm and 1000nm with half maximal enhancement at ~170nm ( figure 2e) . nevertheless, only sars-cov-2 rbd but not sars-cov rbd could increase the cleavage of mca-rppgfsafk(dnp)-oh by ace2 (figure 2 c, d and f). as recently reported, sars-cov-2 rbd bound to ace2 at nanomolar affinities(~30-50nm), while sars-cov rbd bound to ace2 at sub-micromolar affinities(~180-400nm). the different capabilities of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov rbd proteins to enhance ace2 enzymatic activity suggested that a more stable interaction between rbd and ace2 was necessary for its cleavage of non-optimal substrates such as bradykinin analog.to further characterize how efficiently ace2 cleaves fluorogenic caspase-1 substrate and bradykinin analog in the presence of sars-cov-2 spike protein, we determined the kinetic constants for ace2, particularly under the physiological condition at ph7.5 with 150mm nacl. the measurements were carried out with 20ng ace2 in the presence or absence of 14ug/ml sars-cov-2 spike protein and the hydrolysis was limited to 15% product formed as initial velocity conditions. michaelis-menten plots showed that sars-cov-2 spike protein resulted in a ~4 fold reduction of k m from 10. showed higher activities at 0.3m nacl as previously reported. it is worth mention that k cat /k m value for ace2 hydrolysis of bradykinin analog mca-rppgfsafk(dnp)-oh in the presence of sars-cov-2 spike protein was 7.55 x 10 3 m -1 s -1 , which is slightly higher than that of ace2 hydrolysis of angiotensin i decapeptide (drvyihpfh↓l) that was a biological substrate for ace2 13 . taken together, sars-cov-2 increased the substrate binding affinities and catalytic rate of ace2.from the measurements of kinetic constants of ace2, we revealed that the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein not only altered the substrate affinity (k m ) to ace2 but also changed its enzymatic efficiency. in the presence of sars-cov-2 spike protein, ace2 cleaved bradykinin-analog with a k m of ~2um. as previously reported, ace2 could also cleave des-arg 9 -bradykinin but with a much higher k m (290um). therefore, we wonder how the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein would alter the cleavage dynamics among different substrates. we then designed substrate competition assays to assess the selectivity and activity of ace2 upon binding of sars-cov-2 rbd. in the enzymatic reactions, we utilized non-fluorogenic bk, desbk or ang ii peptide to compete for ace2 cleavage of fluorogenic substrates (figure 4) . in the absence of sars-cov-2 rbd binding, only ang ii but not bk or desbk inhibited the cleavage of caspase-1 substrate (mca-yvadapk(dnp)-oh) with >95% inhibition at 80um, which was consistent with the low k m (2.0um) of ang ii and the high k m of desbk or very poor activity of bk (figure 4 b, d, f and h) . the competitive ace2 cleavage of the caspase-1 substrate resulted an inhibition constant ki for ang ii to be 35 µm and 5.2 µm, respectively, in the absence and presence of sars-cov-2 rbd, suggesting the sars-cov-2 rbd enhanced ace2 activity against ang ii.similarly, bk and desbk inhibited the ace2 cleavage with ki of 457 µm and 1180 µm , respectively, in the presence of sars-cov-2 rbd (figure 4 a, c, e and g) , suggesting that sars-cov-2 also enhanced ace2 binding to bk and desbk. as for ace2 cleavage of the bk-analog, ang ii competed with a ki constant of 57 µm and 4.5 µm in the absence and presence of the sars-cov-2 rbd, respectively (supplement figure 3) , similar to that from the caspase-1 substrate cleavage. however, bk and desbk failed to inhibit ace2 cleavage of bk-analog. as shown before, bk-analog bound to endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ece-1) much better than bk due to its c-terminal modification 16 . it is likely that bk-analog also bound better to ace2 than bk.the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 infects human cells via the binding of its spike (s) glycoprotein to the human angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace2). here we examined the influence of the high affinity binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein on the enzymatic activity of ace2. surprisingly, our enzymatic assay showed that the sars-cov-2 spike protein significantly enhanced the enzymatic activity of ace2 to cleave yvadapk peptide, suggesting ace2 upon sars-cov-2 binding would likely cleave more efficiently other substrates with proline at p1 position such as ang ii (drvyihp↓f), apelin-13(qrprlshkgpmp↓f). similarly, binding of sars-cov-2 spike enhanced ace2 to cleave bradykinin analog rppgfsafk. in addition, bradykinin (rppgfspfr) competed with yvadapk peptide for ace2 cleavage to a similar extent as des-arg 9 -bradykinin. our results showed that sars-cov-2 spike protein not only bound to ace2 as the entry receptor but also hijacked its enzymatic activities.we then compared various structures of ace2 to reveal what structural changes on ace2 proteolytic domain might happen upon sars-cov-2 spike binding to affect the enzymatic activity of ace2. the native structure of ace2 extracellular proteolytic domain comprised two subdomains, the n terminal and c terminal subdomain with a wide cleft in between for substrate binding and catalysis 19 with r.m.s.d less than 0.5å (figure 5 d and e) . however, the sars-cov-2 rbd but not sars-cov rbd binding caused the hinge movement between the n-and c-terminal domains reminiscent of a closing clam. we then assessed such relative movement by measuring the angle formed by asn136 on the rim of native ace2 c-terminal domain, zinc atom at the catalytic center, and asn136 of superimposed ace2 bound by rbd of sars-cov-2 or sars-cov. compared to sars-cov rbd binding (0.3°), this angle upon sars-cov-2 rbd binding was increased to 5°. particularly, the binding of a chimeric sars-cov-2 rbd to ace2 11 , could cause significant movement up to ~12°of c-terminal subdomain toward the n-terminal domain of ace2 ( figure 5f ). furthermore, this angle caused by inhibitor mln-4760 binding was 29° to form a closed conformation of ace2, suggesting that sars-cov-2 spike binding initiated a progressive conformational change to energetically facilitate ace2 catalysis. the comparison of substrate binding pocket on ace2 showed that residues f274, h345, f504, h505, y510 and y515 in sars-cov-2-ace2 complexes moved closer to aligned ang ii or mln-4760 inhibitor, suggesting that sars-cov-2 rbd binding to ace2 could increase the substrate binding ( figure 5g ). this is consistent with our kinetic constant measurement, which revealed that the k m values of ace2 hydrolysis were decrease upon sars-cov-2 spike binding. in addition, in sars-cov-2 rbd bound ace2, h345 residue that was proposed to stabilize the hybridized nitrogen upon catalysis adopted the same conformation as that bound by inhibitor. this active conformation of h345 was not observed in native or sars-cov rbd bound ace2 structure, suggesting that the tighter binding of sars-cov-2 rbd could also induce a conformation change to position ace2 substrate pocket residues for efficient catalysis.with the increasing number of confirmed cases worldwide, the major manifestation of sars-cov-2 mediated covid-19 disease and its complications generated critical concerns due to the lack of highly effective antiviral drugs or vaccines. our current analysis of ace2 enzymatic activity upon sars-cov-2 spike protein binding would be clinically relevant. however, a limitation of our study is that we could not systemically measure the levels of various ace2 substrates and their cleaved products in covid-19 patients currently, but we would propose that the ratios between vasodilators and vasoconstrictors would change during sars-cov-2 infection due to the high affinity interaction between ace2 and sars-cov-2 spike protein and subsequently altered ace2 enzymatic activity and substrate selectivity.compared to previous outbreaks of sars-cov and mers, sars-cov-2 is more contagious and clinical symptoms of covid-19 are more variable 4 . in addition to the accumulation of fluid in the lung, a considerable fraction of critically ill covid-19 patients developed deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism 5 . these clinical observations share a common prognostic feature that pointed to the cardiovascular system. vasodilation, vasoconstriction, and permeability are the essential components of the cardiovascular system, which are regulated by the crosstalk of many hormones and biological active peptides. among them, renin-angiotensin system and kinin-kellikrein system have major effects upon the cardiovascular systems 14, 17 . importantly, ace2 catalyzes the conversion of these regulatory peptides in these systems to maintain the homeostatic state. among the biological active substrates, ace2 cleaves among the peptide components of the rennin-angiotensin system, ace2 could efficiently hydrolyze ang ii (drvyihp↓f), and partially cleave ang i(drvyihpfh↓l). during sars-cov-2 infection, the enhancement of ace2 activity could produce more of their cleaved products, ang 1-9 and ang 1-7.beside the opposing effects of ang ii and ang 1-7 on vasoconstriction and vasodilatation, they regulated the expression of ace2. several in vivo and in vitro studies documented that ang ii decreased the expression of ace2 through activation of mapk pathways, whereas ang 1-7 counteracted the inhibitory effect of ang ii to boost the expression of ace2 through mapk phosphatase activation 23, 24 . previous studies showed that sars-cov infection caused the internalization of ace2 6 . however, analyzing the lung tissue in ace2 mice 3 days post sars-cov-2 infection showed substantial expression of ace2 7 .more importantly, ace2 expression was increased in the lungs of severe covid-19 patients with comorbidities, compared to control individuals 18, 25 . the enhanced ace2 activity to cleave ang ii upon sars-cov-2 spike binding might be one of the mechanisms whereby sars-cov-2 utilized to boost the expression of ace2.apelin 1-13(qrprlshkgpmp↓f) is the endogenous ligand for the angiotensin ii protein j receptor (apjr), which is a homolog of the angiotensin receptor at1 26 . apelin 1-13 has nanomolar affinity to apjr and the major effect of apelin in vivo was nitric oxide dependent arterial dilatation to counterbalance ang ii effects. the cleavage of its carboxyl-terminal phenylalanine of apelin 1-13 cause the loss of critical interactions between phe13 and a large hydrophobic cavity on apjr 27 , resulting in 2-5 fold decrease of its potency 28 . the enhancement of ace2 activity would accelerate the metabolism of apelin 1-13, further dampening its beneficial effects on overall cardiac functions.the proteolysis of bradykinin may be particularly relevant to covid-19. normally ace is responsible for the hydrolysis of bradykinin, whereas ace2 hydrolyzes des-arg 9 -bradykinin 14 . bradykinin selectively binds to b2 receptors and des-arg 9 -bradykinin selectively binds to b1 receptor. compared to the constitutive expression of b2 receptor, expression of b1 receptor is upregulated during inflammation. in addition, previous studies showed that all of the reactions for bradykinin degradation occurred normally but the production rate of des-arg 9 -bradykinin was accelerated fivefold when blood was clotted 29 . our results showed that sars-cov-2 spike protein enhanced bradykinin and des-arg 9 -bradykinin binding to ace2. furthermore, neuropeptides dynorphin a 1-13(yggflrrirpkl↓k) and -casomorphin(ypfvep↓i) are good ace2 substrate, which are endogenous ligands for opioid receptors and have antinociceptive effects 30 . interestingly, dynorphin a 1-13 was also implicated as an appetite stimulant 31 . the removal of the c-terminal lysine residue of dynorphin a 1-13 resulted in 90% loss of its potency 32 . since symptoms of covid-19 also include body aches and loss of taste, it would be intriguing to speculate that altered ace2 hydrolysis of these neuropeptides would affect the homeostatic functions of these opioid receptors as well.collectively, the homeostatic regulation of cardiovascular system controlled by ace2 would be out of the vector to express the prefusion s ectodomain, a gene encoding residues 1-1208 of sars-cov-2(genbank: mn908947) was kindly provided by jason s. mclellan (the university of texas at austin) and the protein was expressed as described previously 9 . in brief, freestyle293 f cells (thermo fisher) were transiently transfected with this expression vector using polyethylenimine (pei). protein was purified from filtered cell supernatants using streptactin xt resin (iba, inc) and subsequently subjected to further purification by size exclusion chromatography using a superose 6 10/300 column (ge healthcare) with the buffer of 75mm tris (ph7.5), 0.15m nacl.before enzymatic assays, sars-cov-2 spike and commercial rbd recombinant proteins were dialyzed extensively against 75mm tris(ph7.5) and 0.15m nacl.reactions were performed in black microtiter plates at ambient temperature (26°c) according to manufacturer's instruction. to each well, 50ul of 0.2 or 0.4ug/ml ace2 in assay buffer containing 75mm tris(ph7.5) plus nacl at 0.15m, 0.3m or 1.0m were added respectively. then 10ul dialysis buffer or sars-cov-2 s spike/rbd domain proteins at various final concentrations ranging from 70ug/ml to 0.4ug/ml were added to wells and incubated for 20min after mixing by shaking. the reactions were initiated by adding 50ul of fluorogenic peptides at 40um or with 2-fold serial dilutions ranging from 160um to 0.6um to determine the kinetic constants for ace2 hydrolysis. the relative fluorescence units (rfu) were read at excitation and emission wavelengths of 320nm and 405nm (top read), respectively in kinetic mode at 1-minute intervals for 8 hours.to calculate specific activity of ace2, the substrate blank adjusted relative fluorescent units were converted to molarities according to the conversion factor on synergy h1 plate reader that was calibrated by standard mca-pro-leu-oh (supplement figure 2) . to obtain the kinetic constants, the hydrolysis was limited to ≤15% product formed as the initial velocity conditions. initial velocities were plotted versus to compare the relative proteolytic activity of ace2 to different substrates, various concentrations of non-fluorogenic bk, desbk or ang ii peptides were added to the reaction mixture with fluorogenic peptides as competitive substrates. as mentioned above, 50ul of ace2 at 0.4ug/ml was preincubated with buffers or sars-cov-2 rbd protein at a final concentration of 125nm for 20min. subsequently, 50ul of fluorogenic peptides at 20um supplemented with a serial dilution of non-fluorogenic bk, desbk or ang ii peptides ranging 640um to 80um were added to initiate enzymatic cleavage. fluorescence changes were measured at 1min intervals for 1 hour at 26 degree as the initial velocity conditions.student's t-test was used to determine the statistical significance in each pair wise comparison. each experiment was repeated at least with duplicates. p<0.05 was considered statistically significant(* p<0.05; ** p<0.01; ***p<0.001; **** p<0.0001). target of neutralizing antibodies 11 , making an understanding of s structure and conformational states pertinent for investigating s antigenic surfaces and designing vaccines.the sars-cov s1 subunit is composed of two distinct domains: an n-terminal domain (s1 ntd) and a receptor-binding domain (s1 rbd) also referred to as the s1 ctd or domain b. each of these domains have been implicated in binding to host receptors, depending on the coronavirus in question. however, most coronaviruses are not known to utilize both the s1 ntd and s1 rbd for viral entry 12 . sars-cov makes use of its s1 rbd to bind to the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as its host receptor 13, 14 .recent examination using cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) has illuminated the prefusion structures of coronavirus spikes [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] . initial examination of hcov-hku1 s showed that the receptor-binding site on the s1 rbd was occluded when the rbd was in a 'down' conformation and it was hypothesized that conformational changes were required to access this site 16 . subsequent studies of the highly pathogenic human coronavirus s proteins of sars-cov 15, 22 and mers-cov 17, 22 showed that these viral s1 rbd do indeed sample an 'up' conformation where the receptor-binding site is accessible. these structural studies also located the positions of the s1/ s2 and s2′ cleavage sites on the prefusion spike. the s1/s2 site lies within a surface exposed loop in the second subdomain of s1 16 . however, the s2′ site lies closer to base of the spike and though this region is located on the surface of the spike, cleavage at this site is prevented by surrounding protein elements 17 .coronavirus s transitions from a meta-stable prefusion state to a highly stable postfusion state as part of the s protein's role in membrane fusion. the instability of the prefusion state presents a significant challenge for the production of protein antigens for antigenic presentation of the prefusion antibody epitopes that are most likely to lead to neutralizing responses. recently, we presented the design of two proline mutations (2p) for the prefusion stabilization of coronavirus s proteins 17 . the stabilized mers-cov s 2p ectodomain was shown to maintain the prefusion spike conformation, have similar antibody recognition as wild-type s and possess higher immunogenicity. here, we have used single-particle cryo-em to determine structures of prefusion stabilized sars-cov s 2p ectodomain in uncleaved, s1/s2 cleaved and ace2-bound states. three-dimensional classification of the s1 rbd positions and corresponding atomic protein models revealed that neither ace2-binding nor trypsin cleavage at the s1/s2 boundary induced substantial conformational changes in the prefusion stabilized s protein.structural description of sars-cov s 2p ectodomain. to examine any potential conformational differences in sars-cov s 2p compared to unstabilized wild-type s ectodomains 15, 22 , we determined structures of the sars-cov s 2p ectodomain. this included a 3.2 å resolution c3-symmetric reconstruction and several asymmetric reconstructions (3.9-4.5 å, see below) ( fig. 1 and supplementary tables s1, s4 and figs s1, s2). the s1 ntd and some of the s1 rbd, while clearly present, appear poorly resolved in the cryo-em maps, precluding a de novo build of these regions. for this reason, available sars-cov s crystal structures 22,23 of corresponding domains were placed into these densities. overall, the sars-cov s 2p structure resembles that of other coronaviruses, particularly those of the betacoronavirus genus 16, 17, 19, 22 and the previously published sars-cov wild-type prefusion ectodomains 15, 22 . the s1 domains surround the helical s2 subunits and interdigitate at the 22 (5x58.pdb, dark green) and the prefusion stabilized sars-cov s 2p ectodomain (6crv.pdb light green) adopt identical conformations near the 2p mutation site. coordinate models derived from c3 symmetry cryo-em reconstructions are shown. (c) there is highly featured density in the region containing the 2p mutation site. (d) classification of heterogeneity within the s1 rbd reveals a distribution of rbd configurations with the single-'up' conformation being most prevalent. s1 regions are shown in blue and s2 regions are shown in green. membrane-distal apex of the trimeric spike. the structure of the s2 subunit appears to be highly conserved across coronavirus genera 18, 20, 21 . the sars-cov prefusion wild-type and 2p structures are nearly identical in most regions, including regions proximal to the 2p mutation site (fig. 1b,c) .although the overall structures of sars-cov s are similar, we were able to build several s2 protein regions excluded from the wild-type sars-cov s models, including a fusion-peptide-adjacent region as well as additional amino acids in the s2 c-terminal connector domain. the region c-terminal to the fusion peptide, known as fp2, has been suggested to act as the second part of a bipartite fusion peptide for sars-cov s 24 . comparison of this fp2 region in the structures presented here with the mhv 19 , hcov-hku1 16 , mers-cov 17, 22 , hcov-nl63 20 and porcine deltacoronavirus 18,21 s structures indicates that sars-cov adopts a unique conformation in this region (fig. 2) . whereas most other coronaviruses possess two short α-helices with a cross-linking disulfide bond, in sars-cov a similar disulfide bond bridges the two strands of a beta-hairpin. the unique sars-cov s conformation of fp2 and the lack of cross-group sequence conservation beyond the disulfide bond in this region suggest that sars-cov may use a distinct mechanism of fp2 membrane insertion.the trimeric sars-cov s 2p adopts two distinct conformations related to each of the s1 rbd: 'up' and 'down' . the delineation of two distinct conformations for each s1 rbd is consistent with observations made for mers-cov 17,22 as well as one of the studies of wild-type sars-cov s 22 . gui et al. 15 , however, observed a gradient of conformations in wild-type sars-cov s, which has not been observed in other structural studies of coronavirus spikes nor the work presented here. some possibilities for these different observations may be the differences in spike expression system yielding alternate glycosylation patterns or alternate protein constructs, but the true source remains unclear. the 'down' conformation caps the s2 helices and makes extensive contacts with the s1 ntd. the 'up' conformation of the s1 rbd exposes the s1 rbd receptor-binding site. it has been previously reported that for wild-type sars-cov s, 56% of the particles contained three 'down' rbd conformations while 44% contained a single 'up' s1 rbd conformation 22 . to examine the conformation of the s1 rbd among our sars-cov s 2p ectodomains, we used a local masking, image sutraction and 3-d sorting strategy 17 to more accurately classify the conformations as being either 'down' or 'up' at each of the three s1 rbd positions within the trimer. this analysis revealed that the majority of the s 2p proteins were in the single-'up' conformation (58%) with lesser amounts of double-and triple-'up' conformations (39% and 3% respectively) and with no all-'down' conformation observed. the increased propensity to adopt the 'up' s1 rbd conformation may indicate a difference in the coronavirus s containing the 2p mutations, however other differences in sample preparation cannot be fully ruled out.ace2 and s1 c-terminal domains. to examine the structural consequences binding ace2 to the stabilized sars-cov s 2p, we combined sars-cov s 2p ectodomain with an excess of soluble human ace2 with subsequent purification by size-exclusion chromatography and immediate cryo-em specimen preparation ( supplementary fig. s1 ). initial sorting of particle heterogeneity indicated spikes could be split into ace2-bound (45%) and unbound (55%) classes. using a similar masking and 3-d sorting strategy as above we sorted the unbound s class further into classes with s1 conformations of one or two 'up' s1 rbds ( fig. 3 and supplementary  tables s2-s4 and figs s3-s5) . we did not observe an all-'down' class nor a three 'up' s1 rbd class indicating a low prevalence of these conformations among the unbound s 2p proteins. expanding our 3d sorting strategy, we classification of heterogeneity within the sars-cov s -ace2 complex reveals that 55% of the particles are not bound by ace2. of those particles which are bound by ace2, each configuration of the s1 rbd is observed with classes containing triple 'up' conformation s1 rbd being the most poorly represented. the labeled description of each class begins at the lower rbd when viewed at the membrane distal apex and proceeds clockwise. side views and membrane-distal top views are shown for each reconstruction. s1 regions are shown in blue, s2 regions are shown in green and soluble ace2 is shown in orange. classified our ace2-bound particles at each s1 rbd position and identified single, double and triple ace2-bound s. we were further able to identify s1 rbd conformations at the non-ace2 occupied rbd positions to represent each population of s1 rbd conformations among ace2-bound s.as hypothesized by previous structural work [15] [16] [17] 22 , the s1 rbd of the stabilized spike recognizes ace2 with an 'up' s1 rbd conformation. the proportion of total 'up' s1 rbd conformations within the ace2-bound and -unbound classes is nearly identical within this dataset (58% 'up' s1 rbd). this strongly suggests that binding of a single ace2 receptor does not induce adjacent s1 rbds to transition from a 'down' to 'up' conformation within the context of the stabilized s. hence, ace2 is more likely to bind to an already 'up' s1 rbd rather than inducing the conformational changes that are required for the s1 rbd to become accessible to ace2. though the proportion of 'up' s1 rbd in the ace2 dataset (58%) is similar to the proportion of 'up' s1 rbd in the sars s 2p ectodomain dataset (48%), there is a large difference in the distributions of one 'up' and two 'up' conformational states between these datasets. the significance of this difference remains unclear.despite prolonged co-incubation and an excess of ace2, we had difficulties in saturating the s1 rbd with ace2 in the context of stabilized trimeric s ectodomain. this poor saturation is illustrated by the small proportion of triple-bound ace2 and the majority of spikes that are unbound by receptor. in contrast, isolated recombinant s1 rbd easily binds ace2 and is capable saturating ace2 on target cells to block s-mediated entry 14 . our observed sub-stoichiometric ace2 binding to trimeric spikes is consistent with the difficulty in using soluble ace2 receptor to neutralize sars-cov s pseudotyped onto vsv 25 . the reduced binding of ace2 to trimeric spikes is likely due to the incomplete exposure and conformational flexibility of the s1 rbd. in contrast, mhv which binds ceacam1a via its s1 ntd, but does not undergo conformational changes exhibits complete neutralization by soluble receptor 19, 26 .similar to recently published mers-cov s structures 17 , the ace2-bound s1 rbd of sars-cov s 2p adopts a much more extended and rotated conformation compared to s1 rbd modeled in previous wild-type sars-cov s structures 22 (supplementary fig. s6 ). this difference is likely due to poor density in the hinge regions between the s1 rbd and subdomain 1 (sd-1) in these previous reconstructions 15, 22 rather than the presentation of a unique receptor-bound conformation or the influence of the stabilizing mutations. indeed, the bound ace2 receptor and s1 rbd for all reconstructions here show poorer density quality than the less mobile regions of the sars-cov s (fig. 4) . to improve the density for ace2-bound s1 rbd, we used focused refinement with image subtraction on this region to overcome the flexibility of these domains relative to the rest of sars-cov s 2p. this yielded a 7.9 å resolution reconstruction with improved local density quality (fig. 4b,c) . we successfully placed the crystal structure of the sars-cov s1 rbd bound to ace2 (2ajf.pdb 23 ) into this density as a rigid body indicating that the previously determined crystal structure accurately recapitulates the conformation between the ace2-bound s1 rbd in the prefusion stabilized trimeric spike. given that the s1 rbd in its 'up' conformation is well separated in space and sequence from the 2p stabilizing mutations, we do not anticipate that the introduction of these prefusion stabilizing mutations influences the molecular interactions between the s1 rbd and ace2 beyond perhaps increasing the prevalence of the s1 rbd 'up' conformations as noted above. indeed, both the wild-type and 2p-stabilized sars-cov s ectodomains demonstrate similar affinities for ace2 by spr (185 and 150 nm respectively, supplementary fig. s7) .the ace2-bound, s1 rbd extends upwards and rotates away from contacts with nearby amino acids. hence, any conformational changes induced by receptor binding to the s1 rbd are more likely to be caused by the absence of the s1 rbd contacts in the 'up' conformation, rather than the formation of additional intra-spike contacts in a receptor-bound state (supplementary fig. s8) . indeed, movement of the s1 rbd to the 'up' conformation disrupts molecular interactions with the s2 central α-helices which may play a role in receptor-induced conformational changes in wild-type spikes. the observation that host-receptor engagement of the s1 rbd disrupts interactions within spike in a manner independent of direct receptor-spike contacts suggests a flexible mechanism for how different coronavirus spikes may bind to diverse protein receptors with their s1 rbd and facilitate fusion with host cells.have suggested that binding of a host protein receptor to coronavirus spikes induces conformational changes leading to fusion and exposure of the s2′ protease site for cleavage 4, 6 . comparison of our ace2-bound 2p-stabilized spike structures with those of both the wild-type sars-cov s and the 2p-stabilized sars-cov s indicate that overall, these structures are similar and do not exhibit large conformational differences. the absence of conformational changes includes regions near the s2′ cleavage site, fusion peptide and s2 heptad repeat 1 (hr1). however, fine examination of the ace2-bound s structure revealed a modest conformational change in the s2 central helix where the s2 had been uncapped by a receptor-bound rbd. in both the wild-type 15, 22 and 2p unbound structures, the central helix presents as an α-helix in each protomer of the trimer. however, in the ace2-bound structure, the upper portion of the s2 helix uncapped by the ace2-bound s1 rbd has transitioned to a 3 10 -helix (fig. 4d,e) . the αto 3 10 -helix transition is unique to the s2 protomer uncapped by the ace2-bound s1 rbd and is not observed in the other two copies of the trimeric spike. this subtle transition may indicate that conformational changes towards fusion are initiated in the central helix. n-terminal to the central helix are the 2p mutations that stabilize the spike in its prefusion conformation. these stabilizing mutations may block the propagation of conformational changes beyond the subtle change to a short 3 10 -helix, providing a possible mechanism for their prefusion stabilizing effect.unlike some other coronavirus spikes such as mers-cov s, sars-cov s lacks an amino acid sequence capable of recognition by host furin proteases at the s1/s2 cleavage site. however, sars-cov s can be cleaved in vitro by exogenous trypsin at an equivalent site, and it has been proposed that a similar cleavage event may occur in vivo by trypsin-like proteases during viral entry 27, 28 . moreover, trypsin cleavage of the sars-cov s potentiates s for more efficient membrane fusion 27, 29 . for mers-cov s, cleavage at s1/s2 enables more efficient receptor recognition 6 . in addition, coronaviruses possess a secondary cleavage site in s2 called s2′ 27 . this site is thought to be cleaved by host proteases after receptor recognition [4] [5] [6] and liberates the viral fusion peptide to insert into host membranes in a s2 pre-hairpin intermediate 30 . the s2′ cleavage has been proposed to occur after an arginine residue conserved across coronavirus genera (sars-cov s arg797) 31 .to examine the trypsin protease sensitivity of our prefusion-stabilized coronavirus spikes, we carried out limited proteolysis experiments of both wild-type and 2p sars-cov s ectodomains in the presence and absence of soluble ace2 receptor. a time course of the proteolysis revealed that all four samples are cleaved to s1 and s2 products at equivalent rates at similar sites ( supplementary fig. s9 ). nearing the end of the time course additional lower molecular weight bands are observed which we interpret to be degradation of the s1 subunit. regardless of whether wild-type or prefusion-stabilized s was used or whether ace2 was bound to the s ectodomains, there is no prominent band that corresponds to a s2′ cleavage product (approximately 52 kda).to analyze the cleavage products in detail, we performed cryo-em analysis on the trypsin-cleaved sars-cov s 2p ectodomain. using all-particles and c3 symmetry yielded a reconstruction at 3.3 å resolution (fig. 5 , supplementary tables s1, s4 and fig. s10 ). the short loop containing the s1/s2 cleavage site is disordered in the uncleaved s 2p reconstruction and remains disordered in the s 2p trypsin cleaved reconstruction. moreover, examination of the structure models indicates no significant differences between the trypsin-cleaved and uncleaved sars-cov s 2p (fig. 5b) . fine sorting of s1 rbd positions of the trypsin-cleaved s reveals a very similar distribution of 'up' s1 rbd conformations available for receptor binding as in the uncleaved samples, although we additionally observe a small proportion of s1 rbd in the all-'down' conformation (fig. 5c) . these results indicate that trypsin-cleavage at s1/s2 does not impart large conformational changes on the prefusion-stabilized sars-cov s 2p and justifies the removal of s1/s2 cleavage sites for the production of more homogeneous material as vaccine immunogens.in agreement with the in vitro limited proteolysis experiments, the s2′ site remains uncleaved in the trypsin-cleaved s 2p ectodomain structures. the arginine at the proposed s2′ cleavage site in all coronavirus spike structures published to date and presented here is blocked from cleavage by a loop protruding from just n-terminal to the fusion peptide and by an n-terminal helix of s2 hr1 (fig. 6) . exposure of this site for cleavage here, we present the first structures of a trimeric coronavirus spike ectodomain bound to a protein receptor as well as the first structures of prefusion s1/s2 cleaved coronavirus spikes. our structures of the sars-cov s 2p ectodomain bound to a soluble form of human ace2 receptor show that any conformational changes induced in s by receptor binding are more likely to be due to the disruption of protein-protein interactions rather than the formation of additional contacts between the s1 rbd and other regions of s (supplementary fig. s8 ). the only conformational change that we observe in the ace2-sars-cov s 2p structures is the transition to a short 3 10 -helix at the top of the s2 central α-helix when uncapped by receptor-bound s1 rbd suggesting that more extensive conformational changes may be initiated here. 3 10 -helices have been hypothesized to act as intermediates in coil-to-α-helix transitions 32 . transitions between 3 10 -helices and α-helices has also been hypothesized for the voltage sensing domains of potassium channels where it has been proposed that the transition plays a role in changing from a resting or activated state to a relaxed state 33 . though more extensive changes are likely to drive conformational rearrangements accompanying membrane fusion, the 2p prefusion stabilizing mutations adjacent to the short 3 10 -helix may block these changes from occurring. however, both wild-type and 2p sars-cov s ectodomains bound to ace2 were cleaved equally by trypsin, indicating that at least at the level of trypsin protease susceptibility, these two receptor-bound complexes appear equivalent. strategies similar to those we have used have been employed to stabilize hiv envelope glycoprotein (env) trimers in prefusion conformation 34, 35 . hiv env, which, like sars cov s also engages a protein receptor, cd4, undergoes a large conformational change on the viral surface upon binding 36 . similarly, the soluble, stabilized versions of env undergo large conformational changes upon cd4 binding [37] [38] [39] . conversely, the ebola virus glycoprotein (gp) undergoes only modest conformational changes upon binding its receptor, npc-1 40, 41 . thus, these class i fusion machines likely have fundamental differences in the fusion process that requires further study.these structural and biochemical data show that the introduction of the 2p prefusion-stabilizing mutations does not interfere with receptor binding or recognition by trypsin-like proteases. our structural examinations of both receptor-bound and trypsin-cleaved prefusion-stabilized sars-cov s 2p proteins indicate that neither receptor binding nor trypsin cleavage induce large conformational changes in stabilized spikes. additionally, these structures and accompanying limited proteolysis experiments show that neither receptor binding nor trypsin cleavage expose the s2′ cleavage site for proteolysis within the stabilized spike ectodomains. this work increases the body of knowledge surrounding these prefusion-stabilized spikes as presenting native surfaces for interactions with host factors while maintaining their prefusion conformation.a mammalian-codon-optimized gene encoding sars-cov s (tor2 strain) residues 1-1190 with a c-terminal t4 fibritin trimerization domain, an hrv3c cleavage site, an 8xhis-tag and a twin-strep-tag was synthesized and subcloned into the eukaryotic-expression vector pαh. proline-substituted variant harboring k968p and v969p mutations was generated based on this construct. the resulting plasmids, designated sars s wt and sars s 2p respectively, were transfected into 1 l freestyle 293-f cells (life technologies). 293-f cells were used without validation and were not tested for mycoplasma. three hours after transfection, kifunensine was added to a final concentration of 5 μm. cultures were harvested after 6 d, and protein was purified from the supernatant using strep-tactin resin (iba). hrv3c protease (1% wt/wt) was added to the protein and the reaction was incubated overnight at 4 °c. the digested protein was further purified using a superose 6 16/70 column (ge healthcare life sciences).a gene encoding human ace2 residues 1-615 with an hrv3c cleavage site, an 8xhis-tag and a twin-strep-tag was synthesized and subcloned into the eukaryotic-expression vector pαh. this protein was expressed as described above for s proteins. the hrv3c digested ace2 protein was further purified using a superdex 200 column (ge healthcare life sciences).to make complexes of sars s 2p with soluble ace2, the two proteins were combined in a 1:1.1 molar ratio prior to overnight incubation and size-exclusion chromatography on a superose 6 increase 10/300 (ge healthcare life sciences).purified sars-cov s wt or sars-cov s 2p ectodomain was captured on an nta sensor chip via an 8x histag to a level of ∼330 response units (ru) per cycle using a biacore x100 (ge healthcare). the nta sensorchip was regenerated between cycles using 350 mm edta and 100 mm naoh followed by 0.5 mm nicl 2 . a sample containing 10 mm hepes ph 8.0, 150 mm sodium chloride and 0.05% surfactant p20 (ge healthcare) (hbs-p+) was injected over the sars-cov s and reference flow cells, followed by injections of purified ace2 serially diluted 2-fold from 100 nm to 6.25 nm in hbs-p+, with a duplication electron microscopy data collection. 3 µl of 0.47 mg/ml of protein or protein complexes were mixed with 1 µl of 0.04% (w/v) amphipol a8-35 (anatrace) just prior to grid preparation. 3 µl of the protein mixture, final concentration 0.35 mg/ml, was spotted on to plasma cleaned c-flat grids with a 2 µm/2 µm spacing. grids were blotted for 3 seconds before plunge freezing in liquid ethane on a vitrobot. grids were loaded onto a titan krios and data was collected using leginon 42 at a total dose of 65 e − /å 2 . frames were aligned with motioncor2 (ucsf) 43 implemented in the appion workflow 44 . particles were selected using dog picker 45 . images were assessed and particle picks were masked using em hole punch 46 . the ctf for each image was estimated using gctf 47 .electron microscopy data processing. initial particle stacks were cleaned using multiple rounds of 2d classification in relion 48 . good particles were selected as resembling prefusion coronavirus spikes. for the sars s 2p and trypsin-treated sars s 2p, all particles from the clean stacks were used for reconstruction with c3 symmetry. all datasets were extensively sorted using 3d classification to examine heterogeneity in the s1 rbds as described previously 17 . briefly, 3d masks were defined to encompass the possible heterogeneity at each s1 rbd position. the density within these masks was then removed from unfiltered, unsharpened reconstructions. we then used relion_project with image subtraction to create a particle stack containing only the signal arising from the masked density. finally, we used focused 3d classification to identify compositional and conformational states at each s1 rbd position. all 3d reconstructions were produced with relion 48 and final refinements were performed with a six-pixel soft-edge solvent mask. post-processing was applied to each reconstruction to apply b-factor sharpening and amplitude corrections as well as to calculate local resolution maps.coordinate models were built for several of the high-resolution reconstructions using 5i08.pdb 16 , 2ajf. pdb 23 and 5x4s pdb 22 as template models with reference to a recently published wild-type sars s ectodomain (5x58 pdb 22 ). manual model building was performed in coot 49 with coordinate refinement in rosetta relax 50 and real-space refinement in phenix 51 with final rounds of coordinate refinement and adp estimation performed in phenix.limited proteolysis. 10 µg of either sars-cov s 2p or sars-cov s wt ectodomains were mixed with soluble ace2 in a 1:1.1 ratio and incubated overnight at 4 °c. proteins were digested with 0.1% (w/w) tpck trypsin at room temperature. for sds-page analysis, samples were removed at indicated time points, immediately mixed with sds loading buffer and incubated at 95 °c for 1 minute. for em analysis, the proteolysis reaction was stopped after two hours using phenyl-methyl-sulfonyl-floride (pmsf) at a final concentration of 1 mm and then immediately loaded onto a superose 6 increase 10/300 size-exclusion column. sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' up' , ' up' , ' down' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' up' , ' down' , ' down' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' ace2, ' down' , ' down' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' ace2, ' down' , ' up' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' ace2, ' up' , ' down' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' ace2, ' up' , ' up' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' ace2, ' ace2' , ' down' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd configuration:' ace2, ' ace2' , ' up' sars s 2p + ace2, s1 rbd incursion of animal (usually bat)-derived coronaviruses into the human population has caused several outbreaks of severe disease, starting with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) 3 in 2002 (menachery et al., 2015) . in late 2019 a highly infectious illness, with cold-like symptoms progressing to pneumonia and acute respiratory failure, resulting in an estimated 6% overall death rate (baud et al., 2020) , with higher mortality among the elderly and immunocompromised populations, was identified and confirmed as a pandemic by the who on 11 th march 2020. the etiological agent is a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) belonging to lineage b betacoronavirus and sharing 88% sequence identity with bat coronaviruses (lu et al., 2020a) . the heavily glycosylated trimeric surface spike protein mediates viral entry into the host cell. it is a large type i transmembrane glycoprotein (the ectodomain alone comprises over 1200 residues) (wrapp et al., 2020) . it is made as a single polypeptide and then cleaved by host proteases to yield an n-terminal s1 region and the c-terminal s2 region.spike exists initially in a pre-fusion state where the domains of s1 cloak the upper portion of the spike with the relatively small (~22 kda) s1 rbd nestled at the tip. the rbd is predominantly in a 'down' state where the receptor binding site is inaccessible, however it appears that it stochastically flips up with a hinge-like motion transiently presenting the ace2 receptor binding site (roy, 2020; song et al., 2018; walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) . ace2 acts as a functional receptor for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2, binding to the latter with a 10 to 20-fold higher affinity (k d of ~15 nm), possibly contributing to its ease of transmission (song et al., 2018; wrapp et al., 2020) . there is 73% sequence identity between the rbds of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 ( figure s1 ). when ace2 locks on it holds the rbd 'up', destabilising the s1 cloak and possibly favouring conversion to a postfusion form where the s2 subunit, through massive conformational changes, propels its fusion domain upwards to engage with the host membrane, casting off s1 in the process (song et al., 2018; wrapp et al., 2020) . structural studies of the rbd in complex with ace2 (lan et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020b; yan et al., 2020) how that it is recognized by the extracellular peptidase domain (pd) of ace2 through mainly polar interactions. the s 4 protein is an attractive candidate for both vaccine development and immunotherapy. potent nanomolar affinity neutralising human monoclonal antibodies against the sars-cov rbd have been identified that attach at the ace2 receptor binding site (including m396, cr3014 and 80r (ter meulen et al., 2006; sui et al., 2004; zhu et al., 2007) ). for example 80r binds with nanomolar affinity, prevents binding to ace2 and the formation of syncytia in vitro, and inhibits viral replication in vivo (sui et al., 2004) . however, despite the two viruses sharing the same ace2 receptor these ace2 blocking antibodies do not bind sars-cov-2 rbd (wrapp et al., 2020) . in contrast cr3022, a sars-cov-specific monoclonal selected from a single chain fv phage display library constructed from lymphocytes of a convalescent sars patient and reconstructed into igg1 format (ter meulen et al., 2006) , has been reported to cross-react strongly, binding to the rbd of sars-cov-2 with a k d of 6.3 nm (tian et al., 2020) , whilst not competing with the binding of ace2 (ter meulen et al., 2006) . furthermore, although sars-cov escape mutations could be readily generated for ace2blocking cr3014, no escape mutations could be generated for cr3022, preventing mapping of its epitope (ter meulen et al., 2006) . furthermore a natural mutation of sars-cov-2 has now been detected at residue 495 (y n) (gisaid (shu and mccauley, 2017) : accession id: epi_isl_429783 wienecke-baldacchino et al., 2020), which forms part of the ace2 binding epitope. finally, cr3022 and cr3014 act synergistically to neutralise sars-cov with extreme potency (ter meulen et al., 2006) . whilst this work was being prepared for publication a paper reporting that cr3022 does not neutralise sars-cov-2 and describing the structure of the complex with the rbd at 3.1 å resolution was published (yuan et al., 2020) . here we extend the structure analysis to significantly higher resolution and, using a different neutralisation assay, show that cr3022 does neutralise sars-cov-2, but via a mechanism that would not be detected by the method of yuan et al (yuan et al., 2020) . we use cryo-em analysis of the interaction of cr3022 with the full spike ectodomain to confirm 5 this mechanism. taken together these observations suggest that the cr3022 epitope should be a major target for therapeutic antibodies.to understand how cr3022 works we first investigated the interaction of cr3022 fab with isolated recombinant sars-cov-2 rbd, both alone and in the presence of ace2. surface plasmon resonance (spr) measurements (methods and figure s2 ) confirmed that cr3022 binding to rbd is strong (although weaker than the binding reported to sars-cov (ter meulen et al., 2006) ), with a slight variation according to whether cr3022 or rbd is used as the analyte (k d = 30 nm and 15 nm respectively, derived from the kinetic data in table s1 ).an independent measure using bio-layer interferometry (bli) with rbd as analyte gave a k d of 19 nm (methods and figure s2 ). these values are quite similar to those reported by tian et al. (tian et al., 2020 ) (6.6 nm), whereas weaker binding (k d ~ 115 nm) was reported recently by yuan et al. (yuan et al., 2020) . using spr to perform a competition assay revealed that the binding of ace2 to the rbd is perturbed by the presence of cr3022 ( figure s3 ). the presence of ace2 slows the binding of cr3022 to rbd and accelerates the dissociation. similarly, the release of ace2 from rbd is accelerated by the presence of cr3022. these observations are suggestive of an allosteric effect between ace2 and cr3022.a plaque reduction neutralisation test using sars-cov-2 virus and cr3022 showed an nd50 of 1:201 for a starting concentration of 2mg/ml (calculated according to grist (grist, 1966) ), superior to that of mers convalescent serum (nd50 of 1:149) used as a nibsc 6 international standard positive control (see methods and table s2 ). this corresponds to 50% neutralisation at ~70 nm (~10.5 ug/ml). this is similar to the neutralising concentration (50% neutralisation at 11 ug/ml) reported by ter meulen et al. (ter meulen et al., 2006) for sars-cov, however, as discussed below, it is in apparent disagreement with the result reported recently by yuan et al. (yuan et al., 2020) .we determined the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 rbd-cr3022 fab complex (see methods and table s3 ) to investigate the relationship between the binding epitopes of ace2 and cr3022. crystals grew rapidly and consistently. two crystal forms grew in the same drop. the solvent content of the crystal form solved first was unusually high (ca 87%) with the ace2 binding site exposed to large continuous solvent channels within the crystal lattice ( figure s4 ). these crystals therefore offer a promising vehicle for crystallographic screening to identify potential therapeutics that could act to block virus attachment. the current analysis of this crystal form is at 4.4 å resolution and so, to avoid overfitting, refinement used a novel real-space refinement algorithm to optimise the phases (vagabond, hmg unpublished, see methods). this, together with the favourable observation to parameter ratio resulting from the exceptionally high solvent content, meant that the map was of very high quality, allowing reliable structural interpretation ( figure s5 , methods). full interpretation of the detailed interactions between cr3022 and the rbd was enabled by the second crystal form which diffracted to high resolution, 2.4 å, and the structure of which was refined to give an r-work/r-free of 0.213/0.239 and good stereochemistry (methods, table s3, figure   s5 ).the high-resolution structure is shown in figure 1a . there are two complexes in the crystal asymmetric unit with residues 331-529 in one rbd, 332-445 and 448-532 in the other rbd well defined, whilst residues133-136 of the cr3022 heavy chains are disordered. the rbd has a very similar structure to that seen in the complex of sars-cov-2 rbd with ace2, rmsd for 194 ca atoms of 0.6 å 2 (pdb, 6m0j (lan et al., 2020) ), and an rmsd of 1.1 å 2 compared to the sars cov rbd (pdb, 2ajf (li et al., 2005) ). only minor conformational changes are introduced by binding to cr3022, at residues 381-390. the rbd was deglycosylated (methods) to leave a single saccharide unit at each of the n-linked glycosylation sites clearly seen at n331 and n343 ( figure s5 ). cr3022 attaches to the rbd surface orthogonal to the ace2 receptor binding site. there is no overlap between the epitopes and indeed both the fab and ace2 ectodomain can bind without clashing ( figure   1d ) (tian et al., 2020) . such independence of the ace2 binding site has been reported recently for another sars-cov-2 neutralising antibody, 47d11 . the fab complex interface buries 990 å 2 of surface area (600 and 390 å 2 by the heavy and light chains respectively, figure 2a and figure s6 ), somewhat more than the rbd-ace2 interface which covers 850 å 2 (pdb 6m0j (lan et al., 2020) ). typical of a fab complex, the interaction is mediated by the antibody cdr loops, which fit well into the rather sculpted surface of the rbd (figure 1b , c). the heavy chain cdr1, 2 and 3 make contacts to residues from α 2, β 2 and α 3 (residues 369-386), while two of the light chain cdrs (1 and 2) interact mainly with residues from the β 2-α3 loop, α 3 (380-392) and the α 5-β4 loop (427-430) (figures 1, s1, s7). a total of 16 residues from the heavy chain and 14 from the light chain cement the interaction with 26 residues from the rbd. for the heavy chain these potentially form 7 h-bonds and 3 salt bridges, the latter from d55 and e57 (cdr2) to k378 of the rbd.whilst the light chain interface comprises 6 h-bonds and a single salt bridge between e61(cdr2) and k386 of the rbd. the binding is consolidated by a number of hydrophobic 8 interactions ( figure s7b ). of the 26 residues involved in the interaction 23 are conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 ( figure 2b and figure s1 ). the cr30222 epitope is much more conserved than that of the receptor blocking anti-sars-cov antibody 80r for which only 13 of the 29 interacting residues are conserved (hwang et al., 2006) , in-line with the lack of cross reactivity observed for the latter.the reason for the conservation of the cr3022 epitope becomes clear in the context of the complete pre-fusion s structure (pdb ids: 6vsb (wrapp et al., 2020) , 6vxx, 6vyb (walls et al., 2020) ) where the epitope is inaccessible ( figure 3 ). when the rbd is in the 'down'configuration the cr3022 epitope is packed tightly against another rbd of the trimer and the n-terminal domain (ntd) of the neighbouring protomer. in the structure of the pre-fusion form of trimeric spike the majority of rbds are 'down', although presumably stochastically one may be 'up' (walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) . the structure of a sars-cov complex with ace2 ectodomain shows that this 'up' configuration is competent to bind receptor, and that there are a family of 'up' orientations with significantly different hinge angles (song et al., 2018) . however, the cr3022 epitope remains largely inaccessible even in the 'up' configuration. modelling the rotation of the rbd required to enable fab interaction in the context of the spike trimer, showed a rotation corresponding to a > 60° further declination from the central vertical axis was required, beyond that observed previously (walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) (figure 3i ), although this might be partly mitigated by more complex movements of the rbd and if more than one rbd is in the 'up' configuration this requirement would be relaxed somewhat. since locking the up state by receptor blocking antibodies is thought to destabilise the pre-fusion state (walls et al., 2019) binding of cr3022 presumably introduces further destabilisation, leading to a premature conversion to the post-fusion state, inactivating the virus. cr3022 and ace2 blocking antibodies can bind 9 independently but both induce an 'up' conformation, presumably explaining the observed synergy between binding at the two sites (ter meulen et al., 2006) .to test if cr3022 binding destabilises the prefusion state of spike, the ectodomain construct described previously (wrapp et al., 2020) was used to produce glycosylated protein in hek cells (methods). cryo-em screening showed that the protein was in the trimeric prefusion conformation. spike was then mixed with an excess of cr3022 fab and incubated at room temperature, with aliquots being taken at 50 minutes and 3 hours. aliquots were immediately applied to cryo-em grids and frozen (methods). for the 50 minutes incubation, collection of a substantial amount of data allowed unbiased particle picking and 2d classification which revealed two major structural classes with a similar number in each, (i) the prefusion conformation, and (ii) a radically different conformation (methods , table s4 and figure s8 ).detailed analysis of the prefusion conformation led to a structure at a nominal resolution of 3.4 å (fsc = 0.143), based on a broad distribution of orientations, that revealed the same predominant rbd pattern (one 'up' and two 'down') previously seen (wrapp et al., 2020) with no evidence of cr3022 binding (figure 4a , figure s9 ). analysis of the other major particle class revealed strong preferential orientation of the particles on the grid ( figure   s10a ). despite this a reconstruction with a nominal resolution of 3.9 å within the plane of the grid, and perhaps 7 å resolution in the perpendicular direction ( figure s10b ), could be produced which allowed the unambiguous fitting of the cr3022-rbd complex (figure 4b ).note that in addition there is less well defined density attached to the rbd, in a suitable position to correspond to the spike n-terminal domain (wrapp et al., 2020) . these structures are no longer trimeric, rather two complexes associate to form an approximately symmetric dimer (however, application of this symmetry in the reconstruction process did not improve 1 0 the resolution). the interactions responsible for dimerisation involve the ace2 binding site on the rbd and the elbow of the fab, however the interaction does not occur in our lowresolution crystal form and is therefore probably extremely weak and not biologically significant. since conversion to the post-fusion conformation leads to dissociation of s1(which includes the n-terminal domain and rbd) these results confirm that cr3022 destabilises the prefusion spike conformation. further evidence of this is provided by analysis of data collected after 3 h incubation. by this point there were no intact trimers remaining and a heterogeneous range of oligomeric assemblies had appeared, which we were not able to interpret in detail but which are consistent with the lateral assembly of fab/rbd complexes ( figure s11 ). note that the relatively slow kinetics will not be representative of events in vivo, where the conversion might be accelerated by the elevated temperature and the absence of the mutations which were added to this construct to stabilise the prefusion state (kirchdoerfer et al., 2018; pallesen et al., 2017; wrapp et al., 2020) .until now the only documented mechanism of neutralisation of coronaviruses has been through blocking receptor attachment. in the case of sars-cov this is achieved by presentation of the rbd of the spike in an 'up' conformation.although not yet confirmed for sars-cov-2 it is very likely that a similar mechanism can apply. here we define a second class of neutralisers, that bind a highly conserved epitope ( figure s1 ) and can therefore act against both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (cr3022 was first identified as a neutralising antibody against sars-cov (ter meulen et al., 2006) ). we find that binding of cr3022 to the isolated rbd is tight (~20 nm) and the crystal structure of the complex reveals the atomic detail of the interaction. despite the spatial separation of the cr3022 and ace2 epitopes we find an allosteric effect between the two binding events. the role of the 1 1 cr3022 epitope in stabilising the prefusion spike trimer explains why it has, to date, proved impossible to generate mutations that escape binding of the antibody (ter meulen et al., 2006) .whilst in our assay cr3022 neutralises sars-cov-2, a recent paper (yuan et al., 2020) reported an alternative assay that did not detect neutralisation. the difference is likely due to their removal of the antibody/virus mix after adsorption to the indicator cells, before incubating to allow cytopathic effect (cpe) to develop. this would be in-line with the distinction previously seen between neutralisation tests for influenza virus by antibodies which bind the stem of hemagglutinin and therefore do not block receptor binding (thomson et al., 2012) . these antibodies did not appear to be neutralising when tested with the standard who neutralisation assay, in which a similar protocol is used to that adopted by yuan et al, in which the inoculum of virus/antibody is washed out before development of cpe.neutralisation was observed, however, when the antibodies were left in the assay during incubation to produce cpe. by analogy we would expect antibodies to the rbd that block attachment to ace2 to behave in a similar way to antibodies against the globular head of ha, whilst antibodies such as cr3022, that neutralise by an alternative mechanism to blocking receptor attachment, may need to be present throughout the incubation period with the indicator cells to reveal neutralisation. this agrees with our observation that, in the absence of ace2, the cr3022 fab destroys the prefusion-stabilised trimer (t 1/2 ~1h at room temperature as measured by cryo-em).with monoclonal antibodies now recognised as potential antivirals (lu et al., 2020b; salazar et al., 2017) our results suggest that cr3022 may be of immediate utility, since the mechanism of neutralisation will be unusually resistant to virus escape. in contrast antibodies which compete with ace2 (whose epitope on sars-cov-2 is reported to have already 1 2shown mutation at residue 495 (gisaid: accession id: epi_isl_429783 wienecke-baldacchino et al., 2020 (shu and mccauley, 2017) ), are likely to be susceptible to escape.furthermore, with knowledge of the detailed structure of the epitope presented here a higher affinity version of cr3022 might be engineered. alternatively, since the same mechanism of neutralisation is likely to be used by other antibodies, a more potent monoclonal antibody targeting the same epitope might be found (for instance by screening for competition with cr3022). additionally, since this epitope is sterically and functionally independent of the well-established receptor-blocking neutralising antibody epitope there is considerable scope for therapeutic synergy between antibodies targeting the two epitopes (indeed this type of to further validate the spr results the k d of fab cr3022 for rbd was also measured by bio-layer interferometry. kinetic assays were performed on an octet red 96e (fortebio) at 30 ℃ with a shake speed of 1000 rpm. fab cr3022 was immobilized onto amine reactive 2nd generation (ar2g) biosensors (fortebio) and serially diluted rbd (80，40，20，10 and 5 nm) was used as analyte. pbs (ph 7.4) was used as the assay buffer. recorded data were analysed using the data analysis software ht v11.1 (fortebio), with a global 1:1 fitting model.neutralising virus titres were measured in serum samples that had been heat-inactivated at 56 °c for 30 minutes. sars-cov-2 (strain victoria/1/2020 at cell passage 3 (caly et al., 2020) ) was diluted to a concentration of 1.4e+03 pfu/ml (70 pfu/50 µl) and mixed 50:50 in 1% fcs/mem containing 25 mm hepes buffer with doubling serum dilutions from 1:10 to 1:320 in a 96-well v-bottomed plate.the plate was incubated at 37 °c in a humidified box for 1 hour to allow the antibody in the serum samples to neutralise the virus. cr3022 (ph7.2) at a starting concentration of 2 mg/ml was diluted 1 in 10. the dilutions were then made 2-fold up to 320. the neutralised virus was transferred into the wells of a twice dpbs-washed plaque assay 24-well plate that had been seeded with vero/hslam the previous day at 1.5e+05 cells per well in 10% fcs/mem. neutralised virus was allowed to adsorb at 37 °c for a further hour, and overlaid with plaque assay overlay media (1x mem/1.5% cmc/4% fcs final). after 5 days incubation at 37 °c in a humified box, the plates were fixed, stained and plaques counted.dilutions and controls were performed in duplicate. median neutralising titres (nd50) were determined using the spearman-karber formula (kärber, 1931) relative to virus only control wells.purified and deglycosylated rbd and cr3022 fab were concentrated to 8.3 mg/ml and 11 mg/ml respectively, and then mixed in an approximate molar ratio of 1:1. crystallization screen experiments were carried out using the nanolitre sitting-drop vapour diffusion method in 96-well plates as previously described (walter et al., 2003 (walter et al., , 2005 transmission). data were indexed, integrated and scaled with the automated data processing program xia2-dials (winter, 2010; winter et al., 2018) . the data set of 720° was collected from a single frozen crystal to 4.4 å resolution with 52-fold redundancy. the crystal belongs to space group p4 1 2 1 2 with unit cell dimensions a = b = 150.5 å and c = 241.6 å. the structure was determined by molecular replacement with phaser (mccoy et al., 2007) using search models of human germline antibody fabs 5-51/o12 (pdb id, 4kmt (teplyakov et al., 2014) ) heavy chain and ighv3-23/igk4-1 (pdb id, 5i1d (teplyakov et al., 2016) ) light chain, and rbd of sars-cov-2 rbd/ace2 complex (pdb id, 6m0j (lan et al., 2020) ). there is one rbd/cr3022 complex in the crystal asymmetric unit, resulting in a crystal solvent content of ~87%.during optimization of the crystallization conditions, a second crystal form was found to grow in the same condition with similar morphology. a data set of 720° rotation with data extending to 2.4 å was collected on beamline i03 of diamond from one of these crystals (exposure time 0.004 s per 0.1° frame, beam size 80×20 μ m and 100% beam transmission).the crystal also belongs to space group p4 1 2 1 2 but with significantly different unit cell dimensions (a = b = 163.1 å and c = 189.1 å). there were two rbd/cr3022 complexes in the asymmetric unit and a solvent content of ~74%.the initial structure was determined using the lower resolution data from the first crystal form. data were excluded at a resolution below 35 å as these fell under the beamstop shadow. one cycle of refmac5 (murshudov et al., 2011) was used to refine atomic coordinates after manual correction in coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) figure s5 ). the final refined structure had an r work of 0.331 (r free , 0.315) for all data to 4.36 å resolution. this structure was later used to determine the structure of the second crystal form, which has been refined with phenix (liebschner et al., 2019) to r work = 0.213 and r free = 0.239 for all data to 2.42 å resolution. this refined modelrevealed the presence of one extra residue at each heavy chain n-terminus and 3 extra residues at the n-terminus of one rbd from the signal peptide. there is well ordered density for a single glycan at each of the glycosylation sites at n331 and n343 in one rbd, and only one at n343 in the second rbd.data collection and structure refinement statistics are given in table s3 . structural comparisons used shp (stuart et al., 1979) , residues forming the rbd/fab interface were identified with pisa (krissinel and henrick, 2007) , figures were prepared with pymol (the pymol molecular graphics system, version 1.2r3pre, schrödinger, llc).purified spike protein was buffer exchanged into 2 mm tris ph 8.0, 200 mm nacl, 0.02 % nan3 buffer using a desalting column (zeba, thermo fisher μ m and at a nominal magnification of x105,000, corresponding to a calibrated pixel size of 0.83 å/pixel, see table s4 .cryo-em data processing 2 2for both the 50 minute and 3 h incubation datasets, motion correction and alignment of 2x binned super-resolution movies was performed using relion3.1. ctf-estimation with gctf (v1.06) (zhang, 2016) and non-template-driven particle picking was then performed within cryosparc v2.14.1-live followed by multiple rounds of 2d classification (punjani et al., 2017) .for the 50 minutes dataset. 2d class averages for structure-a and structure-b were then used separately for template-driven classification before further rounds of 2d and 3d classification with c1 symmetry. both structures were then sharpened in cryosparc. data processing and refinement statistics are given in table s4 .an initial model for the spike (structure-a) was generated using pdb id, 6vyb (walls et al., 2020) and rigid body fitted into the final map using coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) .the model was further refined in real space with phenix (liebschner et al., 2019) which resulted in a correlation coefficient of 0.84. two copies of rbd-cr3022 were fitted into structure-b in the same manner. because of the strongly anisotropic resolution the overall correlation coefficient vs the model was lower (0.47).for the 3 h incubation dataset, particles were extracted with a larger box size (686 pixels as compared to 540 pixels), and, following multiple rounds of 2d classification, 2d class averages from 'blob-picked' particles showing signs of complete 'flower-like' structures were selected for ab initio reconstruction. for the 3 h data no detailed fitting was attempted. t/e (red, negative; blue, positive).a mysterious pneumonia illness was first reported in late december 2019 in wuhan, china, and has rapidly spread to a dozen of countries including the united states with thousands of infected individuals and hundreds of deaths within a month [1] . scientists in china have isolated the virus from patients and determined its genetic code. the pathogen responsible for this epidemic is a new coronavirus designated 2019-ncov by the world health organization. 2019-ncov belongs to the same family of viruses as the well-known severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), which have killed hundreds of people in the past 17 years.coronaviruses consist of a large diverse family of viruses. they can be classified into four genera: alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and delta coronavirus [2, 3] . representative alphacoronaviruses include human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), while the betacoronaviruses include the best-known sars-cov and mers-cov. based on nucleic acid sequence similarity, the newly identified 2019-ncov is a betacoronavirus. the entry of all coronaviruses into host cells is mediated by spike glycoprotein that gives coronaviruses a crownlike appearance by forming spikes on their surface. the amino acid sequence of spike glycoprotein consists of a large ectodomain, a single-pass transmembrane anchor, and a short c-terminal intracellular tail [3] . the ectodomain contains a receptor-binding unit s1 and a membrane-fusion unit s2. electron microscopic imaging illustrated that spike glycoprotein forms a clove-shaped spike with three s1 heads and a trimeric s2 stalk. for a virus to enter a host cell, s1 binds to a specific cell surface receptor via its receptorbinding domain (rbd), and s2 fuses the host cell and viral membranes, enabling the entry of viral genomes into host cells. specific rbd-receptor binding determines if a cell or animal can be infected and also serves as a target for therapeutic inventions to treat diseases caused by coronaviruses. previous studies have identified angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as a functional receptor for sars-cov [4, 5] . in this study, we analyzed the structure of spike glycoprotein rbd of 2019-ncov and identified a unique feature that potentially allows a high affinity binding to ace2 in human cells. we further discussed potential candidates for natural hosts of 2019-ncov, routes of transmission, and strategies to inhibit virus entry for therapeutic applications.the genomic sequence of 2019-ncov as deposited by wang et al. was downloaded from the genbank database (mn908947.3). dna and protein sequences were compared by using the blast program. multiple sequence alignment was performed by using the clustal omega program. three-dimensional structure was analyzed by using the cn3d program from the ncbi. protein structure simulation was performed by using swiss-model based on the cocrystal structure of human ace2 with the sars-cov spike glycoprotein rbd (6, pdb id 2ajf). ace2 and rdb interaction was analyzed by molecular docking using the patchdock and firedock programs.by using the initially reported sequence mn908947.3, a blast search of the ncbi database revealed 6 inputs for the virus with essentially identical sequences (accession nc_045512.2, mn908947.3, mn975262.1, mn985325.1, mn988713.1, and mn938384.1). the closest homolog of 2019-ncov is a sars-like coronavirus isolated from bat (mg772933.1) with a sequence identity of 87.99% at 99% coverage (fig. 1a) . it also shows 80% sequence identity with sars coronavirus isolated from human patients or civet with 98% coverage. throughout the entire 29,903bp genome of 2019-ncov, the least conserved region encodes for the spike glycoprotein with sequence identity of 74e83%. spike glycoprotein forms spikes on the surface of coronaviruses and is responsible for entrance of the viruses into the host cells. the rbd in the spike glycoprotein molecule directly binds receptors on the surface of host cells [3] . in the case of sars-cov and bat/civet sars-like cov, the receptor is ace2, an exopeptidase that catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin i to the nonapeptide angiotensin1-9 or the conversion of angiotensin ii to angiotensin1-7 [3e7]. at the protein level, the whole spike glycoprotein and its rbd share 76% and 72% sequence identity with sars-cov, respectively. sars-cov spike glycoprotein is known to be glycosylated. a total of 22 predicated n-glycosylation sites is found in spike glycoprotein of 2019-ncov, which are shared by sars-cov except that the latter contains an extra glycosylation site at n370. a detailed sequence alignment of the rbd of sars-cov spike glycoprotein with those from closely related coronaviruses at the protein level is shown in fig. 1b .the crystal structure of sars-cov rbd in complex with its receptor, human ace2, has been solved [6] . by performing molecular simulation, we obtained a ternary structure for rbd of 2019-ncov that is essentially superimposable with that of sars-cov ( fig. 2aec) , except for a noted structural variation in a loop (loop 2). the backbone of the deduced rbd structure consists of 7 beta sheets. peptide segments involved in the formation of this secondary structure are all highly conserved without the presence of secondary structure breakers. four cysteinyl residues that form disulfide bonds (corresponding to c366/c418 and c467/c474 of sars-cov) are also conserved (see also fig. 1b) . we furthermore performed molecular docking to examine the binding of rbd with ace2. the deduced complex structure reveals similar mode of extensive interaction as seen with sars-cov with a more favorable binding energy (à21.82 21 vs. à13.38 kcal/mol) (fig. 2def) . the contact between ace2 and rbd involves two b-sheets and three loops (see figs. 1b and 2a). there are 16 amino acid residues in sars-cov rbd that are directly in contact with ace2, of which 8 are conserved in 2019-ncov (see fig. 1b ). presumably, the substituted amino acids can either reduce or enhance the interaction.to define the contribution of the variant amino acids to the rbd/ ace2 interaction, we compare the sequences of rbd from three other sars-cov-associated viruses (fig. 1b) . these include coronaviruses isolated from patients during a short, weak sars outbreak in 2003e2004 (denoted sarsv here) and from palm civets and bats, possible sources of sars-cov found in humans [8e11]. recombinant proteins containing rbd of these 3 viruses are all known to bind to human ace2 [11, 12] . in comparison with sars-cov (responsible for the major sras outbreak during the 2002e2003), binding with sarsv and civet rbds is substantially weaker [12] , while quantitative binding affinity with bat rbd has been not been determined [11] . amino acid residues in the rbd/ ace2 binding interface plays a crucial role in determining the binding affinity. among the 16 amino acid residues in rbd of sars that are in contact with ace2, 14, 14, 7, and 8 are shared by sarsv, civet, bat, and 2019-ncov, respectively (fig. 1b) . n479 found in both sars viruses isolated from human patients is changed to k and r in civet and bat, respectively. an earlier study demonstrated that an n479 to k substitution resulted in significantly lower affinity (30fold increase in kd values) [12] . interestingly, this amino acid is substituted by a similar amino acid glutamine (q493) in 2019-ncov, which also contains an amide group but at an extended position, which can potentially carry out similar functions. in comparison with sars-cov, t487 is changed to asparagine (n501) in 2019-ncov but alanine or serine in the other viruses. it has been shown that a t487 to s substitution increased kd by 20-fold, suggesting the methyl group rather than the hydroxyl group in this threonine residue is more important for the interaction [12] . it is hard to predict if n501 with an amide group can confer a better interaction. hydrophobic amino acid l472 is also important for interaction between rbd and ace2. interestingly, it is substituted by proline in sarsv and phenylalanine in 2019-ncov (corresponding to f486). l472 is located in a loop formed by disulfide bond c467/c474. interestingly, this loop with ctppalnc in sars-cov is replaced by cngvegfnc in 2019-ncov containing one extra amino acid residue and totally different amino acid compositions. the replacement of two proline residues by two flexible glycine residues converts a rigid structure to a very flexible one. further examination of the deduced rbd/ace2 complex structure reveals that this unique phenylalanine f486 in the flexible loop can penetrate deep into a hydrophobic pocket in ace2 formed by f28, l79, y83, and l97 (fig. 2f) . the presence of two aromatic amino acids in the pocket may provide additional binding force via pstacking interactions [13] . taken together, 2019-ncov likely has a stronger binding to ace2 via its spike glycoprotein.glycosylation may also affect the interaction of rbd with ace2. among the 23 glycosylation sites on spike glycoprotein, two are in rbd (fig. 1b) . glycosylation has been detected on one of these residues, asn330 [6] . n330 corresponds to n343 in the spike glycoprotein of 2019-ncov and is a conserved glycosylation site. since it is well separated from the rbd/ace2 interaction interphase, glycosylation at this site is unlikely to interfere with the interaction [6] . it should be noted that another potential glycosylation site corresponding to n357 in sars-cov is not conserved in 2019-ncov because of substitution of t by a in the þ2 position. lack of this glycosylation is not expected to affect the receptor binding.the 2019-ncov outbreak is thought to be initiated from a seafood market that also carried many other wild live animals including snakes, birds, and various mammals. interestingly, a study by ji et al. suggests that snakes might serve as a likely reservoir for the novel ncov-2019 based on the observation that the codon usage of ncov-2019 was more similar to snakes than other potential hosts they investigated [14] . while the data and premise are being debated, we sought to address the problem by analyzing the structure of ace2 in different animals. ace2 is widely expressed in the animal kingdom from fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, to mammals. remarkably, its structure is highly conserved. comparison of human ace2 with that of a civet (paguma larvata, aax63775.1), a bat (rhinolophus sinicus, adn93475.1), a bird (nipponia nippon, kfq92425.1), a snake (protobothrops mucrosquamatus, xp_029140508.1), a frog (xenopus laevis, xp_018104311.1), and a fish (callorhinchus milii, xp_007889845.1) revealed amino acid sequence identity of 83%, 81%, 83%, 61%, 60%, and 59%, respectively. fig. 3 aligns parts of ace2 sequences that contain all the interaction sites in contact with sars-cov rbd according to the published co-crystal structure [6] . the interaction involved mainly two a-helices of ace2. out of 20 amino acid residues involved in the direct interaction, 4 of them are shared by all seven species of animals analyzed in the study, including f28 that supposedly interacts with f486 of spike glycoprotein from 2019-ncov (fig. 2f) . many of the remaining resides in the contact are conserved or replaced by amino acids of similar chemical properties. it is interesting to note that bird ace2 shares as many conserved contacting amino acid residues as bat and civet ace2. ace2 molecules from any of these has the potential to interact with rbd of 2019-ncov with high affinity. therefore, it would not be a surprise if any of these wild animals is found to be a primary or secondary host of 2019-ncov. sars-cov-like coronaviruses have been found in many bats that are considered as natural reservoirs for the viruses. they may well be the host for 2019-ncov. however, the possibility that cold-blooded animals like snakes can serve as a host cannot be ruled out. the flexible interacting loop identified in our study may allow the virus to adapt to both the cold-blooded and warm-blooded hosts.by performing immunostaining, earlies studies have demonstrated the expression of ace2 in lung alveolar epithelial cells as well as arterial and venous endothelial cells, arterial smooth muscle cells, renal tubular epithelium, and epithelia of the small intestine [15, 16] . the lung expression provides strong support for infection of sars-cov and 2019-ncov through the airways of the lung. however, by searching the human protein atlas database, we found that ace2 mrna is mainly detected in small intestine, colon, duodenum, kidney, testis, and gallbladder. its expression level in the lung is minimal (fig. 4) . furthermore, by examining data from two single-cell rna-seq studies [17, 18] , we only identified 2 out of 4599 and 13 out of 540 lung epithelial cells expressed a detectable level of ace2 (www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/sc). this confirms that the overall expression of ace2 in the lung is low and may also suggest the presence of selected cells with upregulated ace2 expression under certain conditions.the tissue expression pattern of ace2 suggests other modes of virus transmission that may involve the functions of intestine, kidney, testis, and other tissues. particular attention should be paid to the intestines which expressed the highest level of ace2. earlier studies have demonstrated that diarrhea was present in up to 70% of patients infected with sars-cov [19] . more importantly, a recent case report demonstrated the presence of 2019-ncov in feces of a patient with an initial diarrhea episode [20] . while this finding has been noted in other reports, tests of feces and urine samples for the presence of 2019-ncov is warranted, which may help to reveal alternative routes of virus transmission.since its initial outbreak, the 2019-ncov infection is much more contagious than it was originally thought. we know that the virus is capable of spreading quickly from human to human and that people can spread the virus even before they become symptomatic [1] . this makes it harder to contain the virus, and many are concerned about the possibility of a new pandemic. our study suggests unique structural features of the spike glycoprotein rbd of 2019-ncov that confers potentially higher affinity binding for its receptor than found with sars-cov. with a higher affinity binding capability, the number of viruses required to infect a cell is much reduced. this partly explains why 2019-ncov appears to be more aggressive than sars-cov. this also reminds us of a lesser-known coronavirus hcov-nl63 that also uses ace2 also as a receptor. hcov-nl63 was initially isolated from a child with bronchiolitis in the netherlands [21] . it belongs to the alphacoronavirus subfamily. the rbd of sars-cov shares no structural homology with that of sars-cov but recognizes the same region in ace2. however, cocrystal structure reveals that rbd of nl63-cov has a narrower contact with ace2, involving fewer amino acids [22] . this presumably results in a weaker interaction. evidently, nl63-cov does not spread aggressively and only causes mild to moderate respiratory infections [23] .the exact mode of transmission for 2019-ncov has not been firmly established. sars-cov is thought to be transmitted by respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes [19] . the respiratory droplets spread can occur only through direct person-to-person contact or at a close distance. presumably, 2019-ncov can be transmitted through respiratory droplets. it may also be transmitted more effectively through the air over a long distance (airborne spread) or by other ways. considering the predominant expression of ace2 in intestines and kidney, 2019-ncov may infect cells in these tissues and find its way into feces and urine. this makes transmission through the fecal-oral route and bodyfluids (urine) possible. the presence of 2019-ncov in feces supports such a notion [20] .specific rbd-receptor binding determines if a cell or animal can be infected and also serves as a target for therapeutic inventions to treat diseases caused by coronaviruses. by binding directly to ace2 on the surface of host cells, spike glycoprotein plays an essential role in virus infection. an obvious way to stop the virus infection is to block the rbd and ace2 interaction. this can be achieved by using antibodies or small molecular inhibitors. naturally, antibodies and inhibitors that can disrupt the interaction of rbd with ace2 is of therapeutic importance. by using a molecular docking approach, an earlier study identified n-(2-aminoethyl)-1 aziridineethanamine as a novel ace2 inhibitor that effectively blocks the sars-cov rbd-mediated cell fusion [24] . this has provided a potential candidate and lead compound for further therapeutic drug development. meanwhile, biochemical and cell-based assays can be established to screen chemical compound libraries to identify novel inhibitors. on the other hand, many ace inhibitors are currently used to treat hypertension and other cardiovascular diseases [25] . among them are captopril, perindopril, ramipril, lisinopril, benazepril, and moexipril. although these drugs primarily target ace, a homolog of ace2 with 42% sequence identity and 61% sequence similarity in the catalytic domain, they may be effective toward ace2 as well [26] . it should be noted that ace inhibitors bind to the catalytic center rather than rbd binding site. nonetheless, these enzymatic inhibitors may indirectly alter conformation of the rbd binding site and thereby affect the interaction of ace2 with rbd. it is certainly worthwhile to test these drugs for their ability to block the rbd/ace2 interaction. the 2019 coronavirus disease (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has been spread globally since its first outbreak in wuhan, china in december 2019. 1−3 common symptoms of sars-cov-2 infected patients involve fever, cough, and fatigue with an estimated death rate of 3%−5%. 4 it has already caused more than 7 million confirmed cases and more than 400,000 deaths all over the world (at the time this work is written). in addition to health concerns, the disease also brought severe economic and social issues. 5 while the situation of wuhan has been stepped down, europe and the united states are experiencing a major epidemic. thus, it is crucial to understand the infection and spreading process and find measures to mitigate the epidemic situation.the sars-cov-2 is a member of the beta-coronavirus genus, 6 which also includes the acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and the middle-east respiratory syndrome virus (mers). the sars-cov-2 virus appears to be optimized for binding to the human receptor ace2, 7 and the binding patterns between ace2 and sars-cov-2 or sars-cov at the receptor binding domain (rbd) are thought to be almost identical. 8 more specifically, sars-cov-2 shares 76%−78% sequence identity with sars-cov for the whole protein and 73%−76% for the rbd. 9 the trimeric spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 is comprised of three s1/s2 units, and the rbd locates at s1. one variation, the s1/s2 cleavage site of sars-cov-2 is a unique "rrar" furin recognition site, 10 while in sars-cov it is a single arginine. 11 the three s1/s2 units undergo a hingelike conformational switch between "up" and "down" states. only at the "up" state, the rbd is exposed and is able to bind to the receptor, while at the "down" state the rbd is hidden and is inaccessible by the receptor. 12 for sars-cov, the spike trimer with two "down" and one "up" is the most populated state. 13 this could very likely be the case for sars-cov-2, but to our knowledge no experimental statistical measurement has been reported yet. a recent study pointed out the possibility of two spike proteins binding with the same ace2. 14 after binding to the receptor, the following cascade of events is triggered: the spike protein undergoes a large conformational change, the s1 with the receptor is shed, s2 is transformed to a more stable postfusion state, and finally the viral membrane is fused with the cell membrane. 15, 16 despite the similarities in structures and binding patterns between the two viruses, sars-cov-2 spreads faster than sars-cov and this might be due to the stronger binding of the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. 12 the range of experimental binding affinities of the two ace2-virus is wide, with reports of 15 nm 12 and 150−185 nm 13 for the ace2-sars-cov-2 and the ace2-sars-cov complexes, respectively, and also reports of 4.7 nm and 31 nm, 8 and 1.2 nm and 5.0 nm 17 for both systems, respectively. in all cases, the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex shows a larger binding affinity than ace2-sars-cov. on the other hand, although the sequences and epitope have been studied extensively, it is still unclear what is the structural/energetic basis for the difference between the two complexes. moreover, the receptor binding is a crucial step for drug and antibody interference with the infection process. thus, this work will focus on understanding the detailed differences between the binding features of the two coronaviruses and the human receptor ace2.recent works yielded high-resolution structure of sars-cov-2 at its prefusion state, 14 as well as the complex of its rbd domain and ace2. 8 these emerging structures provide an opportunity to use computational modeling to investigate the underlying mechanism behind the differences in binding strengths of the two ace2-virus complexes. however, such a task is very challenging. for example, recent theoretical work 18 analyzed the number of contacts, interface area, and fluctuations and concluded that different viruses have different strategy for binding. however, this work could not obtain the correct order of binding affinity between the ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov complexes.obviously, the main issue is the differences in interaction of free energies between the two types of viruses and the receptor, as this energy is essential for understanding the binding process. evaluating the binding energy of a very large protein complex is an enormous challenge for fully atomistic models and thus we chose here to use our coarse-grained (cg) model 19−21 to study the energetics of the complexes. our cg model has been consistently developed and systematically calibrated to account for proper evaluation of electrostatic free energies of proteins and membranes, including, of course, solvation and hydrophobic effects. the model was applied extensively to many systems, calculating protein-folding free energies and related properties. 22−24 here we use the model to evaluate the binding of the virus to ace2.our analysis of the binding patterns found that the substitutions of residues near the rbd of sars-cov in the conversion to sars-cov-2 is not the reason for the increase in binding energy. it is found that the major contribution actually comes from the body of the spike protein that is away from the rbd. it is also found that the antibody of sars-cov, that did not show cross-reactivity, might be partially due to the fact that the binding interface is partially covered, compare to the situation in the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex.in this work, we used modeler 25 to perform homology modeling in constructing the binding complexes of ace2-sars-cov-2 and m396-sars-cov-2. the sars-cov-2 structure was taken from the recent cryo-em study (pdb id: 6vsb) 12 with an incomplete receptor binding domain. for the binding domain, we used the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 rbd that is bound to ace2 (pdb id: 6m0j). 8 the binding between m396 and sars-cov-2 was modeled using the m396-sars-cov structure as a template (pdb id: 2dd8). 26 subsequently, we utilized our cg model to calculate the free energy of each structure and the relevant binding energies. our cg model is focused on the electrostatic free energy of the protein that involves the solvation energy and the interactions between charged and polar residues. the full cg treatment includes membrane terms (see si) which are not included in the present case, since the membrane is out of the system studied. the total cg energy is defined as follows 20 (see also si) the terms on the right are the side chain van der waals energy, main chain solvation energy, main chain hydrogen bond energy, side chain electrostatic energy, side chain polar energy, side chain hydrophobic energy, main chain/side chain electrostatic energy, and main chain/side chain van der waals energy, respectively. the scaling coefficients c 1 , c 2 , and c 3 are taking values of 0.10, 0.25, and 0.15 in this work.before the evaluation of the free energy, we used a monte carlo proton transfer (mcpt) method 20 to determine the charge configuration of all ionizable residues in the system. in the mcpt approach, the mc procedure controls proton transfer moves between ionizable residues or between one ionizable residue and the bulk. the acceptance probability of the move is determined by standard metropolis criteria (see si). by such calculations, we are able to get the cg free energy of each protein configuration and also the electrostatic contribution of each residue when they are either in the the journal of physical chemistry b pubs.acs.org/jpcb article ace2-virus complex or in the unbound state. note that the cg already represents the free energy of the system and not the potential energy. all calculations and simulations were carried out using the molaris-xg package. 27, 28 for more details, see si.we started by trying to evaluate the binding energy differences between the two complexes (ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov) and to determine where the difference is coming from. this study utilized the recently published cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id: 6vsb) 12 and the crystal structure of its rbd and ace2 (pdb id: 6m0j) 8 and performed homology-modeling in order to obtain the structure of the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. the structure of ace2-sars-cov has been taken from a previous work (pdb id: 6cs2). 13 after getting the structures, we performed energy minimization and molecular dynamics for structural relaxation. this procedure was followed by the mcpt algorithm 20 (that determines the optimal charge distribution of the ionizable residues) and obtained the cg energies of the ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov complexes. with the same treatment, we obtained the cg energies of the ace2, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 monomers at infinite distance separation. the ace2-virus binding free energy was then calculated by δg binding = g complex − g ace2 − g virus . even though the binding mode of the two ace2-virus complexes ( figure 1b ) were argued to be almost identical, 8 we still obtained binding energy of −70.7 kcal/mol for ace2-sars-cov-2 and −66.4 for ace2-sars-cov, respectively. as expected, the major difference come from electrostatic contributions. at this point, the binding energy difference could either be an effect of the nonconserved residues or the change in structures of the two complexes near or outside the rbds.to understand this issue in a more quantitative way, we evaluated the electrostatic contributions of each residue to the total binding free energy of the two complexes (see figure 2a) . it was found that some residues give positive contributions while others give negative contributions. this finding is consistent with the results that show some interactions at the binding interface strengthen while others weaken the binding. 14 to see whether the difference in binding comes from the rbd, we further classified the free energy contributions based on their distances from the binding site. thus, we plotted in figure 2b the contributions of the residues within given range to the total free energy (this was done according to the distances to the n501 residue of ace2-sars-cov-2 or to t487 of ace2-sars-cov). to our surprise, if we consider the journal of physical chemistry b pubs.acs.org/jpcb article the residues within 60 å of the binding site, it is found that the ace2-sars-cov complex has a stronger binding affinity (its curve is below that of the ace2-sars-cov-2 curve). apparently the residues between 60 and 120 å are the residues that switched the trend. this result indicates that the binding to the receptor in a remote position from the binding site possibly leads to a stronger binding in ace2-sars-cov-2 than in ace2-sars-cov. interestingly, the three s1/s2 cleavage sites also locate within the 60−120 å range. in view of the above conclusion, we tried to examine whether the finding of long-range interactions is coincidental. thus, we tested the influence of effective dielectric constant in the cg model (using a constant between 60 and 90) and also use a function of the form ε eff = 1 + ε′[1 − exp(−μr ij )], where we used ε′ = 80 and μ = 0.8. it was found that the trend stayed similar to the different dielectric constants. it is still possible that including the effect of the ionic strength would reduce the binding difference at the long distance, but the sign is very unlikely to change.it should be noted that the value of the overall calculated binding energy is most probably an overestimate. one missing effect is the entropy contribution of the separate parts of the complex (which is equal for the two systems). another missing effect is the above-mentioned effect of the ionic strength that would reduce the electrostatic interaction.to illustrate the contributions of each residue, we plot their contributions in figure 2c ,d. the figure assigns each residue one color by its free energy contribution. both complexes have residues with relatively large energy changes near the binding site (red and yellow colors) and according to figure 2b these contributions are more negative for ace2-sars-cov-2. however, when we move outside the rbd, more residues of this type appear in the thinner spike protein body of sars-cov2 compared to the fatter spike protein body of sars-cov. it suggests that for both ace2-virus complexes, some residues at the rbd region strengthen the binding while others weaken it (figure 2a) . however, the interactions change between 60 to 120 å at the binding site makes the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 stronger ( figure 2b) and may indicate an effective evolution of the spike protein body of the novel virus. this larger binding affinity might explain why sars-cov-2 spreads faster than sars-cov.because of the structural homology and similar binding patterns, several rbd-directed monoclonal antibodies (m396, s230, 80r) of sars-cov have been tested for sars-cov-2, but none of them could show cross-reactivity. 8, 12 another antibody (cr3022) that was obtained from a convalescent sars-cov patient could bind to sars-cov-2 but still could not neutralize the virus even at a concentration as high as 400 μg/ml, and its cross-reactivity was attributed to the high percentage of targeted epitope residues (86%). 29 in this work we tried to understand the absence of crossreactivity by studying the binding pattern between sars-cov-2 with one of the sars-cov antibody, m396. we used homology modeling to generate a structure of the m396-sars-cov-2 complex from sars-cov-2 (pdb id: 6vsb) 12 and m396-sars-cov (rbd) (pdb id: 2dd8) 26 structures. for the antibody-virus complexes, we used δg binding = g complex − g m396 − g virus . figure 3a shows the overlapped structures of the ace2-sars-cov-2 and m396-sars-cov-2 complexes that are aligned toward the virus body. visually the m396 antibody only covers part of the ace2-sars-cov-2 binding interface. as before, we analyzed the distance-dependent electrostatic energy contributions of the m396-virus complex. as seen from figure 3b , the binding of m396 and sars-cov-2 does not result in structural/energetic differences that can lead to an increase of interactions in the range between 60 and 120 å, as was observed in the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. the energy contribution near the rbd (<60 å) is also weaker in comparison to the corresponding contribution in the ace2virus complex. overall, m396 shows an ineffective binding pattern that misses part of the epitopes of ace2 that could trigger the following structural changes, and this might also be the case for other antibodies that did not show cross-reactivity. to mimic the ace2-sars-cov-2 binding pattern, zhang et al. synthesized a 23-mer peptide fragment of the ace2 peptidase domain α1 helix. 30 however, the binding affinity was not strong. this might be an effect of the instability of a small helix fragment.structural analysis shows that there are 14 key residues that participate in the binding between ace2 and sars-cov. 17 among them, eight are conserved in sars-cov-2 and the other six are mutated. the six mutated residues are n439/ r426 (sars-cov-2/sars-cov), l455/y442, f486/l472, q493/n478, q498/y484, and n501/t487 ( figure 4a ). to understand how the substituted residues would affect binding energy, we performed mutation calculations for the two ace2virus complexes. the residues of ace2-sars-cov-2 were table 1 , all mutated ace2-sars-cov-2 constructs are less stable compared to the wildtype system, while the mutated ace2-sars-cov shows the opposite results. this is consistent with our previous distancedependent binding energy contributions near the rbd, where we find that the ace2 and sars-cov complex gives a more favorable binding pattern than in the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex ( figure 2b ). the mutation calculation suggests that the effective binding of the novel virus might happen at the remote part. the current work explored the structural/energetic basis of the difference in binding energy between the sars-cov-2/ ace2 and the sars-cov/ace2 complexes. it was found that the binding of sars-cov-2 is more favorable, not because its rbd has been optimized, but because the sars-cov-2 glycoprotein trimer body has been evolved to bind stronger at distanced sites (in fact, if we just consider the rbd then sars-cov is more favorable). it is not very clear if this stronger binding is converted to conformational changes, cleavage, and subsequent fusion events. however, if this is the case we have an interesting explanation of the reason why the novel coronavirus spreads faster and easier. the results also suggest to use the novel virus as a template during drug/antibody design with the whole spike protein as a binding template instead of a fraction of the rbd that might neglect the essential changes in the virus body and size effect.the supporting information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcb.0c04317.constructing the assemblies; energetics of the cg protein model; figure the protein complex construction was done by utilizing all available experimental structures, where all the structure used in this work are the combination of elements from cryo-em or x-ray diffraction (xrd) structures. for receptor ace2, the structure comes from cryo-em ace2-sars-cov-2 complex (pdb id: 6vsb) 1 . for the protein body of the novel virus sars-cov-2, we utilized two structures, where one is the virus body from pdb 6vsb, however, this structure misses a loop near the binding domain. another available structure is that of the xrd complex of ace2 and the receptor binding domain of the sars-cov-2. in this structure the loop near the rbd is complete (pdb id 6m0j) 2 . we combined the protein body of pdb 6vsb and the loops near rbd from 6m0j to obtain a complete sars-cov-2 protein body. the entire ace2-sars-cov complex structure was taken from the cryo-em structure (pdb id: 6cs2) 3 . for the sars-cov antibody m396 complex , we used the xrd structure (pdb id: 2dd8) 4 . the binding patterns of ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov to m396-sars-cov are directly obtained from the above mentioned pdb structures. the binding pattern between m396 and sars-cov-2 was obtained by mimicking the binding pattern between m396 and sars-cov. the above homology-modelling is done by modeller 5 .after obtaining the structures, we trim them into coarse-grained (cg) representation, and perform steepest decent energy minimization and md relaxation to eliminate unreasonable closed interactions, until the potential energy is converged. next, we use a monte carlo proton transfer (mcpt) procedure to obtain the cg free energies (see below). all simulations and calculations were done by the molaris-xg package software 6 . the binding energy was calculated by the following equations:for the ace2/virus complexes:for the m396/virus complexes:the development of realistic cg models in the field has been slow, partly due to the difficulties of obtaining unique points for calibration. we have used a relatively extensive benchmark of folding experiments and membrane insertion experiments. the cg model that has been continuously developed and refined in our group is based on solvation model of ionizable residues, which emphasis the key-role of electrostatic effects of the protein 7 .in our cg model, the entire side chain is represented by a cb (fig s1) . the total cg free energy is given by:the total cg folding free energy is taken relative to the free energy of the unfolded system in water at zero allied potential. the two terms represent the main chain and side chain contributions, while the third term accounts for the total protein and side chain flexibility in estimating the overall conformational entropy.the main chain energy is given by the contributions of backbone solvation and hydrogen bonds:where c2 and c3 are the scaling coefficients (0.25 and 0.15, respectively).the side chain term is given by:where the first three terms are electrostatic, polar, and hydrophobic components, respectively.the last term is the van der waals component for side chain interactions and c1 is a scaling coefficient (0.10). the focus is placed on the electrostatic term, which is computed as a sum of change in free energy associated with charge-charge interactions between ionizable side chains ∆∆ → , and the change in solvation free energy of those residues in their specific environment ,∆∆ → , inside the protein and in water. finally, if electrodes and electrolytes are presented, then another term is added to the total energy:the last term is the cg representation of the effect of the external potential.for more details see ref. 7a and 7b.before the cg energy evaluation, we use a monte carlo proton transfer (mcpt) algorithm to obtain the charge configuration of the system 7a . in the mcpt approach, the mc controls proton transfer between ionizable residues or between one ionizable residue and the bulk. the acceptance possibility of the move is determined by standard metropolis criteria.the actual mcpt can be used for time dependent study of proton transport processes as described in ref 7b. however, here we use this approach just to obtained equilibrated ionization states. cov was more epidemic in saudi arabia. similar manifestations were detected as acute lung injury often followed by pulmonary and renal failure. dromedary camels were involved in the infection, which were thought to be the most common source of transmission from animal to human. nevertheless, its risk factors in human remained unclear [9, 10] . the infection of mers-cov further virus spread to france, uk, spain, italy and tunisia. the fatality rate of mers-cov infected persons was about 35% [11] . high fatality rates of 9.5% and 34.4%were reported for sars-cov and mers-cov respectively. fortunately, the fatality rate of sars-cov-2 is only 2.4% reported which is significantly low [12] . all of these three pathogenic viruses belong to the genus betacoronavirus. other previously known coronaviruses that can infect human includes human coronavirus 229e (hcov-229e), oc43(hcov-oc43), nl63 (hcov-nl63), hku1 (hcov-hku1) [13] .the metagenomics next-generation sequencing technology identified that the genetic material j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f is highly conserved between the two with an overall identity of 96%. in fact, according to , the homology between the sars-cov-2 and ratg13 (sars-like coronavirus in bats) is 96% at the whole-genome level [18] , depicting bat as the zoonotic source of newly evolved sars-cov-2 [19] .sars-cov-2 found to be an enveloped virus with particle size of 100-160 nm in diameter and as the name suggests "corona" (means crown), it has crowned like projections when seen under electron microscopy [20] . it has a positive sense rna as genetic material having size of 29.9 kb (fig. 1 ) roughly distributed among adenosines (30%), cytosines (18%), guanines (20%), and rest thymines (32 %) [21] . the genome is compacted into a helical nucleocapsid often enclosed by a lipid bilayer. also, the rna genome of covs is largest among all the rna viruses [22] . non-structural open reading frames are also present [23] .the orf1ab is the largest gene in sars-cov-2, encoding a polyprotein (pp1ab). another gene orf1a encodes for a polyprotein (pp1a). two-thirds of viral rna situated in the first orf (orf1ab) encodes a 7096 residues long polyprotein. thus, both orf1a and orf1ab are translated to produce pp1a and pp1ab polyproteins, which are cleaved by the proteases that are encoded by orf1a to yield 15 non-structural proteins (nsps). sequence studies have noted variations between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov such as the lack of 8a gene or in variation in the number of base pairs in 8b and 3c genes in sars-cov-2 [24] . in addition, around 380 substitutions are recognized within the genome of sars-cov-2 when compared to previously known coronaviruses in a systemic study, which may have affected the functionality and pathogenicity of this novel virus [24] .these said proteins are extensively studied for devising new antiviral agents against covid-19 because the genome, as well as 3d structures, indicate that main drug-binding pockets are probably conserved across sars-cov-2, sars, and mers [23] . for coronaviruses, entry is found to be often biphasic in nature, which means it can enter the cell when near the cell surface or in the late endosomal phase [8] . in addition, a characteristic coronavirus fusion peptide (fragment of the fusion protein) that works in a calciumdependent manner is employed during membrane fusion. different receptors are identified nsp1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 receptor for mers-cov [9] and receptor of hcov-229e is found to be aminopeptidase n (aka cd13). lung epithelial cells are the primary targets for sars-cov-2, and binding takes place between receptor binding domain of class i viral fusion protein called spike (s) glycoprotein and ace-2 receptor of lung epithelial cells [10] (fig. 3) . molecular interactions studies and crystal structure analysis, also confirms that spike protein of sars-cov-2 binds to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor and readily infects ciliated bronchial cells and type ii pneumocytes found in lungs. unfortunately, sars-cov-2 has more affinity for ace2 receptors than sars-cov due to a single n501t mutation in the s protein of sars-cov-2 [25] , which aids in their transmission from host to host. it is noteworthy that the expression level as well as allele frequency of ace2 receptors varies among populations. these factors may correlate the disease susceptibility and sequence polymorphism. the binding of the viral s protein to ace2 induces a negative feedback loop. as the level of ace2 drops, its counterpart enzyme ace picks up its role of converting substrate angiotensin i to angiotensin ii. elevated levels of angiotensin ii results in the profound binding to its receptor, agtr1a resulting in the increased pulmonary vascular permeability [26] . a study of 99 patients infected with sars-cov-2 showed that females were less susceptible to infection than males, and older males with comorbidities j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f were more likely to be infected with sars-cov-2, and highlighted insights into the role of ace2 in the sars-cov-2 pandemic [27, 28] . advance research in the field of structural and molecular biology shall reveal the complexities of the molecular mechanism that prompts coronavirus s-mediated membrane fusion.sars-cov-2, the seventh member of the coronavirus family has the characteristic manifestation of both lower and upper respiratory tracts with symptoms like dry or productive cough, sore throat, lassitude followed by fever. [29] . the sterility of a c-section coupled with isolation measures immediately after, rule out the possibility of infection during or after birth, strongly raising the suspicion of in utero transmission of the virus. the neonate needed external ventilator support for twelve hours, then, he was extubated and put on cpap. the outcome was favourable and he did not require antibiotic support. lab tests and imaging were found to be normal throughout [30] .infected patients have shown high leukocyte counts, abnormal respiratory functioning, or boosted pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tnf-α, mip1α, interleukin-2, 7, and 10.additionally, c-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and d-dimer formation also peaks with infection [31] .journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f covid-19 showed some unique clinical features that include the targeting of the lower airway as is evident by symptoms like rhinitis, sneezing, and sore throat (fig. 4) . also, patients infected with covid-19 were found to have developed intestinal symptoms like diarrhoea [32] , while only a few of mers or sars patients had diarrhoea [31] .upon entering the host, sars-cov-2 has been reported to stay in the respiratory tract for a few days, which is the asymptomatic period. it has been found that the virus persists for up to 14 days in severe cases and 8 days in non-severe cases. the viral load profile is found to peak at the time of onset of symptoms, and so is transmissible easily at an early stage of infection.a high viral load is found in severe cases and can be potentially used as a marker of case severity and prognosis. the viral rna particle is found in the faeces for 5 days after the onset of the symptom and persists up to 4 to 5 weeks, as well as in total blood, urine, serum, and saliva [32] .the main mode of transmission is through fomites and respiratory droplets. rates of transmission appear to be similar for asymptomatic and symptomatic patients. according to the data revealed by european centre for disease prevention and control, the environmental sustainability of active sars-cov-2 is up to 3 hours in the air after aerosolization, around 24 hours on chipboard, and almost 3 days on stainless steel or plastic.based on the assessment made by the chinese government, the who indicated that about 80 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f c-terminal together comprise the ed [39] , both are crucial for the successful entry of coronavirus into a host cell. s1 initiates the first step of viral entry, as it contains the receptorbinding domain. s2 later mediate the fusion of the cell and viral membranes. the critical step of cleavage of s protein is generally mediated by host protein convertase that allows for the fusion sequences to be exposed as required for the fusion. cleavage of s protein at s1/s2 site mediates cell-cell fusion and is an essential step for the entry of s protein into human lung cells. this vital step is governed by cellular protease furin that performs this cleavage. sars-cov-2, like mers-cov depends on this furin-mediated pre-cleavage of s proteins at the s1/s2 site for the activation of s protein by tmprss2 in lung cells, which fail to express robust levels of cathepsin l. inhibitors of furin and tmprss2 can serve as possible therapeutic options in covid-19. a recent study reported that the inhibitor of tmprss2blocks sars-cov-2 infection [40] . however, an interesting point that should be noted is that furin is needed for normal development unlike tmprss2 and hence, obstructing furin for longer periods can be associated with unwanted toxic effects [40] .genomic analysis of the novel coronavirus revealed that its spike protein differs from those of close bat cov relatives, in the sense that it has a specific site, which gets activated by an j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cleavage site can be expressed as 'gain of function' that allowed a bat cov to infect humans [41] . it can also transmit between different hosts through gene recombination or mutations in the receptor-binding domain, leading to a higher mortality rate.the sars-cov-2 virus can enter human bronchial epithelia through contact with the ace2 receptors on them, making this virus highly host-specific. recently, the crystal structure of the spike protein's receptor-binding domain of sars-cov-2, in complex with human ace2, was released by wang and zhang's group [25] . interestingly, a study conducted revealed that ace2 expression is higher in males than females. supporting this notion 61.8% deaths were reported in males in a sample study carried out in new york. additional findings suggest that the binding of sars-cov-2 to ace2 is synergistic to the expression of ace2 [44] .the main components of the s1 domain are the n-terminal domain (ntd) and the c-terminal domain (ctd). this s1 domain is marked as a major antigen on the surface of the coronavirus. receptor binding domain (rbd) at the head region of s1 recognizes the host cell receptor (ace2). it is reported that the glutamine 394 and lysine 31 are the key residues of rbd and ace2 respectively that are involved in this interaction [25] initiating the membrane fusion between viral particles and the host's receptor. there are 18 residues of ace-2 that interact with the rbd (contain 14 amino acids) of spike protein and for this contact, k341 of ace-2 and r453 residue of rbd play the most important role (38) . a small section of the s1 region formed between 318 to 510 amino acid residues are plenty for strong attachment to the peptidase domain of ace2 [25] . according to another report six rbd residues: l455, f486, q493, s494, n501 and y505 are actively involved in ace2 receptor binding and determining host range of sars-cov-2 [45] . s2 contains basic elements like hydrophobic fusion peptide needed for membrane fusion (fig. 6 ). x-ray crystallographic analysis demonstrates that hr1 and hr2 domains combinedly form the 6-hb fusion core in the s2 subunit of sars-cov-2. the structure is crucial for membrane fusion in sars-cov-m pro also called chymotrypsin-like protease (3cl pro ) and the presence of cys-his dyad on the active site is responsible for its protease activity (47) . the most commonly found recognition sequence of m pro is leu,gln♦ser,ala,gly (where ♦ denotes the cleavage site) [58] . m pro is majorly involved in the cleavage of pps to generate (nsps) which later compile into the replicase-transcriptase complex (rtc) [59] .m pro exists as a homodimer having a molecular mass of 33.797 kda, as determined by mass spectroscopy [59] . the 2.1 å high-resolution crystal structure reveals the two-fold symmetry of the m pro molecule where the two subunits are held together by a salt-bridge interaction between glu290 of one protomer and arg4 of the other [59] (fig. 7) . each monomer has three distinct domains: domains ⅰ and ⅱ display antiparallel β-barrel structures whereas domain iii is a large antiparallel globular structure made up of 5 α-helices arranged. domains ii and iii, are connected using a long loop like segment of domain iii. the substrate binds to a pocket created between domains i and ii. it is highly conserved among all the covs. on the other hand, the most variable regions were α-helices and surface loops domain iii [59] .the two monomers are arranged in a perpendicular orientation such that the domain ii of one is in contact with the nh2-terminal residues aka 'n-finger' of others. this dimerization is essential for the formation of substrate binding sites, thus also affect catalytic efficiency of the protease, and thereby maintain the shape of the substrate-binding pocket of s1 protein [59] . sars-cov-2 mpro is made up of 306 amino acid residues. crystal structure analysis suggests that thr25, thr26, leu27, his41, ser46, met49, tyr54, phe140, leu141, asn142, gly143, cys145, his163, met165, glu166, leu167, pro168, phe185, asp187, gln189, thr190, ala191, and gln192 are found in the active site pocket [60] . pl pro cleaves at the borderlines of nsp1/2, nsp2/3, and nsp3/4. it works in association with m pro to cleave the poly protein into nsps [56] . pl pro at its catalytic core domain contains 316 amino acids, which is responsible for cleaving replicase substrates, and a consensus sequence at cleavage sites usually found to be lxgg [59] (fig. 8) .major antiviral drugs are designed against m pro and pl pro proteases. inhibiting the activity of these enzymes could hamper viral replication. many studies have recently reported that drugs targeting the main protease can be possible therapeutics in covid-19. a recent literature used repurposing of fda approved drugs to identify potential leads that inhibited the sars-cov-2 m pro and can play a key role in covid-19 therapeutics [60] . the absence of any similar human protease makes m pro an easy target for antiviral drug development [59] .nonetheless, care should be taken to avoid the chances of host toxicity by ensuring that the cleavage sequence for the host protease should be different [59] . another approach could be to mutate ser139 and phe140 positions, which are crucial sites involved in the dimerization of 3clpro [58] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the helicase unwinds the double-stranded rna segment into single strands by hydrolysingntps. this enzyme prefers atp, datp, and dctp as substrates. due to its sequence conservation in all coronaviruses, this helicase is an easy target to develop antiviral drugs[61]. the adp binding site and the nucleic acid binding site of nsp 13 are considered in molecular docking studies while designing inhibitors but a serious limitation is the nonspecificity of inhibitors that may cause host toxicity.rdrp is the structurally conserved rna polymerase that executes rna replication and transcription with the help of its cofactors nsp7 and nsp8 (fig. 9 ). this complex forms the largest (160 kda) unit involved in rna synthesis. it also possesses the characteristic nidovirus nsp12 n-terminal domain having kinase-like structural fold [62] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f it is involved in the various steps of the central dogma of novel coronavirus. it has two main domains: the n-terminal exoribonuclease (exon) domain has an important part to play in proofreading and preventing any fatal mutations, and the other is the c-terminal domain act as a guanine-n7 methyltransferase (n7-mtase) required for mrna capping [63] .it is one of the rna-processing enzymes encoded by the coronavirus genome. it forms a sixunit endoribonuclease that cleaves 3' end of uridines [64] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f it acts as a cofactor and forms an assembly with nsp14 and nsp16. in the heterodimer conformation nsp16 is positioned over the nsp10 monomer. nsp 10 has an overall conserved structure comprising of a n-terminus made up of two α-helices, a central β-sheet domain, and a c-terminus domain having various loops and helices [65] .this he enzyme when present is localized in the envelope of cov. usually, in [40, 65] . camostat mesylate (serine protease inhibitor) is well known for its action against tmprss2 activity, which makes it a potential drug candidate to test for sars-cov-2 [65] .as per centres for diseases control and prevention cdc, two types of tests are available for scan are also employed in the testing of covid-19 [26] .currently approved treatment modalities consist of supportive care teamed with oxygen supplementation performed via non-invasive ventilation, or through mechanical ventilation.severe cases may also be treated with antibiotics against bacterial infection and vasopressor support. clinicians from the usa and italy have reported several other complications such as acute myocardial damage, thromboembolic phenomena such as pe, and sudden death.around 12 trials are in progress to test possible treatments against covid-19. wang et. al from wuhan institute of virology screened some of the fda approved anti-virus or antiinfection drugs and found that remdesivir and chloroquine could effectively prevent the viral growth in cell-based assay with ec50 of 0.77 and 1.13 μm, respectively [67] . repurposing these drugs happens to be the most practical approach in response to rapidly increasing positive cases.other antiviral drugs, monoclonal antibodies, and antibody-rich plasma from recovered patients are also under trials. on-going therapies can be broadly classified into two on the basis of their targets; first approach targets the virus entity by blocking the key enzyme responsible for viral life processes (replication, translation etc.) or by preventing the entry of virus particle into human cells. the other approach stress on immune system functioning j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f either by boosting innate/humoral immunity or by inhibiting inflammatory response that led to pulmonary failure [26] . on 20 march, who announced the launch of solidarity, a coordinated effort to collect scientific data rapidly. the study design has been kept simple so that even hospitals with an overwhelming number of patients can participate. the physician simply records the date the patient left the hospital or died, the duration of the entire stay, and whether the patient required ventilation or oxygen. the design is not blinded, and the who website randomizes the patient to one out of four drug regimes, or local standard care. for this study who has chosen an experimental antiviral remdesivir; the antimalarial drughydroxychloroquine, a combination of antiretroviral drugs lopinavir and ritonavir; and this combination plus ifnβ. kong et al., recently introduced a docking server for docking small molecules, peptides and antibodies against potential targets of covid-19. this can be very useful for researchers across the world for predicting target-ligand interactions for covid-19 [68] .the evolution of novel coronavirus and the eventual outbreak of covid-19 has put the burden on the medical fraternity and the scientific community to identify the components of this viral entity including its genome, replication cycle, proteome as well as modes of transmission. this can only be achieved with collaborative efforts backed up by advances in molecular and structural virology. viral proteins are identified as potential targets since they are involved in each phase of the viral life cycle. in the present review, we discussed the structure, function, and host-virus interactions of various sars-cov-2 proteins based on a thorough review of the latest literature available. we hope our review will give a useful groundwork for the devising new drugs against covid-19.although many potential therapies are under clinical trial, no pharmaceutical products have yet been offered to be reliable as well as effective against covid-19 (who, 31 st marchincursion of animal (usually bat)-derived coronaviruses into the human population has caused several outbreaks of severe disease, starting with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2002 (menachery et al., 2015) . in late 2019 a highly infectious illness, with cold-like symptoms progressing to pneumonia and acute respiratory failure, resulting in an estimated 6% overall death rate (baud et al., 2020) , with higher mortality among the elderly and immunocompromised populations, was identified and confirmed as a pandemic by the who on 11 th march 2020. the etiological agent is a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) belonging to lineage b betacoronavirus and sharing 88% sequence identity with bat coronaviruses (lu et al., 2020a) . the heavily glycosylated trimeric surface spike protein mediates viral entry into the host cell. it is a large type i transmembrane glycoprotein (the ectodomain alone comprises over 1200 residues) (wrapp et al., 2020) . it is made as a single polypeptide and then cleaved by host proteases to yield an n-terminal s1 region and the c-terminal s2 region.spike exists initially in a pre-fusion state where the domains of s1 cloak the upper portion of the spike with the relatively small (~22 kda) s1 rbd nestled at the tip. the rbd is predominantly in a 'down' state where the receptor binding site is inaccessible, however it appears that it stochastically flips up with a hinge-like motion transiently presenting the ace2 receptor binding site (roy, 2020; song et al., 2018; walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) . ace2 acts as a functional receptor for both sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2, binding to the latter with a 10 to 20-fold higher affinity (k d of ~15 nm), possibly contributing to its ease of transmission (song et al., 2018; wrapp et al., 2020) . there is 73% sequence identity between the rbds of sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 ( figure 1 ). when ace2 locks on it holds the rbd 'up', destabilising the s1 cloak and possibly favouring conversion to a postfusion form where the s2 subunit, through massive conformational changes, propels its fusion domain upwards to engage with the host membrane, casting off s1 in the process (song et al., 2018; wrapp et al., 2020) . structural studies of the rbd in complex with ace2 (lan et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020; yan et al., 2020) show that it is recognised by the extracellular peptidase domain (pd) of ace2 through mainly polar interactions. the spike protein is an attractive candidate for both vaccine development and immunotherapy. potent nanomolar affinity neutralising human monoclonal antibodies against the sars-cov-1 rbd have been identified that attach at the ace2 receptor binding site (including m396, cr3014 and 80r (ter meulen et al., 2006; sui et al., 2004; zhu et al., 2007) ). for example 80r binds with nanomolar affinity, prevents binding to ace2 and the formation of syncytia in vitro, and inhibits viral replication in vivo (sui et al., 2004) . however, despite the two viruses sharing the same ace2 receptor these ace2 blocking antibodies do not bind sars-cov-2 rbd (wrapp et al., 2020) . in contrast cr3022, a sars-cov-1-specific monoclonal selected from a single chain fv phage display library constructed from lymphocytes of a convalescent sars patient and reconstructed into igg1 format (ter meulen et al., 2006) , has been reported to cross-react strongly, binding to the rbd of sars-cov-2 with a k d of 6.3 nm (tian et al., 2020) , whilst not competing with the binding of ace2 (ter meulen et al., 2006) . furthermore, although sars-cov-1 escape mutations could be readily generated for ace2-blocking cr3014, no escape mutations could be generated for cr3022, preventing mapping of its epitope (ter meulen et al., 2006) . furthermore a natural mutation of sars-cov-2 has now been detected at residue 495 (y n) (gisaid (shu and mccauley, 2017) :accession id: epi_isl_429783 wienecke-baldacchino et al., 2020), which forms part of the ace2 binding epitope. finally, cr3022 and cr3014 act synergistically to neutralise sars-cov-1 with extreme potency (ter meulen et al., 2006) . whilst this work was being prepared for publication a paper reporting that cr3022 does not neutralise sars-cov-2 and describing the structure of the complex with the rbd at 3.1 å resolution was published (yuan et al., 2020) . here we report crystallographic analysis to significantly higher resolution, use a different neutralisation assay to show that cr3022 does neutralise sars-cov-2 and use cryo-em analysis of the interaction of cr3022 with the full spike ectodomain to demonstrate a mechanism of neutralisation not seen before for coronaviruses.taken together these observations suggest that the cr3022 epitope should be a major target for therapeutic antibodies.to understand how cr3022 works we first investigated the interaction of cr3022 fab with isolated recombinant sars-cov-2 rbd, both alone and in the presence of ace2. surface plasmon resonance (spr) measurements (methods and figure s1 ) confirmed that cr3022 binding to rbd is strong (although weaker than the binding reported to sars-cov-1 (ter meulen et al., 2006) ), with a slight variation according to whether cr3022 or rbd is used as the analyte (k d = 30 nm and 15 nm respectively, derived from the kinetic data in table s1 ).an independent measure using bio-layer interferometry (bli) with rbd as analyte gave a k d of 19 nm (methods and figure s1 ). these values are quite similar to those reported by tian et al. (tian et al., 2020 ) (6.6 nm), whereas weaker binding (k d ~ 115 nm) was reported recently by yuan et al. (yuan et al., 2020) . using spr to perform a competition assay revealed that the binding of ace2 to the rbd is perturbed by the presence of cr3022 ( figure s1 ). the presence of ace2 slows the binding of cr3022 to rbd and accelerates the dissociation. similarly, the release of ace2 from rbd is accelerated by the presence of cr3022. these observations are suggestive of an allosteric effect between ace2 and cr3022.a plaque reduction neutralisation test using sars-cov-2 virus and cr3022 showed a probit mid-point prnt 50 of 1:11,966 (95% confidence interval 5,297-23,038) for a starting concentration of 1.36mg/ml (calculated according to grist (grist, 1966) ), superior to that of the nibsc international standard positive control used by public health england (mers convalescent serum which gives a prnt 50 of 1:874 (95% confidence interval 663-1220), see methods, figure 2 and table s2 ). this corresponds to 50% neutralisation at ~0.114 µg/ml (~ 1 nm) exceeding the 11 µg/ml reported by ter meulen et al. (ter meulen et al., 2006) for sars-cov-1, however, as discussed below, it is in apparent disagreement with the result reported recently by yuan et al. (yuan et al., 2020) . in light of this discrepancy, further neutralisation tests were performed to rule out differences in the assay with regard to antibody/virus contact time. repeated prnt tests deliberately using three different batches of cr3022 gave similar results (table s2 ) and leaving the virus/antibody mix in place throughout the incubation on the plate and removing the antibody after one hour also gave similar results (prnt 500 values of 1:4,666 and 1:6,504 respectively, methods, figure s2 ). in summary all of these results, taking into consideration the different cr3022 starting concentrations, were within the same confidence levels. following these experiments a commercial source of antibody cr3022 (creative biolabs) was tested (using the same method and on the same date as the above wash and leave experiment, with a starting concentration of 1 mg/ml). this gave markedly weaker neutralisation: prnt 50 1:27 leaving the antibody on the plate and 1:285 washing it off. note that in both cases the neutralisation was slightly higher when the antibody was washed off. although the differences were within the confidence levels of the experiments, it is possible that this reflects unbound virus remaining in the inoculum being washed off.we determined the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 rbd-cr3022 fab complex (see methods and table s3 ) to investigate the relationship between the binding epitopes of ace2 and cr3022. crystals grew rapidly and consistently. two crystal forms grew in the same drop. the solvent content of the crystal form solved first was unusually high (ca 87%) with the ace2 binding site exposed to large continuous solvent channels within the crystal lattice ( figure s3 ). these crystals therefore offer a promising vehicle for crystallographic screening to identify potential therapeutics that could act to block virus attachment. the current analysis of this crystal form is at 4.4 å resolution and so, to avoid overfitting, refinement used a real-space refinement algorithm to optimise the phases (vagabond, hmg unpublished, see methods) . this, together with the favourable observation to parameter ratio resulting from the exceptionally high solvent content, meant that the map was of very high quality, allowing reliable structural interpretation ( figure s4 , methods). full interpretation of the detailed interactions between cr3022 and the rbd was enabled by the second crystal form which diffracted to high resolution, 2.4 å, and the structure of which was refined to give an r-work/r-free of 0.213/0.239 and good stereochemistry (methods, table s3, figure s4 ). the structure is similar to that reported by yuan et al., (2020) , the rmsd in cαs for the rbd is 0.5 å, whilst for the cr3022 heavy chain it is 1.1 å and for the light chain 0.7 å. there are also some differences in the overall interaction compared to that structure, after overlapping the rbd, the angular differences for the variable domains are 5.5 and 8º.the high-resolution structure is shown in figure 3 . there are two complexes in the crystal asymmetric unit with residues 331-529 in one rbd, 332-445 and 448-532 in the other rbd well defined, whilst residues 133-136 of the cr3022 heavy chains are disordered. the rbd has a very similar structure to that seen in the complex of sars-cov-2 rbd with ace2, rmsd for 194 cα atoms of 0.6 å 2 (pdb, 6m0j (lan et al., 2020) ), and an rmsd of 1.1 å 2 compared to the sars cov-1 rbd (pdb, 2ajf (li et al., 2005) ). only minor conformational changes are introduced by binding to cr3022, at residues 381-390. the rbd was deglycosylated (methods) to leave a single saccharide unit at each of the n-linked glycosylation sites clearly seen at n331 and n343 ( figure s4 ). cr3022 attaches to the rbd surface orthogonal to the ace2 receptor binding site. there is no overlap between the epitopes and indeed both the fab and ace2 ectodomain can bind without clashing ( figure   3d ) (tian et al., 2020) . such independence of the ace2 binding site has been reported recently for another sars-cov-2 neutralising antibody, 47d11 (okba et al., 2019) . the fab complex interface buries 990 å 2 of surface area (600 and 390 å 2 by the heavy and light chains respectively, figure 4 and figure s5 ), somewhat more than the rbd-ace2 interface which covers 850 å 2 (pdb 6m0j (lan et al., 2020) ). typical of a fab complex, the interaction is mediated by the antibody cdr loops, which fit well into the rather sculpted surface of the rbd ( figure 3b , c). the heavy chain cdr1, 2 and 3 make contacts to residues from α2, β2 and α3 (residues 369-386), while two of the light chain cdrs (1 and 2) interact mainly with residues from the β2-α3 loop, α3 (380-392) and the α5-β4 loop (427-430) ( figures 1, 3 & 5) . a total of 16 residues from the heavy chain and 14 from the light chain cement the interaction with 26 residues from the rbd. for the heavy chain these potentially form 7 h-bonds and 3 salt bridges, the latter from d55 and e57 (cdr2) to k378 of the rbd. the light chain interface comprises 6 h-bonds and a single salt bridge between e61 (cdr2) and k386 of the rbd. the binding is consolidated by a number of hydrophobic interactions ( figure 5 ). there are slight differences in the interactions between these and those reported by yuan et al. (2020) , for instance the contact area for the light chain-rbd differs by ~12.5% between the two structures. of the 26 residues involved in the interaction, 23 are conserved between sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 (figures 1 & 4) . the cr30222 epitope is much more conserved than that of the receptor blocking anti-sars-cov-1 antibody 80r for which only 13 of the 29 interacting residues are conserved (hwang et al., 2006) , in-line with the lack of cross reactivity observed for the latter.the reason for the conservation of the cr3022 epitope becomes clear in the context of the complete pre-fusion s structure (pdb ids: 6vsb (wrapp et al., 2020) , 6vxx, 6vyb (walls et al., 2020) ) where the epitope is inaccessible ( figure 6 ). when the rbd is in the 'down' configuration the cr3022 epitope is packed tightly against another rbd of the trimer and the n-terminal domain (ntd) of the neighbouring protomer. in the structure of the pre-fusion form of trimeric spike the majority of rbds are 'down', although presumably stochastically one may be 'up' (walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) . the structure of a sars-cov-1 complex with ace2 ectodomain shows that this 'up' configuration is competent to bind receptor, and that there are a family of 'up' orientations with significantly different hinge angles (song et al., 2018) . however, the cr3022 epitope remains largely inaccessible even in the 'up' configuration. modelling the rotation of the rbd required to enable fab interaction in the context of the spike trimer, showed a rotation corresponding to a > 60° further declination from the central vertical axis was required, beyond that observed previously (walls et al., 2020; wrapp et al., 2020) (figure 6i ), although this might be partly mitigated by more complex movements of the rbd and if more than one rbd is in the 'up' configuration this requirement would be relaxed somewhat. since locking the up state by receptor blocking antibodies is thought to destabilise the pre-fusion state (walls et al., 2019) binding of cr3022 presumably introduces further destabilisation, leading to a premature conversion to the post-fusion state, inactivating the virus. cr3022 and ace2 blocking antibodies can bind independently but both induce an 'up' conformation, presumably explaining the observed synergy between binding at the two sites (ter meulen et al., 2006) .to test if cr3022 binding destabilises the prefusion state of spike, the ectodomain construct described previously (wrapp et al., 2020) was used to produce glycosylated protein in hek cells (methods). cryo-em screening showed that the protein was in the trimeric prefusion conformation. spike was then mixed with an excess of cr3022 fab and incubated at room temperature, with aliquots being taken at 50 minutes and 3 h. aliquots were immediately applied to cryo-em grids and frozen (methods). for the 50 minutes incubation, collection of a substantial amount of data allowed unbiased particle picking and 2d classification which revealed two major structural classes with a similar number in each, (i) the prefusion conformation, and (ii) a radically different structure (methods, table s4 and figure s6 ).detailed analysis of the prefusion conformation led to a structure at a nominal resolution of 3.4 å (fsc = 0.143), based on a broad distribution of orientations, that revealed the same predominant rbd pattern (one 'up' and two 'down') previously seen (wrapp et al., 2020) with no evidence of cr3022 binding ( figure 7a ). analysis of the other major particle class revealed strong preferential orientation of the particles on the grid ( figure s6c ). despite this a reconstruction with a nominal resolution of 3.9 å within the plane of the grid, and perhaps 7 å resolution in the perpendicular direction ( figure s6g ), could be produced which allowed the unambiguous fitting of the cr3022-rbd complex ( figure 7b ). note that in addition there is less well defined density attached to the rbd, in a suitable position to correspond to the spike n-terminal domain (wrapp et al., 2020) . these structures are no longer trimeric, rather two complexes associate to form an approximately symmetric dimer (however, application of this symmetry in the reconstruction process did not improve the resolution).the interactions responsible for dimerisation involve the ace2 binding site on the rbd and the elbow of the fab, however the interaction does not occur in our low-resolution crystal form and is therefore probably extremely weak and not biologically significant. since conversion to the post-fusion conformation leads to dissociation of s1 (which includes the nterminal domain and rbd) these results confirm that cr3022 destabilises the prefusion spike conformation. further evidence of this is provided by analysis of data collected after 3 h incubation. by this point there were no intact trimers remaining and a heterogeneous range of oligomeric assemblies had appeared, which we were not able to interpret in detail but which are consistent with the lateral assembly of fab/rbd complexes ( figure s7 ). note that the relatively slow kinetics will not be representative of events in vivo, where the conversion might be accelerated by the elevated temperature and the absence of the mutations which were added to this construct to stabilise the prefusion state (kirchdoerfer et al., 2018; pallesen et al., 2017; wrapp et al., 2020) .until now the only documented mechanism of neutralisation of coronaviruses has been through blocking receptor attachment. in the case of sars-cov-1 this is achieved by presentation of the rbd of the spike in an 'up' conformation.although not yet confirmed for sars-cov-2 it is very likely that a similar mechanism can apply. here we define a second class of neutralisers, that bind a highly conserved epitope ( figure 1 ) and can therefore act against both sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 (cr3022 was first identified as a neutralising antibody against sars-cov-1 (ter meulen et al., 2006) ). we find that binding of cr3022 to the isolated rbd is tight (~20 nm) and the crystal structure of the complex reveals the atomic detail of the interaction. despite the spatial separation of the cr3022 and ace2 epitopes we find an allosteric effect between the two binding events. the role of the cr3022 epitope in stabilising the prefusion spike trimer explains why it has, to date, proved impossible to generate mutations that escape binding of the antibody (ter meulen et al., 2006) .whilst in our assay cr3022 strongly neutralises sars-cov-2, a recent paper (yuan et al., 2020) reported an alternative assay that did not detect neutralisation. we tested whether the removal of the antibody/virus mix after adsorption to the indicator cells, performed by yuan et al, before incubating to allow cytopathic effect (cpe) to develop, would explain this difference. this would be in-line with the distinction previously seen between neutralisation tests for influenza virus by antibodies which bind the stem of hemagglutinin and therefore do not block receptor binding (thomson et al., 2012) . these antibodies did not appear to be neutralising when tested with the standard who neutralisation assay, in which similar to yuan et al, the inoculum of virus/antibody is washed out before development of cpe.neutralisation was observed, however, when the antibodies were left in the assay during incubation to produce cpe. performing side-by-side prnt experiments leaving the antibody/virus mix in place and washing it off did not however show a significant difference.in fact, the neutralisation was marginally stronger when excess antibody and virus was washed off. to check if there were issues related to the reproducibility we performed neutralisation tests on three separate batches of cr3022. all gave essentially indistinguishable results (table s2 ), however when we tested commercially sourced cr3022 (creative biolabs, usa; cat#: mro-1214lc) the neutralisation was markedly reduced, perhaps improperly folded antibody. it is possible the loss of neutralisation ability with commercial antibody may be related to the report that cr3022 does not neutralise sars-cov-2 (yuan et al., 2020) . in addition, we note that in all the prnt tests performed, cr3022 appears to give strong but incomplete (90% plaque reduction) neutralisation. such partial neutralisation has been reported before, for antibodies against ebola virus, which nonetheless confer profound protection (rijal et al., 2019; saphire et al., 2018) . given the mechanism of neutralisation we rationalise that this arises from the kinetic limitation of antibody binding and spike destruction, as seen by cryo-em, where in the absence of ace2, the cr3022 fab destroys the prefusion-stabilised trimer with t 1/2 ~1h at room temperature. this might also lead to slightly higher neutralisation when antibody and (non-inactivated) virus is washed off the cells after one hour. in summary cr3022 neutralises sars-cov-2, but via an unusual mechanism that some assays appear to detect poorly, as observed by yuan et al, 2020 . it is now important to establish how effective this mechanism is at controlling viral infection.with monoclonal antibodies now recognised as potential antivirals (lu et al., 2020b; qiu et al., 2014; salazar et al., 2017) our results suggest that cr3022 may be of immediate utility, since the mechanism of neutralisation will be unusually resistant to virus escape. in contrast antibodies which compete with ace2 (whose epitope on sars-cov-2 is reported to have already shown mutation at residue 495 (gisaid: accession id: epi_isl_429783 wienecke-baldacchino et al., 2020 (shu and mccauley, 2017) ), are likely to be susceptible to escape. furthermore, with knowledge of the detailed structure of the epitope presented here a higher affinity version of cr3022 might be engineered. alternatively, since the same mechanism of neutralisation is likely to be used by other antibodies, a more potent monoclonal antibody targeting the same epitope might be found (for instance by screening for competition with cr3022). additionally, since this epitope is sterically and functionally independent of the well-established receptor-blocking neutralising antibody epitope there is considerable scope for therapeutic synergy between antibodies targeting the two epitopes (indeed this type of synergy has been described for sars-cov-1 (ter meulen et al., 2006) ). moreover, it has been reported (wan et al., 2019) residue numbers are those of sars-cov-2 rbd, conserved amino acids have a red background, secondary structures are labelled on the top of the sequence, and the glycosylation site is marked with a blue hexagon. residues involved in receptor binding are marked with magenta disks. blue disks mark the residues involved in interactions with the cr3022 heavy chain (vh), cyan disks mark the residues interacting with the cr3022 light chain (vl) and green disks with both chains.for cr3022 at a starting concentration of 1.36mg/ml, the dilutions used were from 1:160 to 1:327,680. the probit mid-point is 1:11,966 (95% confidence intervals: 5,297 -23,038). further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, david i stuart (dave@strubi.ox.ac.uk).plasmids generated in this study are available from the lead contact with a completed materials transfer agreement.the high resolution and lower resolution coordinates and structure factors of the sars-cov-2 rbd/cr3022 complex are available from the pdb with accession codes 6yla and 6ym0 respectively (https://www.rcsb.org/). em maps and structure models are deposited in emdb and pdb with accession codes emd-11119 and 6z97 for the prefusion spike, and emd-10863 and 6yor for the dimeric rbd/cr3022 complex respectively (https://www.emdataresource.org/). the data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors on request. to further validate the spr results the k d of fab cr3022 for rbd was also measured by bio-layer interferometry. kinetic assays were performed on an octet red 96e (fortebio) at 30 ℃ with a shake speed of 1000 rpm. fab cr3022 was immobilized onto amine reactive 2nd generation (ar2g) biosensors (fortebio) and serially diluted rbd (80，40，20，10 and 5 nm) was used as analyte. pbs (ph 7.4) was used as the assay buffer. recorded data were analysed using the data analysis software ht v11.1 (fortebio), with a global 1:1 fitting model. the plate was incubated at 37 o c in a humidified box for 1 h to allow neutralisation to take place, before the virus-antibody mixture was transferred into the wells of a twice dpbswashed 24-well plate containing confluent monolayers of vero e6 cells. virus was allowed to adsorb onto cells at 37 o c for a further hour in a humidified box before being overlaid with mem containing 1.5% carboxymethylcellulose (sigma, dorset, uk), 4% (v/v) fcs and 25mm hepes buffer. after 5 days incubation at 37 o c in a humidified box, the plates were fixed overnight with 20% formalin/pbs (v/v), washed with tap water and then stained with 0.2% crystal violet solution (sigma) and plaques were counted. a mid-point probit analysis (written in r programming language for statistical computing and graphics) was used to determine the dilution of antibody required to reduce sars-cov-2 viral plaques by 50%(prnt50) compared with the virus only control (n=5). the script used in r was based on a source script from (johnson et al., 2013) . antibody dilutions were run in duplicate and an internal positive control for the prnt assay was also run in duplicate using a sample of heatinactivated (56 ○ c for 30 min) human mers convalescent serum known to neutralise sars-cov-2 (national institute for biological standards and control, uk). this protocol was repeated in two further experiments with cr3022 (from a different batch) at a starting concentration of 1 mg/ml to compare leaving the virus/antibody mixture on the plate and in parallel with washing it off before the addition of overlay media.purified and deglycosylated rbd and cr3022 fab were concentrated to 8.3 mg/ml and 11 mg/ml respectively, and then mixed in an approximate molar ratio of 1:1. crystallization screen experiments were carried out using the nanolitre sitting-drop vapour diffusion method in 96-well plates as previously described (walter et al., 2003 (walter et al., , 2005 . crystals were initially crystals were mounted in loops and frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to data collection.diffraction data were collected at 100 k at beamline i03 of diamond light source, uk.diffraction images of 0.1° rotation were recorded on an eiger2 xe 16m detector (exposure time of either 0.002 s or 0.01 s per frame, beam size 80×20 μm and 100% beam transmission). data were indexed, integrated and scaled with the automated data processing program xia2-dials (winter, 2010; winter et al., 2018) . the data set of 720° was collected from a single frozen crystal to 4.4 å resolution with 52-fold redundancy. the crystal belongs to space group p4 1 2 1 2 with unit cell dimensions a = b = 150.5 å and c = 241.6 å. the structure was determined by molecular replacement with phaser (mccoy et al., 2007) using search models of human germline antibody fabs 5-51/o12 (pdb id, 4kmt (teplyakov et al., 2014) ) heavy chain and ighv3-23/igk4-1 (pdb id, 5i1d (teplyakov et al., 2016) ) light chain, and rbd of sars-cov-2 rbd/ace2 complex (pdb id, 6m0j (lan et al., 2020) ). there is one rbd/cr3022 complex in the crystal asymmetric unit, resulting in a crystal solvent content of ~87%.during optimisation of the crystallisation conditions, a second crystal form was found to grow in the same condition with similar morphology. a data set of 720° rotation with data extending to 2.4 å was collected on beamline i03 of diamond from one of these crystals (exposure time 0.004 s per 0.1° frame, beam size 80×20 μm and 100% beam transmission).the crystal also belongs to space group p4 1 2 1 2 but with significantly different unit cell dimensions (a = b = 163.1 å and c = 189.1 å). there were two rbd/cr3022 complexes in the asymmetric unit and a solvent content of ~74%.the initial structure was determined using the lower resolution data from the first crystal form. data were excluded at a resolution below 35 å as these fell under the beamstop shadow. one cycle of refmac5 (murshudov et al., 2011) was used to refine atomic coordinates after manual correction in coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) data collection and structure refinement statistics are given in table s3 . structural comparisons used shp (stuart et al., 1979) , residues forming the rbd/fab interface were identified with pisa (krissinel and henrick, 2007) , figures were prepared with pymol (the pymol molecular graphics system, version 1.2r3pre, schrödinger, llc).purified spike protein was buffer exchanged into 2 table s4 .for both the 50 minute and 3 h incubation datasets, motion correction and alignment of 2x binned super-resolution movies was performed using relion3.1. ctf-estimation with gctf (v1.06) (zhang, 2016) and non-template-driven particle picking was then performed within cryosparc v2.14.1-live (https://cryosparc.com/) followed by multiple rounds of 2d classification (punjani et al., 2017) .for the 50 minutes dataset, 2d class averages for particle groups a and b were used separately for template-driven classification before further rounds of 2d and 3d classification with c1 symmetry. both structures were then sharpened in cryosparc. data processing and refinement statistics are given in table s4 .an initial model for the spike (group a) was generated using pdb id, 6vyb (walls et al., 2020) and rigid body fitted into the final map using coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) . the for the 3 h incubation dataset, particles were extracted with a larger box size (686 pixels as compared to 540 pixels), and, following multiple rounds of 2d classification, 2d class averages from 'blob-picked' particles showing signs of complete 'flower-like' structures were selected for ab initio reconstruction (in some classes, petals from these flower-like particles were missing, figure s7 ). for the 3 h data no detailed fitting was attempted.spr kinetic data were fitted using biacore t200 evaluation software 3.1 (www.cytivalifesciences.com). bli data were analysed using data analysis software ht v 11.1 (www.fortebio.com). prnt neutralisation data were subjected to mid-point probit the authors declare no competing interests.binding affinity between rbd and cr3022 fab, related to star methods, (surface plasmon resonance and bio-layer interferometry).(a-b) surface plasmon resonance binding sensorgrams measured with a biacore t200. biotinylated (bio-) rbd was immobilised as the ligand and cr3022 fab was used as analyte at five concentrations (5.9, 11.9, 23.8, 47.5 and 95 nm). (c-d) cr3022 igg was immobilised as the ligand and rbd-his was used as analyte at five concentrations (6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, 100 nm). data were fitted to a 1:1 binding model using the biacore t200 evaluation software 3.1. the average kinetic values from these two sets of experiment are listed in extended table 1 table s3 x-ray data collection and refinement statistics, related to figure 3 and star methods (crystallisation, data collection and x-ray structure determination and x-ray crystallographic refinement and electron density map generation). in december 2019, outbreak of sars-cov-2 infection has brought back the attention of pathogenic coronavirus to the spotlight [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . sars-cov-2 is spreading rapidly, causing severe covid-19 symptoms and life-threatening diseases in some infected patients 6 . numbers of infected cases reached over 60,000 in less than 3 months 7 .the prominent sequence differences between the crucial rbms of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov raise a critical question of whether the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 spike protein to human ace2 is comparable to that of sars-cov. a recent study by computational modeling suggested that sars-cov-2 has a lower binding affinity to human ace2, as a result of the loss of one hydrogen bond interactions 18 . however, another publication using structure analysis suggested similar binding affinities to sars-cov 9 . by using biolayer interferometry binding assay, tian et al. 9 measured the sars-cov-2 rbd's binding affinity to human ace2 protein to be 15.2 nm, which is comparable to previously published affinity data for sars-cov spike protein 19 . the above comparison of spike proteins' binding affinities to human ace2 between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were inconclusive or indirect, hence, a direct head-to-head comparison is desired for the understanding of the infectivity and transmissibility of sars-cov-2 virus.neutralizing antibody (nab) is expected to be one of the most promising treatments against coronavirus infection among the existing therapeutic options 20, 21 . several nabs targeting sars-cov exhibit significant in vivo antivirus activities by reducing virus titers in lung tissues of animal models [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . however, coronavirus is a single-stranded rna virus prone to rapid mutations during transmission, nabs without cross-reactivity to a broad spectrum of viral mutants could lead to treatment failure 10, [27] [28] [29] , therefore, highly potent and cross-protective nabs and prophylactic vaccines against sars-cov-2 are in urgent needs.here we investigated the optimized complex structure conformations between the rbds of sars-cov-2 (wuhan/ivdc-hb-01/2019, gisaid accession id: epi_isl_402119) and sars-cov (cuhk-w1, genbank accession id: ay278554) with ace2 by computational modeling and binding free energy analysis. we also used the recombinant s1 proteins of the two viruses to compare their binding curves to both recombinant ace2 protein and ace2 expressing cells. the above studies confirm that both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have similar binding affinities to the human receptor ace2.due to the relatively low homology of the spike rbds between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, it is of significant interest to investigate whether sars-cov neutralizing antibodies possess cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2. sars-cov polyclonal antibodies and ace2 blocking and non-blocking nabs were tested with sars-cov-2 pseudovirus (psv) for cross neutralizing activities.the structure model for sars-covrbd-ace2 complex was optimized based on the complex's crystal structure (pdb id: 2ajf) (http://www.rcsb.org/). the structure model for sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex was constructed by homology modeling using the optimized sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex crystal structure as a template, based on a 73.7% amino acid sequence homology between the two viruses. root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of cα atoms between the two complex structures is 0.703 å, indicating an almost identical structural conformation (figure1b). there are subtle differences in the rbd-ace2 interfaces between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov at the loop 469-470 (numbered according to sars-cov rbd), arising from a one-residue insertion after residue 469 ( figure 1a) .on the other hand, the interaction patterns in both complex structures' interfaces are somewhat different ( figure 1a and table s2 ). four residues in sars-cov-2 rbd (i.e. n439, g476, q498, and n501) lost their interactions with ace2 as compared with the corresponding residues in sars-cov rbd (i.e. r426, d463, y484, and t487), four replacing residues in sars-cov-2 rbd (i.e. k417, v445, e484, and f486) form new interactions with ace2, which are absent in the sars-cov rbd (corresponding to v404, s432, p470, and l472) ( figure 1a&c ). it is noteworthy that although a strong salt-bridge presented between r426 of sars-cov rbd and e329 of ace2, is missing in the interaction involving sars-cov-2 rbd. however, a new strong salt-bridge interaction between e484 of sars-cov-2 rbd and k31 of ace2 compensates for that loss.the rbd-ace2 binding free energies of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are estimated to be -40.42 and -44.96 reu (rosetta energy unit), respectively (table s1), by rosetta interface analyzer 30 . the insignificant difference in binding free energies suggests that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov viruses have similar binding affinities to human ace2. recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov-2 showed similar binding to human ace2 in both protein and cellular forms, as compared with sars-covthe rbd containing s1 protein, resulted from cleavage of the spike protein on the virus membrane is responsible for the binding of the virus to human receptor on cell membrane, which is important for viral infectivity 31 . binding curves of recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov to human ace2 were measured by elisa. results confirmed that both viruses have similar s1-ace2 protein-protein binding curves and ec 50 (figure 2a) . binding curves of s1 protein to ace2 expressing 293t cells was further assessed using facs. again, similar binding curves and ec 50 values were obtained for the two viruses ( figure 2b ). the above experimental results are consistent with our structure modeling analysis, which indicates that sars-cov-2 virus likely infects human cells through similar mechanisms as sars-cov virus by binding to human ace2 with comparable affinities, and hence may possess similar transmissibility.a. serial diluted recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov were coated on 96 well plates, incubated with the recombinant fc-tagged ace2 (ace2-fc) for binding evaluation.b. recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were incubated with 293t-ace2 cells and subjected to facs evaluation for binding.coronavirus' mutation and emergence of escape mutants to neutralizing monoclonal antibodies and vaccines are a major concern. sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are two different coronaviruses with modest level of sequence homology in their spike proteins. understanding whether antibodies raised from sars-cov spike protein immunization have cross-reactivity to the new sars-cov-2 will offer important insights and guidance to therapeutic antibody and prophylactic vaccine development.sars-cov nabs were generated by immunizing mouse or rabbit with sars-cov s1 or rbd protein. two sars-cov s-protein rabbit polyclonal antibodies (table 1 ) and four monoclonal antibodies ( table 2 ) were analyzed for cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2 s1 protein and cross-neutralizing activities to sars-cov-2 psv. as expected, the polyclonal antibodies showed weaker binding to sars-cov-2 s1 protein (ec 50 >100ng/ml) as compared to sars-cov s1 protein (ec 50 <25ng/ml). neutralizing activities against sars-cov-2 psv were lower by more than two-orders of magnitudes than sars-cov psv (table 1) , presenting a pessimistic forecast for the probability to identify highly potent and cross-reactive nabs to sars-cov-2 from sars-cov antibodies or antibody libraries.sars-cov monoclonal nabs with strong s1 binding (ec 50 <50ng/ml, k d ≤2.0e-10 m) and potent ace2-blocking activities exhibited potent neutralizing activities against sars-cov (minimum dose to reach 100% neutralization at ~0.1μg/ml), but almost no cross-binding to sars-cov-2 s1 protein (ec 50 >15μg/ml) and no cross-neutralizing activities against sars-cov-2 psv (<50% neutralizing activity at 100μg/ml) (figure3, table 2, figure s1 & s2).interestingly, three ace2-non-blocking monoclonal antibodies showed modest binding activities to sars-cov s1 protein (ec 50 >100ng/ml) and neutralizing activities to the sars-cov psv (minimum dose to reach 100% neutralization at ≥ 10 μg/ml). although, these nabs were less potent than the ace2-blocking nabs to sars-cov, but could evidently cross-bind to the sars-cov-2 s1 protein (ec 50 <3μg/ml) and cross-neutralize sars-cov-2 psv (>50% neutralizing activity at 100μg/ml) ( table 2) . rp01: polyclonal antibody from rabbit immunized with sars-cov s1 protein.t51: polyclonal antibody from rabbit immunized with sars-cov rbd proteina. binding of sars nabs to sars-cov s1 protein were tested by elisa.recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov were coated on plates, serial diluted nabs were added for binding to recombinant s1 protein. b. binding of sars nabs to sars-cov-2 s1 protein were tested by elsia. recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov-2 were coated on plates, serial diluted nabs were added for binding to recombinant s1 protein. c. neutralization of sars-cov nabs against sars-cov-2 psv. d. antibody competition with sars-cov rbd binding to ace2. recombinant sars-cov rbd protein was coated on plates, nabs and recombinant ace2 were then added for rbd binding competition measurements. as suggested by the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 rbd sequence alignment analysis (figure 1a) , the 50% rbm sequence homology is much less than the 73.7% rbd sequence homology. structure similarity analysis confirms the presence of significant local structure differences in the rbm regions, while the rest of the rbd regions have significantly higher similarities (figure 4) . moreover, three glycosylation sites in sars-cov rbd (i.e. n318, n330, and n357) 32 was conserved, although one of the glycosylation sites, n357, may not be glycosylated in the corresponding residue of sars-cov-2 as predicted by netnglyc 33 .taking the two viruses' rbd structure similarities and glycosylation sites into account, we predict that there are two possible conserved regions in rbd where epitopes for cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies reside. these regions probably do not overlap with the ace2 binding sites (figure 4) . we speculate that it is more likely to obtain cross-reactive and non-blocking neutralizing antibodies targeting the conserved regions outside the rbm region. the neutralization mechanism for these non-blocking but cross-reactive antibodies is likely unrelated to ace2 blockage.rbd is shown in a space-filled model with colored surface. ace2 is shown as gray tube model. the three glycosylation sites in sars-cov are labeled. note that n 357 st in sars-cov is changed to n 370 sa in sars-cov-2, which is different from the nxs/t pattern required for glycosylation, and hence this site is more likely to be unglycosylated. the two possible cross-reactive regions are marked with yellow circles.coronavirus spike protein has been shown to be responsible for interacting with host cell receptors to initiate infection. both sars-cov and sars-cov viruses use human ace2 for cell entry 10 . due to the nature of rna virus' rapid mutation rates, changes in the s-protein's amino acid sequence, especially in the rbd's receptor binding motif, could have significant impact on virus infectivity, pathogenicity, transmissibility, and cross-protection from previous coronavirus infection, as well as therapeutic antibody and prophylactic vaccine development. hence, understanding the differences between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 and their implications may offer significant scientific and practical value.though it is difficult to assess the virus-host-cell interactions with real virion, we studied the new sars-cov-2 in head-to-head comparisons with sars-cov using multiple methods. measurements of recombinant sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike proteins to recombinant ace2 protein and ace2 expressing 293t cells confirmed the two coronaviruses' similar binding affinities to human ace2 (figure 2a&b) , which provided direct molecular based evidences to support and possibly explain the observation that the new sars-cov-2 coronavirus has similar transmissibility to sars-cov virus.since sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are both coronaviruses with over 70% sequence homology and share the same human receptor ace2, analyzing sars-cov's antibodies' cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2 may provide useful information on whether neutralizing epitopes were conserved on the two coronaviruses. two rabbit polyclonal antibodies produced with sars-cov s1 and rbd proteins had potent binding and neutralizing activities to sars-cov but only modest cross-binding and cross-neutralizing activities to the new sars-cov-2 virus. four highly potent ace2 blocking sars-cov monoclonal antibodies showed binding affinities to sars-cov s1 protein in the range of 0.2 nm to 8.7 pm, and very high neutralizing activities to sars-cov. as low as 0.2 ug/ml nab can lead to 100% neutralization of sars-cov psv. however, virtually no cross-binding or cross neutralizing activities against the novel sars-cov-2 virus were detected with the four ace2 blocking monoclonal antibodies.we then screened non-ace2-blocking antibodies raised from sars-cov rbd for neutralizing activities. three such monoclonal antibodies were identified. although, binding affinities to sars-cov s1 protein was significantly lower with ec 50 between 55 to 224 μg/ml as compared to 16 to 42 μg/ml ec 50 for the four ace2-blocking nabs, significant cross-binding activities to sars-cov-2 s1 protein and modest cross-neutralizing activities against sars-cov-2 psv were detected.the observation that these three antibodies bind to and neutralize both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 without blocking ace2 suggest the following. first, the epitope or epitopes for these three antibodies are conserved across the two significantly different coronaviruses. hence it is possible but maybe challenging to identify antibodies with potent neutralizing activities to both sars-cov and sars-cov-2, and ideally to their mutant virus strains as well. second, the epitope or epitopes for the three nabs are likely located outside the rbm motif due to their non-ace2 blocking features and the fact that homology in the rbm motif between the two viruses is significantly lower than the rest portion of the rbd.an analysis on the mutations in rbd was also conducted. we analyzed 68 sequences of sars-cov-2 variants in gisaid and found 4 variants with mutations in rbd (one has n354d/d364y, two have v367f, and one has f342l). alignment of 111 sars-cov rbd sequences, collected by blast via ncbi website 34 , was used for consurf analysis 35 . as shown in figure 5 , the sars-cov rbm region is highly variable, making it more challenging to develop cross-reactive antibodies with broad spectrum of neutralizing activities against mutant strains. on the other hand, significant portions of rbd (marked in pink) outside the rbm motif are highly conserved. neutralizing antibodies targeting epitopes in these regions could potentially have cross-protective activities against different mutant strains.it is also noteworthy that the three non-blocking antibodies' neutralizing activities are significantly lower than the four blocking antibodies. due to the limited number of antibodies obtained, it is difficult to conclude whether there is a consistent pattern between ace2 blockage and neutralizing potency, but one can speculate that neutralizing antibodies targeting conserved epitopes outside the rbm region may be cross-protective but may also be less potent due to the lack of ace2 blocking activities. in a recent article 9 , a sars-cov rbd neutralizing antibody cr3022 with an epitope outside the rbm motif was also shown to be non-blocking but cross-binding to sars-cov-2 rbd with a relatively low k d of 6.3 nm.the neutralization mechanism of these non-blocking antibodies is not clear yet. it is known that antibodies targeting the s2 region could block s2 protein's configuration change and hence interfere with virus entry into host cells. whether these non-blocking rbd antibodies also interfere with s2 protein's configuration change remains to be investigated.in summary, the above findings suggest that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov bind to human ace2 with similar affinities and hence may have similar transmissibility. antibodies targeting the rbm regions may be more potent due to their ace2 blocking activities but cross-protecting antibodies targeting the rbm regions may be more difficult to obtain because of the lower degree of sequence conservation. antibodies to the more conserved regions outside the rbm motif may possess cross-protective neutralizing activities but may be less potent due to the lack of ace2 blocking activities. mechanism of neutralization for the non-blocking rbd antibodies remains to be investigated. developing potent and cross-protective therapeutic antibodies and vaccines is possible but could be challenging.rbd is shown as colored surface. ace2 is shown as gray cartoon. the three surface mutation sites (i.e. n354d, d364y, and v367f) observed in sars-cov-2 rbd are labeled. mutation f342l is buried and not shown here.recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 (cat: 40591 the human embryonic kidney 293t cell line (cat:crl-11268) used for pseudovirus (psv) packaging were purchased from atcc. 293t-ace2 cells were established by transfection of ace2 expression plasmid to 293t cells. both 293t and 293t-ace2 cells were grown in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem) containing 10% (v/v) fbs.indicated proteins were coated on 96 well plates using cbs buffer over night at 4℃. bsa was used for blocking at room temperature for 1h. indicated corresponding proteins or antibodies were then added and incubated at room temperature for 1h. after washing away the unbound proteins or antibodies, secondary antibody with hrp labeling were added and incubated for another hour before washed away. developing buffer was added and incubated for 5-30 min, 1% h 2 so 4 was added to stop the reaction and absorbance at 450nm was detected with a microplate reader.indicated concentrations of s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were incubated with 293t-ace2 cells for 45 min. after washing away the unbound proteins, cells were incubated withpe labelled anti-his-tag antibody for 20 min and went through flow cytometer for detection of cellular binding. flowjo and graphpad softwares were used for data analysis.recombinant sars-cov s1 protein were biotinated and loaded using sa sensor, indicated antibodies were added for real time association and dissociation analysis. data analysis octet was used for data processing.6-8 hours before transfection, 293t cells were pre-plate on t75 flask in dmem+10% fbs at 100,000 cells/cm 2 . 13μg of luciferase-expressing hiv-1 lentiviral transfer genome (pwpxl-luc), 13μg of packaging plasmid (psd) and 13μg of expression plasmid encoding either sars-cov-2-s protein (pcmv-whcov-spike) or sars-s protein (pcmv-sars-spike) were co-transfected into pre-plated 293t cells using sinofection transfection reagent according to the procedure recommended by manufacturer. then the transfected cells incubated were incubated at 37℃ and 5% co 2 overnight, followed by medium exchange with fresh dmem plus 10% fbs. the supernatant containing pseudovirus was collected after 48-72 hours and filtered through a 0.45μm filter and stored at -80℃ for longtime storage or 4℃ for short time storage.293t-ace2 cells were plated in 96-well plate at 1,0000 cells/well in 100 μ l dmem+10% fbs. 60μl serially diluted antibody samples and 60μl of sars-cov-2 or sars psv were mixed and incubated at 4℃ for 1 hour. then 100μl/well of the antibody-psv mixture was added onto the 293t/ace2 cell wells and incubated for 37℃, 5% co 2 . after 72 hours infection, luciferase luminescence (rlu) was detected using luciferase assay system according to the procedure recommended by manufacturer with a luminescence microplate reader. antibodies inhibition% was calculated as following: inhibiton%= 1 %. antibodies neutralization titers were presented as 50% maximal inhibitory concentration (ic 50 ).protein sequence alignments were performed using clustal omega 36 .the sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex structure was remodeled based on pdb 2ajf to complete its missing loop using discovery studio (ds) 37 . this complex structure was then optimized by rosetta relax 38 . the sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex structure was constructed base on the optimized sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex structure using ds and was also optimized by rosetta relax. the interface between the rbd and ace2 was analyzed by rosetta interface analyzer 30 and ds. software pymol was used for preparing structural figures 39 . structural similarity analysis between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov was carried out by discovery studio (ds) 37 .structural conservation analysis of sars-cov rbd was carried out using consurf 35 . alignment of 111 sars-cov rbd sequence, used for the generation of sequence conservation, was collected by blast via ncbi website 34 . structural conservation was displayed by pymol 39 .14 / 18 packstat: rosetta's packing statistic score for the interface (0=bad, 1=perfect). fa_atr: lennard-jones attractive between atoms in different residues. fa_rep: lennard-jones repulsive between atoms in different residues. fa_elec: coulombic electrostatic potential with a distance-dependent dielectric. table s2 . rbd side chain interaction in the rbd-ace2 interface. distance: the nearest distance from side chain of rbd residue to ace2.sb: salt-bridge. hb: hydrogen bond. pi:π-stack or π-anion interaction. np: non-polar interaction. figure s1 . realtime association and dissociation of monoclonal nabs detected by octet system. figure s2 . neutralization assays of monoclonal nabs against sars-cov psv.in december 2019, outbreak of sars-cov-2 infection has brought back the attention of pathogenic coronavirus to the spotlight [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . sars-cov-2 is spreading rapidly, causing severe covid-19 symptoms and life-threatening diseases in some infected patients 6 . numbers of infected cases reached over 60,000 in less than 3 months 7 .the prominent sequence differences between the crucial rbms of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov raise a critical question of whether the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 spike protein to human ace2 is comparable to that of sars-cov. a recent study by computational modeling suggested that sars-cov-2 has a lower binding affinity to human ace2, as a result of the loss of one hydrogen bond interactions 18 . however, another publication using structure analysis suggested similar binding affinities to sars-cov 9 . by using biolayer interferometry binding assay, tian et al. 9 measured the sars-cov-2 rbd's binding affinity to human ace2 protein to be 15.2 nm, which is comparable to previously published affinity data for sars-cov spike protein 19 . the above comparison of spike proteins' binding affinities to human ace2 between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were inconclusive or indirect, hence, a direct head-to-head comparison is desired for the understanding of the infectivity and transmissibility of sars-cov-2 virus.neutralizing antibody (nab) is expected to be one of the most promising treatments against coronavirus infection among the existing therapeutic options 20, 21 . several nabs targeting sars-cov exhibit significant in vivo antivirus activities by reducing virus titers in lung tissues of animal models [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . however, coronavirus is a single-stranded rna virus prone to rapid mutations during transmission, nabs without cross-reactivity to a broad spectrum of viral mutants could lead to treatment failure 10, [27] [28] [29] , therefore, highly potent and cross-protective nabs and prophylactic vaccines against sars-cov-2 are in urgent needs.with ace2 by computational modeling and binding free energy analysis. we also used the recombinant s1 proteins of the two viruses to compare their binding curves to both recombinant ace2 protein and ace2 expressing cells. the above studies confirm that both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have similar binding affinities to the human receptor ace2.due to the relatively low homology of the spike rbds between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, it is of significant interest to investigate whether sars-cov neutralizing antibodies possess cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2. sars-cov polyclonal antibodies and ace2 blocking and non-blocking nabs were tested with sars-cov-2 pseudovirus (psv) for cross neutralizing activities.the structure model for sars-covrbd-ace2 complex was optimized based on the complex's crystal structure (pdb id: 2ajf) (http://www.rcsb.org/). the structure model for sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex was constructed by homology modeling using the optimized sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex crystal structure as a template, based on a 73.7% amino acid sequence homology between the two viruses. root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of cα atoms between the two complex structures is 0.703 å, indicating an almost identical structural conformation (figure1b). there are subtle differences in the rbd-ace2 interfaces between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov at the loop 469-470 (numbered according to sars-cov rbd), arising from a one-residue insertion after residue 469 ( figure 1a) .on the other hand, the interaction patterns in both complex structures' interfaces are somewhat different ( figure 1a and table s2 ). four residues in sars-cov-2 rbd (i.e. n439, g476, q498, and n501) lost their interactions with ace2 as compared with the corresponding residues in sars-cov rbd (i.e. r426, d463, y484, and t487), four replacing residues in sars-cov-2 rbd (i.e. k417, v445, e484, and f486) form new interactions with ace2, which are absent in the sars-cov rbd (corresponding to v404, s432, p470, and l472) ( figure 1a&c ). it is noteworthy that although a strong salt-bridge presented between r426 of sars-cov rbd and e329 of ace2, is missing in the interaction involving sars-cov-2 rbd. however, a new strong salt-bridge interaction between e484 of sars-cov-2 rbd and k31 of ace2 compensates for that loss.the rbd-ace2 binding free energies of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are estimated to be -40.42 and -44.96 reu (rosetta energy unit), respectively (table s1), by rosetta interface analyzer 30 . the insignificant difference in binding free energies suggests that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov viruses have similar binding affinities to human ace2. author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprint recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov-2 showed similar binding to human ace2 in both protein and cellular forms, as compared with sars-covthe rbd containing s1 protein, resulted from cleavage of the spike protein on the virus membrane is responsible for the binding of the virus to human receptor on cell membrane, which is important for viral infectivity 31 . binding curves of recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov to human ace2 were measured by elisa. results confirmed that both viruses have similar s1-ace2 protein-protein binding curves and ec 50 (figure 2a) . binding curves of s1 protein to ace2 expressing 293t cells was further assessed using facs. again, similar binding curves and ec 50 values were obtained for the two viruses ( figure 2b ). the above experimental results are consistent with our structure modeling analysis, which indicates that sars-cov-2 virus likely infects human cells through similar mechanisms as sars-cov virus by binding to human ace2 with comparable affinities, and hence may possess similar transmissibility.a. serial diluted recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov were coated on 96 well plates, incubated with the recombinant fc-tagged ace2 (ace2-fc) for binding evaluation.b. recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were incubated with 293t-ace2 cells and subjected to facs evaluation for binding.author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprintcoronavirus' mutation and emergence of escape mutants to neutralizing monoclonal antibodies and vaccines are a major concern. sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are two different coronaviruses with modest level of sequence homology in their spike proteins. understanding whether antibodies raised from sars-cov spike protein immunization have cross-reactivity to the new sars-cov-2 will offer important insights and guidance to therapeutic antibody and prophylactic vaccine development.sars-cov nabs were generated by immunizing mouse or rabbit with sars-cov s1 or rbd protein. two sars-cov s-protein rabbit polyclonal antibodies (table 1 ) and four monoclonal antibodies ( table 2 ) were analyzed for cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2 s1 protein and cross-neutralizing activities to sars-cov-2 psv. as expected, the polyclonal antibodies showed weaker binding to sars-cov-2 s1 protein (ec 50 >100ng/ml) as compared to sars-cov s1 protein (ec 50 <25ng/ml). neutralizing activities against sars-cov-2 psv were lower by more than two-orders of magnitudes than sars-cov psv (table 1) , presenting a pessimistic forecast for the probability to identify highly potent and cross-reactive nabs to sars-cov-2 from sars-cov antibodies or antibody libraries.sars-cov monoclonal nabs with strong s1 binding (ec 50 <50ng/ml, k d ≤2.0e-10 m) and potent ace2-blocking activities exhibited potent neutralizing activities against sars-cov (minimum dose to reach 100% neutralization at ~0.1μg/ml), but almost no cross-binding to sars-cov-2 s1 protein (ec 50 >15μg/ml) and no cross-neutralizing activities against sars-cov-2 psv (<50% neutralizing activity at 100μg/ml) (figure3, table 2, figure s1 & s2).interestingly, three ace2-non-blocking monoclonal antibodies showed modest binding activities to sars-cov s1 protein (ec 50 >100ng/ml) and neutralizing activities to the sars-cov psv (minimum dose to reach 100% neutralization at ≥ 10 μg/ml). although, these nabs were less potent than the ace2-blocking nabs to sars-cov, but could evidently cross-bind to the sars-cov-2 s1 protein (ec 50 <3μg/ml) and cross-neutralize sars-cov-2 psv (>50% neutralizing activity at 100μg/ml) ( table 2) . rp01: polyclonal antibody from rabbit immunized with sars-cov s1 protein.t51: polyclonal antibody from rabbit immunized with sars-cov rbd protein author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprinta. binding of sars nabs to sars-cov s1 protein were tested by elisa.recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov were coated on plates, serial diluted nabs were added for binding to recombinant s1 protein. b. binding of sars nabs to sars-cov-2 s1 protein were tested by elsia. recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov-2 were coated on plates, serial diluted nabs were added for binding to recombinant s1 protein. c. neutralization of sars-cov nabs against sars-cov-2 psv. d. antibody competition with sars-cov rbd binding to ace2. recombinant sars-cov rbd protein was coated on plates, nabs and recombinant ace2 were then added for rbd binding competition measurements. as suggested by the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 rbd sequence alignment analysis (figure 1a) , the 50% rbm sequence homology is much less than the 73.7% rbd sequence homology. structure similarity analysis confirms the presence of significant local structure differences in the rbm regions, while the rest of the rbd regions have significantly higher similarities (figure 4) . moreover, three glycosylation sites in sars-cov rbd (i.e. n318, n330, and n357) 32 was conserved, although one of the glycosylation sites, n357, may not be glycosylated in the corresponding residue of sars-cov-2 as predicted by netnglyc 33 .taking the two viruses' rbd structure similarities and glycosylation sites into account, we predict that there are two possible conserved regions in rbd where epitopes for cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies reside. these regions probably do not overlap with the ace2 binding sites (figure 4) . we speculate that it is more likely to obtain cross-reactive and non-blocking neutralizing antibodies targeting the conserved regions outside the rbm region. the neutralization mechanism for these non-blocking but cross-reactive antibodies is likely unrelated to ace2 blockage.rbd is shown in a space-filled model with colored surface. ace2 is shown as gray tube model. the three glycosylation sites in sars-cov are labeled. note that n 357 st in sars-cov is changed to n 370 sa in sars-cov-2, which is different from the nxs/t pattern required for glycosylation, and hence this site is more likely to be unglycosylated. the two possible cross-reactive regions are marked with yellow circles.coronavirus spike protein has been shown to be responsible for interacting with host author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprint cell receptors to initiate infection. both sars-cov and sars-cov viruses use human ace2 for cell entry 10 . due to the nature of rna virus' rapid mutation rates, changes in the s-protein's amino acid sequence, especially in the rbd's receptor binding motif, could have significant impact on virus infectivity, pathogenicity, transmissibility, and cross-protection from previous coronavirus infection, as well as therapeutic antibody and prophylactic vaccine development. hence, understanding the differences between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 and their implications may offer significant scientific and practical value.though it is difficult to assess the virus-host-cell interactions with real virion, we studied the new sars-cov-2 in head-to-head comparisons with sars-cov using multiple methods. measurements of recombinant sars-cov-2 and sars-cov spike proteins to recombinant ace2 protein and ace2 expressing 293t cells confirmed the two coronaviruses' similar binding affinities to human ace2 (figure 2a&b) , which provided direct molecular based evidences to support and possibly explain the observation that the new sars-cov-2 coronavirus has similar transmissibility to sars-cov virus.since sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are both coronaviruses with over 70% sequence homology and share the same human receptor ace2, analyzing sars-cov's antibodies' cross-reactivity to sars-cov-2 may provide useful information on whether neutralizing epitopes were conserved on the two coronaviruses. two rabbit polyclonal antibodies produced with sars-cov s1 and rbd proteins had potent binding and neutralizing activities to sars-cov but only modest cross-binding and cross-neutralizing activities to the new sars-cov-2 virus. four highly potent ace2 blocking sars-cov monoclonal antibodies showed binding affinities to sars-cov s1 protein in the range of 0.2 nm to 8.7 pm, and very high neutralizing activities to sars-cov. as low as 0.2 ug/ml nab can lead to 100% neutralization of sars-cov psv. however, virtually no cross-binding or cross neutralizing activities against the novel sars-cov-2 virus were detected with the four ace2 blocking monoclonal antibodies.we then screened non-ace2-blocking antibodies raised from sars-cov rbd for neutralizing activities. three such monoclonal antibodies were identified. although, binding affinities to sars-cov s1 protein was significantly lower with ec 50 between 55 to 224 μg/ml as compared to 16 to 42 μg/ml ec 50 for the four ace2-blocking nabs, significant cross-binding activities to sars-cov-2 s1 protein and modest cross-neutralizing activities against sars-cov-2 psv were detected.the observation that these three antibodies bind to and neutralize both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 without blocking ace2 suggest the following. first, the epitope or epitopes for these three antibodies are conserved across the two significantly different coronaviruses. hence it is possible but maybe challenging to identify antibodies with potent neutralizing activities to both sars-cov and sars-cov-2, and ideally to their mutant virus strains as well. second, the epitope or epitopes for the three nabs author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprint are likely located outside the rbm motif due to their non-ace2 blocking features and the fact that homology in the rbm motif between the two viruses is significantly lower than the rest portion of the rbd.an analysis on the mutations in rbd was also conducted. we analyzed 68 sequences of sars-cov-2 variants in gisaid and found 4 variants with mutations in rbd (one has n354d/d364y, two have v367f, and one has f342l). alignment of 111 sars-cov rbd sequences, collected by blast via ncbi website 34 , was used for consurf analysis 35 . as shown in figure 5 , the sars-cov rbm region is highly variable, making it more challenging to develop cross-reactive antibodies with broad spectrum of neutralizing activities against mutant strains. on the other hand, significant portions of rbd (marked in pink) outside the rbm motif are highly conserved. neutralizing antibodies targeting epitopes in these regions could potentially have cross-protective activities against different mutant strains.it is also noteworthy that the three non-blocking antibodies' neutralizing activities are significantly lower than the four blocking antibodies. due to the limited number of antibodies obtained, it is difficult to conclude whether there is a consistent pattern between ace2 blockage and neutralizing potency, but one can speculate that neutralizing antibodies targeting conserved epitopes outside the rbm region may be cross-protective but may also be less potent due to the lack of ace2 blocking activities. in a recent article 9 , a sars-cov rbd neutralizing antibody cr3022 with an epitope outside the rbm motif was also shown to be non-blocking but cross-binding to sars-cov-2 rbd with a relatively low k d of 6.3 nm.the neutralization mechanism of these non-blocking antibodies is not clear yet. it is known that antibodies targeting the s2 region could block s2 protein's configuration change and hence interfere with virus entry into host cells. whether these non-blocking rbd antibodies also interfere with s2 protein's configuration change remains to be investigated.in summary, the above findings suggest that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov bind to human ace2 with similar affinities and hence may have similar transmissibility. antibodies targeting the rbm regions may be more potent due to their ace2 blocking activities but cross-protecting antibodies targeting the rbm regions may be more difficult to obtain because of the lower degree of sequence conservation. antibodies to the more conserved regions outside the rbm motif may possess cross-protective neutralizing activities but may be less potent due to the lack of ace2 blocking activities. mechanism of neutralization for the non-blocking rbd antibodies remains to be investigated. developing potent and cross-protective therapeutic antibodies and vaccines is possible but could be challenging. author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprintrbd is shown as colored surface. ace2 is shown as gray cartoon. the three surface mutation sites (i.e. n354d, d364y, and v367f) observed in sars-cov-2 rbd are labeled. mutation f342l is buried and not shown here.recombinant s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 (cat: 40591-v08h), sars-cov (cat: 40150-v08b1) and mers-cov (cat:40069-v08h), recombinant rbd protein of sars-cov (cat: 40150-v31b2), transfection reagent sinofection (cat: stf02), mammalian expression plasmids of full length s or rbd protein of sars-cov-2 (cat: vg40589-ut, wuhan/ivdc-hb-01/2019) and sars-cov (cat: vg40150-g-n, cuhk-w1), ace2 (cat: hg10108-ut), polyclonal antibodies against sars-cov rp01 (cat: 40150-rp01) and t52 (cat: 40150-t52) were purchased from sino biological. fetal bovine serum (fbs) (cat: sa 112.02) were purchased from lanzhou minhai bio-engineering. hygromycin (cat: v900372) were purchased from sigma-aldrich. sars-cov neutralizing antibodies were generated from mice (m103, m127) or rabbits (r314, r301, r325, r302, r258, r348) immunized with recombinant s1 protein of sars-cov. luciferase assay system (cat: e1501) was purchased from promega.the human embryonic kidney 293t cell line (cat:crl-11268) used for pseudovirus (psv) packaging were purchased from atcc. 293t-ace2 cells were established by transfection of ace2 expression plasmid to 293t cells. both 293t and 293t-ace2 author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprint cells were grown in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem) containing 10% (v/v) fbs.indicated proteins were coated on 96 well plates using cbs buffer over night at 4℃. bsa was used for blocking at room temperature for 1h. indicated corresponding proteins or antibodies were then added and incubated at room temperature for 1h. after washing away the unbound proteins or antibodies, secondary antibody with hrp labeling were added and incubated for another hour before washed away. developing buffer was added and incubated for 5-30 min, 1% h 2 so 4 was added to stop the reaction and absorbance at 450nm was detected with a microplate reader.indicated concentrations of s1 proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were incubated with 293t-ace2 cells for 45 min. after washing away the unbound proteins, cells were incubated withpe labelled anti-his-tag antibody for 20 min and went through flow cytometer for detection of cellular binding. flowjo and graphpad softwares were used for data analysis.recombinant sars-cov s1 protein were biotinated and loaded using sa sensor, indicated antibodies were added for real time association and dissociation analysis. data analysis octet was used for data processing.pseudovirus production in 293t adherent cells 6-8 hours before transfection, 293t cells were pre-plate on t75 flask in dmem+10% fbs at 100,000 cells/cm 2 . 13μg of luciferase-expressing hiv-1 lentiviral transfer genome (pwpxl-luc), 13μg of packaging plasmid (psd) and 13μg of expression plasmid encoding either sars-cov-2-s protein (pcmv-whcov-spike) or sars-s protein (pcmv-sars-spike) were co-transfected into pre-plated 293t cells using sinofection transfection reagent according to the procedure recommended by manufacturer. then the transfected cells incubated were incubated at 37℃ and 5% co 2 overnight, followed by medium exchange with fresh dmem plus 10% fbs. the supernatant containing pseudovirus was collected after 48-72 hours and filtered through a 0.45μm filter and stored at -80℃ for longtime storage or 4℃ for short time storage.293t-ace2 cells were plated in 96-well plate at 1,0000 cells/well in 100 μ l dmem+10% fbs. 60μl serially diluted antibody samples and 60μl of sars-cov-2 or sars psv were mixed and incubated at 4℃ for 1 hour. then 100μl/well of the antibody-psv mixture was added onto the 293t/ace2 cell wells and incubated for author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprint 37℃, 5% co 2 . after 72 hours infection, luciferase luminescence (rlu) was detected using luciferase assay system according to the procedure recommended by manufacturer with a luminescence microplate reader. antibodies inhibition% was calculated as following: inhibiton%= 1 %. antibodies neutralization titers were presented as 50% maximal inhibitory concentration (ic 50 ).protein sequence alignments were performed using clustal omega 36 .the sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex structure was remodeled based on pdb 2ajf to complete its missing loop using discovery studio (ds) 37 . this complex structure was then optimized by rosetta relax 38 . the sars-cov-2 rbd-ace2 complex structure was constructed base on the optimized sars-cov rbd-ace2 complex structure using ds and was also optimized by rosetta relax. the interface between the rbd and ace2 was analyzed by rosetta interface analyzer 30 and ds. software pymol was used for preparing structural figures 39 . structural similarity analysis between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov was carried out by discovery studio (ds) 37 .structural conservation analysis of sars-cov rbd was carried out using consurf 35 . alignment of 111 sars-cov rbd sequence, used for the generation of sequence conservation, was collected by blast via ncbi website 34 . structural conservation was displayed by pymol 39 .author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. table s2 . rbd side chain interaction in the rbd-ace2 interface. distance: the nearest distance from side chain of rbd residue to ace2.sb: salt-bridge. hb: hydrogen bond. pi:π-stack or π-anion interaction. np: non-polar interaction.author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprint figure s1 . realtime association and dissociation of monoclonal nabs detected by octet system. figure s2 . neutralization assays of monoclonal nabs against sars-cov psv.author/funder. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.951723 doi: biorxiv preprintcoronaviruses are the large family of viruses that belongs to coronaviridae family. on the basis of genomic structures and phylogenetic relationship, the subfamily coronavirinae comprises of four genera alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus [1] . the transmission of alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses are limited to mammals and causes respiratory illness in humans such as sars coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), whereas the gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses infect birds as well as infect mammals [2] . coronaviruses have the largest rna genome swatantra kumar and shailendra k. saxena have contributed equally to this work.& shailendra k. saxena shailen@kgmcindia.edu of 26-32 kilobases (kb) with positive sense. the genome encodes four major structural proteins including spike (s), nucleocapsid (n), membrane (m) and envelope (e) which required to make complete virus particle [3] . upon entry into host cells, the viral genome translates into two large precursor polyproteins namely as pp1a and pp1ab which get processed into 16 mature nonstructural proteins (nsp1-nsp16) by orf 1a-encoded viral proteinases, 3c-like proteinases (3clpro) and papain-like proteinase (plpro). these nonstructural proteins (nsps) perform crucial function during viral rna replication and transcription [4] . rna recombination without proof-reading mechanism among the existing coronaviruses is mostly responsible for the evolution and emergence of novel coronaviruses [5] . the frequency of recombination has been proposed to be higher in the s gene which codes for viral spike (s) glycoprotein. on 21st january 2020, chinese authorities have confirmed around 200 human cases and three deaths due to the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) from wuhan city, china. according to the world health organization (who), as of 11th february 2020, a total of 43,103 cases have been confirmed with 1018 deaths with case fatality rate of 2.36%. around 42,708 cases and 1017 deaths were reported from china alone. in addition to china, other south-east asian countries including singapore, thailand, republic of korea, japan, taiwan, malaysia, vietnam, india, philippines, nepal, sri lanka, cambodia have reported cases of 2019-ncov. moreover, countries like united arab emirates, germany, france, united kingdom, italy, spain, russia, sweden, finland, belgium, usa, canada and australia have also reported with 2019-ncov cases [6] . however, the route of transmission of 2019-ncov has not been yet identified. the average age of the patients reported with 2019-ncov infection is 56 years where more than 50% of the cases are from men. health care professionals and hospitalized patients are at the highest risk for the 2019-ncov transmission. patients were mainly reported with pneumonia like symptoms as fever, fatigue, dry cough, lymphopenia, elevated level of lactate dehydrogenase and prolonged prothrombin time. in addition, patients had difficulty in breathing where chest radiographs showing bilateral patchy shadows, or ground glass opacity in all patients including invasive pneumonic infiltrates in few cases [7, 8] .the 2019-ncov in china is suspected to emerge from closely related predecessors sars-cov and may spread further especially due to ongoing yearly migration and worldwide travelling. to characterize the virus and its genetic material, bronchoalveolar lavage was performed in few patients and the collected fluid samples or cultured viruses were used for next-generation sequencing. all the samples have been found to be closely related to bat sars-like betacoronavirus [9] . the sequenced virus ''wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus isolates wuhan-hu-1'' of 29,875 bp ss-rna with the accession number of mn908947 is available on ncbi database [10] . the length of the 2019-ncov encoded proteins were found to be almost similar among 2019-ncov and bat sars-like coronaviruses. however, a notable difference was found in the longer spike protein of 2019-ncov when compared with the bat sars-like coronaviruses and sars-cov [9] .the infection of coronavirus is initiated via the interaction of viral envelope with host cellular membrane [11] . the internalization of virus also depends upon the potential glycosylation sites present on viral glycoprotein. viral envelope comprises of three proteins where spike (s) and membrane (m) are the two major glycoproteins and envelope (e) is the non-glycosylated protein. the m protein comprises of short n-terminal glycosylated ectodomain with three transmembrane domains (tm) and a long c-terminal ct domain [12] . the m and e proteins are required for virus morphogenesis, assembly and budding. s glycoprotein is a type 1 fusion viral protein that comprises of two heptad repeat regions known as hr-c and hr-n which forms the coiled-coil structures surrounded by protein ectodomain [13] . s protein cleaved into two subunits s1 and s2 where s1 comprises of minimal receptor-binding domain (270-510) that helps in receptor binding and s2 facilitates membrane fusion [14] . s protein is crucial for receptor binding, membrane fusion, internalization of the virus, tissue tropism and host range and therefore is the crucial targets for vaccine development [15] . therefore, in the present study we analyzed the s glycoprotein of 2019-ncov considering its importance for virus attachment to the host cell receptor and compared it with its predecessor reference sars-cov strain for sequence variation, glycosylation pattern, structural and antigenic divergence for a better understanding of viral pathogenesis and antigenicity. , where as japanese encephalitis virus (af075723.1) was considered as an outlier. for phylogenetic analysis, these sequences were used and tree was generated by molecular evolutionary genetic analysis (mega) x software [16] and tree was generated by upgma (unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean) method which is a simple agglomerative hierarchical clustering method [17] .for further comparison between s glycoprotein of current circulating 2019-ncov and sars-cov, we have used wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus (2019-ncov; submitted to ncbi by wu f et al., 17 jan 2020) with accession number qhd43416.1 and sars coronavirus gd03t0013 (sars-cov; submitted to ncbi by song h d et al., 22 dec 2003) with accession number ay525636.1 [18] .for analyzing the variation among the spike glycoprotein sequences, we have aligned the complete spike glycoprotein sequences of 2019-ncov and sars-cov. standard single-letter abbreviations for the amino acids were used. the collinear sequences were aligned by online use of clustal omega (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/clustalo/ ). this data was validated further by alignment using emboss needle pairwise sequence alignment tools with eblosum62 matrix, gap penalty of 10 and extended penalty of 0.5 [19] . mismatches and gaps were identified as (); small positive scores were identified as (.); scores [ 1 were identified as (:) and identities were identified as (i). in addition, we have specifically analyzed the sequence variation in the minimal receptor-binding domain (270-510) of s glycoproteins.to determine the differences in the viral attachment sites of spike glycoproteins to the host cell surface, a glycosylation sites of 2019-ncov and sars-cov spike glycoproteins were determined by netnglyc 1.0 software (https://www. cbs.dtu.dk/services/netnglyc/) [20] . in addition, the glycosylation sites were validated by another software n-glyde (https://bioapp.iis.sinica.edu.tw/nglyde/help. html) [21] .the antigenic variation among the spike glycoproteins of 2019-ncov and sars-cov were determined using netctl 1.2 server (https://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ netctl/) [22] . the server predicts the peptide mhc class i binding; proteasomal c terminal cleavage and transporter associated with antigen processing (tap) protein transport efficiency. cytotoxic t lymphocyte (ctl) epitopes of these two spike glycoproteins were determined separately and results were compared for the epitopes with score [ 0.7. the ctl epitopes were validated by another software mhc-i binding predictions from iedb analysis resource (https://tools.iedb.org/mhci/) [23] .to determine the structural divergence, the protein homology modeling was performed by using the spike glycoprotein sequences of 2019-ncov and sars-cov using hhpred server (https://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/ tools/hhpred) [24] . the generated models for s glycoproteins of 2019-ncov (pdba) and sars-cov (pdbb) were based on cryo-em structure of the sars coronavirus spike glycoprotein (pdb id 6acc). the generated models were superimposed to determine the structural divergence using superpose version 1.0 (https://wishart.biology.ualberta.ca/ superpose/), which calculates the protein superposition using a modified quaternion approach. deviation between the structural divergences was calculated according to the local and global rmsd values [25] .our phylogenetic analysis exhibits that a 2019-ncov is closely related with bat sars-like coronavirus. however, both 2019-ncov and bat sars-like coronavirus emerged from the sars coronavirus (fig. 1) . suggesting that 2019-ncov is newly spilled coronavirus into humans in china is closely related to sars-cov. further, complete sequence alignment data suggested that spike glycoprotein sequences of 2019-ncov and sars-cov exhibits 76.2% identity, 87.2% similarity and 2% gaps (fig. 2a) . this data suggests that spike glycoprotein of 2019-ncov exhibits higher sequence similarity with 12.8% of difference with sars-cov. additionally, we looked into the sequence variation of minimal receptor-binding domain (rbd) from 270 to 510 amino acids which are required for its interaction with cellular receptors. we have found that spike glycoproteins exhibits 73.3% identity, 83.9% similarity and 0.4% gaps, suggesting 16.1% difference and the tertiary structure of minimal rbd has been shown in fig. 2b . the significant variation in minimal rbd of s-glycoprotein suggests that 2019-ncov may have alteration in virus binding capacity and infectivity into the host cell receptor.the potential glycosylation sites among both the spike glycoproteins were compared and presented in table 1 . as compared with the sars-cov, we have found that spike glycoprotein of 2019-ncov exhibits novel glycosylation sites such as ngtk, nfti, nltt, and ntsn that may be the results of sequence variation. in addition, we have also found that the 2019-ncov spike glycoprotein exhibits common glycosylation sites that were also present in sars-cov such as nitn, ngti, nitn, nfsq, nesl, nctf and nntv (table 1) . our glycosylation data suggests that the 2019-ncov may interacts with host receptor using novel glycosylation sites that may affect the internalization process and associated pathogenesis.the antigenic variation in both spike glycoproteins of 2019-ncov and sars-cov were compared to determine the antigenicity. we have found that most of the ctl epitopes are novel from the sars-cov. however, six epitopes risncvady, cvadysvly, rsfiedllf, rvdfcgkgy, mtsccsclk and vlkgvklhy were found to be identical (represented in italics) in both the spike glycoproteins (table 2 ). in addition, some of the the table shows a comparison of predicted n-glycosylation sites in spike glycoprotein of wuhan-hu-1-2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and sars coronavirus-2003 (sars-cov) strains. n-glycosylation potential (0.5) was taken as cutoff. the n-glycosylation sites were determined by netnglyc 1.0 [20] and validated by n-glyde server [21] *italics indicates the differences between n-glycosylation sites between the two spike glycoproteins structural, glycosylation and antigenic variation between 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov)... 17 the table shows a comparison of predicted ctl epitopes in spike glycoprotein of wuhan-hu-1-2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and sars coronavirus-2003(sars-cov) strains. epitopes were generated by netctl 1.2 [22] and validated by iedb analysis resource server [23] where scores [ 1.25 shows highest sensitivity and specificity towards mhc class i. italics indicates the identical ctl epitopes *italics showing common epitopes with one amino acid change between the two spike glycoproteins epitopes were identified with change in single amino acid (represented in italics*). the antigenicity data suggested that the 2019-ncov exhibits few antigenic similarities with sars coronavirus that might be associated with the similar antigenic response and therefore can be considered as the one of preventive strategies based on s glycoprotein peptide based vaccine designed for sars-cov. in addition, the novel epitopes may be used to design newer effective vaccines.the overall difference of 12.8% in s glycoprotein sequences and 23.6% difference in the minimal receptorbinding domain influenced us to look for the structural divergence in spike glycoproteins of 2019-ncov and sars-cov. the generated models were compared for the structural divergence. we have found that two glycoproteins exhibits 1.38 local rmsd value in angstrom (fig. 3 ) which showed that in spite of 12.8% variation in the sequences there was an insignificant structural divergence among the spike glycoproteins. this results suggests that the attachment inhibitors designed for sars-cov may be used as the current choice of therapy for 2019-ncov.the outbreak of 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) in china has raised alarm due to its associated global risk. the management of 2019-ncov human infections depends on characteristics of the virus, including the transmission capability, the severity of resulting infection, and availability of vaccines or medicines to control the impact of the coronavirus disease . coronaviruses are zoonotic in nature that means they transmit from animals to humans [26] . however, the exact source of 2019-ncov has not been yet identified. the evolution of 2019-ncov may be the result of rna recombination among the viruses as previously reported in the case of sz3 strain of sars-cov which arose from the recombination of existing rf4092 and wiv16 bat strains. likewise, the wiv16 bat strains generated likely from the two other prevalent bat sars-cov strains [27] . the most frequent breakpoint for recombination exist in the s gene of coronavirus that encodes for spike (s) protein which comprises of minimalbinding domain and orf8 upstream that encodes an accessory protein [28] . considering the prevalence and large genetic diversity of existing coronaviruses, their close proximity and frequent recombination has expected the emergence of novel variants. our phylogenetic analysis revealed that a 2019-ncov arises from the predecessors strains of sars-coronaviruses.in the present study, we have shown the sequence divergence, differences and similarity in the glycosylation sites and antigenic variation in spike glycoprotein of 2019-ncov and compared with the sars-cov strain. our amino acid sequence alignment data suggests a significant variation of 12.8%. in addition, we have found 23.6% difference in minimal receptor-binding domain of s glycoprotein. the significant variation in minimal receptorbinding domain of s-glycoprotein suggests that 2019-ncov may have alteration in virus binding capacity and infectivity into the host cell receptor [29] .we have found novel glycosylation sites in the spike glycoprotein of 2019-ncov suggesting that virus may utilize different glycosylation to interact with its receptors. we have also found that the glycosylation sites in minimal receptor-binding domain exhibits similar sites to other coronaviruses [30] . while comparing the antigenic sites, we have found that 2019-ncov exhibits novel ctl epitopes that may results in distinct antigenic response as compared to sars coronavirus. these novel ctl epitopes may impart opportunities for the development of peptide based vaccine for the prevention of 2019-ncov. however, some of the epitopes were found to be similar in both the glycoproteins, suggesting that sars-associated peptide based vaccine might be used for the prevention of 2019-ncov in the current scenario. in this regard we have found one of the ctl epitope rvdfcgkgy has been used to design peptide based vaccine for sars-cov and was found to be effective in various animal models [31] . furthermore, we have found insignificant structural divergence between two glycoproteins which suggests that the attachment inhibitors designed for sars-cov may be used as the current choice of therapy for 2019-ncov.variation in amino acid sequences and distinctive antigenicity of 2019-ncov suggests that although the current virus infection is not severe, it has a potential to become pandemic. moreover, we identified an insignificant structural divergence in the spike glycoproteins that suggests that although the virus has changed its sequence its structure remains the same. the data also suggests the scope of coronavirus specific attachment inhibitors as the choice of therapy in the current pandemic situation.collectively, for the first time our results exhibit the emergence of human 2019-ncov is closely related to predecessor sars-cov. consequently, it should be renamed as sars-cov-2 and owing it's pandemic potential it should be declared as a public health emergency of international concern at the earliest. foremost our data provide the evidence that 2019-ncov uses various novel glycosylation sites as sars-cov and may have a potential to become pandemic owing its antigenic discrepancy. further, demonstration of novel ctl epitopes may impart opportunities for the development of peptide based vaccine for the prevention of 2019-ncov. additionally our revelation of similar antigenic sites in both 2019-ncov and sars coronavirus, suggests the scope of sars-associated peptide based vaccine for the prevention of 2019-ncov. the similarity in the spike glycoprotein structures suggests the use of coronavirus specific attachment inhibitors as the current choice of therapy for 2019-ncov.the world health organization was informed of pneumonia cases of unknown etiology in wuhan, hubei province, china on 31 december 2019 (1). a novel coronavirus was identified as the cause of the disease by further investigations (2) . this new virus is related to the previously identified sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus) and has been named sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2). symptoms of the coronavirus disease 2019 are acute onset of fever, myalgia, dyspnea, cough and evidence of ground-glass lung opacities. we do not have currently an effective vaccine or treatment for the covid-19 patients and continued research is urgently needed to address the challenges posed by the pandemic.transmembrane spike (s) glycoprotein of the sars-cov-2 interacts with the angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) presented on the surface of human cells and mediates viral entry (3) (4) (5) . both the viral spike and the human ace2 (hace2) are glycoproteins and their glycosylation affects their interactions or vaccine design. covid 19 spike glycoprotein forms a trimeric structure on the surface of the virus envelope (6) . each spike protein consists of an s1 and an s2 subunit; the s1 subunit mediates binding of the virus to the ace2 receptor while the s2 subunit enables fusion of the virion with the cell membrane and initiates viral entry. sars-cov-2 has 10 to 20 times higher affinity for the ace2 receptor than the sars-cov (3) which may be, in part, related to glycosylation of the proteins. sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein carries 22 n-glycosylation sequons 4 (6) and at least 3 sites of mucin-type o-glycosylation were predicted (7) but were not yet observed experimentally. the latest analysis shows that 20 out of the 22 n-glycosylation sequons are occupied by complex, hybrid and oligomannosidic structures. some of the sequons are predominantly occupied by oligomannose structures which could have influence on the trimeric structure. the studies also detected one o-glycopeptide occupied at sites, distinct from the predicted furin cleavage site at the s1/s2 boundary (6, 8, 9) .in this study, we report analysis of the site-specific glycoforms with focus on the resolution of structural motifs of the identified o-and n-glycopeptides. to this end, we used high-resolution lc-ms/ms with hcd fragmentation and modulated nce (10) to study a recombinant sars-cov-2 s full-length protein expressed in human embryonic kidney (hek 293) cells. our analyses identified 9 occupied o-glycopeptides and 17 n-glycopeptides. we resolved, for the first time, lacdinac and polylacnac structural motifs associated with the n-glycopeptides and we identified novel o-glycopeptides including a glycopeptide near the furin cleavage site of the spike glycoprotein.recombinant sars-cov-2 spike (r683a, r685a, his-tag) protein expressed in hek 293 cell line was obtained from acrobiosystems (newark, de, usa). trypsin gold and glu-c, sequencing grade were from promega (madison, wi), pngase f, neuraminidase, 1-3 and 1-4 betagalactosidase were from new england biolabs (ipswich, ma).aliquots of the sars-cov-2 s protein were dissolved in sodium bicarbonate buffer to a final concentration of 1mg/ml. the protein solution was reduced with 5 mm dtt for 60 min at 60 °c, alkylated with 15 mm iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, and digested with trypsin gold (2.5 ng/μl) at 37°c in barocycler nep2320 (pressure biosciences, south easton, ma) for 1 hour.gluc, pngase f, neuraminidase and beta galactosidase digests of tryptic peptides were carried out as described previously (11, 12) with heat inactivation (99 °c for 10 min) prior to the addition of any enzyme.digested proteins were separated using a 120-minute acn gradient on a 250 mm x 75 μm c18 pepmap column at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min as described previously (13) . in brief, peptide and glycopeptide separation was achieved by a 5 min trapping/washing step using 99% solvent a (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 10 μl/min followed by a 90 min acetonitrile gradient at glycopeptides were analyzed using orbitrap fusion lumos mass spectrometer with the electrospray ionization voltage at 3 kv and the capillary temperature at 275°c. ms1 scans were performed over m/z 400-1800 with the wide quadrupole isolation on a resolution of 120,000 (m/z 200), rf lens at 40%, intensity threshold for ms2 set to 2.0e4, selected precursors for ms2 with charge state 3-8, and dynamic exclusion 30s. data-dependent hcd tandem mass spectra were 6 collected with a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap with fixed first mass 110 and 4 normalized collision energy 10, 20 and 35%. etd and ethcd methods used calibrated charge dependent parameters and hcd supplemental activation was set to 15% nce; we used the same chromatographic method and instrument settings for the etd measurements as described above.lc-im-ms/ms experiments were performed on a waters select series cyclic ion mobility mass spectrometer with an acquity m-class solvent system. tryptic peptides were separated using a 75 µm x 150 mm acquity beh c18 column with a 5 cm symmetry c18 trap. peptides were eluted over 60 minutes prior to electrospray ionization and analysis in positive mode. glycoforms of the polybasic peptide were isolated in the quadrupole and fragmented in the trap region prior to ion mobility separations. ion mobility methods entailing five passes of the cyclic device were previously optimized for hexnachex and hexnachexneuac oxonium ions and were used to separate and characterize the oxonium ion fragments of the targeted glycopeptides. traveling wave parameters within the cyclic device were kept at default values, 375 m/s and 22v for the wave velocity and wave height, respectively. calibration for collisional cross section was performed for both single pass and for each of the 5-pass methods using major mix.byonic software (protein metric) was used for the identification of summary formulas of glycans associated with the glycopeptides. independent searches were performed on the data with different collision energy (ce) settings. all spectra of the identified glycopeptides were checked manually for the presence of structure-specific fragments. analysis of the ion mobility data was performed using driftscope (v2.9) by manual extraction of the retention ranges associated with the glycopeptides.we have identified 17 tryptic n-glycopeptides of the sars-cov-2 spike protein occupied by high mannose, hybrid and complex glycans. we have determined their site occupancy by pngasef deglycosylation in 18 o water as described (11) and we find majority of the sequons fully occupied (table 1 ). we have found that two sequons are not glycosylated (n17, n603), that n234 is almost exclusively occupied by high mannose glycans. the remaining 17 sequons are dominated by complex glycans. in addition, we confirmed the presence of core fucosylation on 15 of the occupied sequons (table 1) .we used our recently described workflows, using modulation of collision energy (ce) for selective fragmentation of the glycopeptides (10), to identify structural motifs of the nglycosylated peptides of the sars-cov-2 s protein. we identified the lacdinac structural motif on all the occupied sequons of the sars-cov-2 s expressed in the hek293 cells (table 1) (table 1) and we resolved extensive fucosylation of the core as well as the outer-arms of the n-glycopeptides as described previously (10) . the presence of core fucose was confirmed on 15 sequons and we confirmed the presence of outer arm fucosylation (11, 14) on 7 sequons which is in contrast to the previously published data (8) . this might be a result of slight differences in the hek293 expression systems used or differences in the analytical methods. for example, our study analyzed a modified full-length protein not cleaved by convertases which could potentially cause some differences. it is, however, more likely that the energy optimized workflows improve the structural resolution. we do not achieve complete assignment of all linkages or quantification of the isobaric structures but the presence of these structural motifs, frequently associated with specific biological functions, is clearly established. the overall results show that 6 glycopeptides carry polylacnac motifs, that all sequons occupied by complex glycans carry lacdinac to some degree, and that the lacdinac structures constitute majority (>50%) of the glycoforms on n165 and n1098. this may not necessarily reflect the n-glycoforms of a virion but the hek293 expression system is commonly used for functional studies of the s glycoprotein or the production of vaccine candidates which means that resolution of the structures is highly relevant.previously published data describes one o-glycopeptide occupied at s323 and t325 (6, 8) . we identified the same o-glycopeptides but, in addition, we have identified 8 o-glycopeptides occupied by core-1 and core-2 structures ( table 2) . occupancy of the sites varies from <1% to 9 57% and is very low for at least three of the glycopeptides. however, we detect approximately 13% occupancy with core-1 and core-2 structures at the t678 (figure 2 and 3 ) located near the polybasic furin cleavage site between the s1 and s2 subunits which evolved in the sars-cov-2 s protein (7). this is relevant because o-glycans proximal to the convertase cleavage sites of protein substrates regulate proteolysis (15) exoglycosidase digestion and ethcd fragmentation was used to determine exact sites occupied by glycans. we have identified 9 o-glycopeptides occupied by o-glycans (table 2 ). figure 3 shows a typical etd/ethcd fragmentation spectrum of an o-glycopeptide in this case simplified by non-specific neuraminidase. the fragmentation shows that t687 is the major occupied site as the z6 carries a glycan but the z4 does not; thepeptide is occupied by core-1 ( figure 3a ) as well as core-2 ( figure 3b) structures. in addition, we used a combination of neuraminidase, β1-3 and β1-4galoctosidasesto resolve the hexnac attachment on the o-glycopeptide even in the hcd spectra (supplemental figure 3 ).we chose cims (18) of oxonium ions to determine the structural features of o-glycopeptides of the sars cov-2 glycoprotein. we choose to use cims on the fragment to reduce influence of the peptide backbone on the structural resolution. we were able to confirm the presence of core-2 structures by the dihexnac fragment m/z 407 in the hcd spectra using the orbitrap fusion lumos (figure 2a inset) . the tandem mass spectra obtained from the cims instrument preserve large oxonium ions, such as the intact detached glycan m/z 1022 ( figure 5 ) which confirms that a hexasacharide occupies the o-glycopeptide agc(cam)ligaehvnn(dea)syec(cam)dipigagic(cam)asyqtqtnspr but using beam type fragmentation we could not determine which serine or threonine is occupied. we cannot fully exclude the possibility of contribution from a second glycan at this peptide but neither the etd not the hcd spectra show evidence of another occupied site besides the t678 of this peptide. we have also confirmed the presence of an extended core-1 structure associated with this glycopeptide by the fragments 528 and 819 observed in the spectra ( figure 5b ).we have used cims to separate isomeric oxonium ion fragments of the glycopeptides. we have used the m/z 657 ion to assign sialylation of the core-2 monosialylated structures. we used an optimized procedure based on a hemopexin glycopeptide standard, which we described previously (12) , and we determined ccs of the fragment 657 ( figure 6 ) observed by fragmentation of the glycopeptide with sialyl-t antigen with linkage (α2-3) (ccs 234.9) and by fragmentation of an nglycopeptide with sialyl-lacnac with (α2-6) linkage (ccs 232.8) (data not shown). this is in agreement with the previously published results on the linkages of the sialylated glycans (6, 8) .we resolved two major ims peaks in the cims of the fragment m/z 657 using a one pass method ( figure 7a ). with 5 passes, the first peak was partially separated into two analytes with determined ccss of 232.8 and 234.9 å 2 and a second peak ccs 248.5 å 2 . this is reproducible for all 2hexnac containing structures (supplemental figure 2) . the ccs of the first peak fits exactly the previously observed ccs of sialylated α2-6 lacnac while the ccs of the second peak fits the gal-2-3sa in the mono-sialylated core-2 structure (figure 7, panel a) . we used the cims of the fragment m/z 731 (2hexnac2hex) to determine the ratio of the core-2 structure and the extended core-1 structure. we obtained 2 major peaks using 5 passes of the cims (data not shown); the first peak (drift time:69.70 ms; ccs: 238.8 å 2 ) is consistent with a core-2 structure and the second peak (76.84 ms; ccs: 251.5 å 2 ) with a linear core-1 extended structure with terminal galnac(1-3)gal as described previously (22) . the ratio of the core-1 with terminal galnac(1-3)gal and the core-2 structure is 25/75.we research reported in this publication was supported by the national institutes of health under awards s10od023557, u01ca230692, and r01ca238455 to rg. the content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the national institutes of health.the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. and non-conserved regions of spike glycoproteins between mers-cov, sras-cov, and sars-cov-2.the spike proteins of sars-cov-2 from wuhan, zhejiang, and guandong in china and other countries of the united states, france, australia, and germany were nearly 100% conserved ( supplementary fig. 2 ). next, alignment and phylogenetic analysis of the amino acid sequences of spike proteins in sars-cov-2, mers-cov, and sars-covs showed the difference of sequence conservancy ( fig. 1a and supplementary fig. 1 ). as spike proteins of those five sars-covs had approximately 99.5% homologous a.a. sequence ( supplementary fig. 2 ), we used sars-ns1 as a representative sars-cov for further analysis.currently, bioinformatic approaches of epitope analysis are welldeveloped and successfully proved to identify both weak and strong epitopes that might be experimentally ignored. 8 in our study, using antibody epitope bioinformatic tools (supplementary materials and methods), we computed sequence-based antibody epitope scores in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 (fig. 1b) . the sars-cov-2 had significantly lower antibody epitope score compared with mers-cov (p < 0.0001; fig. 1c ) and significantly higher antibody epitope score compared with sars-cov (p < 0.01; fig. 1c ), indicating the spike proteins have significantly variable antigenicity. next, we conducted sequence alignment to acquire the conserved and nonconserved regions of spike proteins ( fig. 1d and supplementary  fig. 1 ). compared with the conserved regions, the non-conserved regions had significantly higher antibody epitope score (fig. 1e, f) , indicating the non-conserved regions of spike proteins are more antigenic.as the surface accessibility of epitope is also important for the interaction of antibody and antigen, we evaluated the surface epitope accessibility of spike proteins (fig. 1g ), no significant difference was observed in the total protein level (fig. 1h) . however, non-conserved regions showed significantly higher surface epitope accessibility score (fig. 1i, j) , indicating the nonconserved regions of spike proteins are more available for antibody recognition.furthermore, we identified the antibody epitopes considering both the antibody epitope and surface epitope accessibility scores ( fig. 1k and supplementary materials and methods). the antibody epitopes of spike proteins were compared between mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 ( fig. 1l) , and the unique, shared, and public epitopes were identified (fig. 1m) . no public epitope could be found. although five epitopes were shared between sars-cov and sars-cov-2, there were apparent dominances of unique epitopes in sras-cov (83.9%) and sras-cov-2 (85.3%) (fig. 1n) .moreover, among these unique epitopes, 92.7% of them were derived from the non-conserved regions and the combinations of the conserved and non-conserved regions (fig. 1o) , indicating the divergence of spike proteins could lead to major changes in the antibody epitopes.next, according to the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the sars-cov spike protein complexed with human ace2 protein (pdb accession: 6acj), 9 we used swiss-model bioinformatic tool 10 to model the three-dimensional complex structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein binding to its host cell receptor novel antibody epitopes dominate the antigenicity of spike glycoprotein. . . m zheng and l song ace2 (fig. 1p) . we discovered that the sars-cov-2 spike rbd was in the interaction interface with ace2 (fig. 1p) . in the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein, we found seven epitopes and only one of them was from the conserved region homologous to sars-cov, yet the rest are novel epitopes using the combinations of conserved and non-conserved regions (fig. 1q) . furthermore, we identified the high-score epitopes with both high epitope and surface accessibility score ( fig. 1r and supplementary fig. 3 ). finally, we found 11 high-score epitopes for sars-cov-2 and only 1 of them was from the conserved region, but located outside rbd; nevertheless, we identified two novel high-score epitopes located in rbd (fig. 1s) , which might be used to block the spike-ace2 interaction to inhibit the sars-cov-2 infection. in summary, our study showed that, although sars-cov-2 spike protein displayed high (75.5%) homology toward that of sars-cov, the novel epitopes contributed to 85.3% of all the antibody epitopes, 85.7% of the rbd antibody epitopes, and 90.9% of the high-score antibody epitopes in sars-cov-2, implying remarkable alterations in the antigenicity. notably, these results might explain why the most of the antibodies against sras-cov spike protein were invalidated for sars-cov-2 in the previous study 5 and indicate the necessity to develop new antibodies and vaccines specific for sars-cov-2. importantly, we discovered novel and high-score antibody epitopes for sars-cov-2 spike protein and analyzed their rbd locations, which should be potent and specific targets for developing antibody drugs and vaccines of sars-cov-2 in the future. taken together, our study found that the antigenicity of sars-cov-2 spike protein is remarkably dominated and altered by novel antibody epitopes, which provides promising leads for the research and development of vaccine for sars-cov-2. fig. 1 antibody epitope analysis of spike proteins in mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2. a alignment and phylogenetic analysis of the amino acid sequences of spike proteins in sars-cov-2, mers-cov, and five representative sars-covs (total sequence alignment in supplementary fig. 2) . b antibody epitope scores in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2; the grey dashed lines indicate the default threshold of antibody epitope scores. c density plot of the distributions of antibody epitope scores in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2, with colors showing tail distribution probability, and the grey dashed lines representing the first, second, and third quartiles, respectively. the results were considered statistically significant when *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001 using kruskal-wallis test. d illustration of conserved and non-conserved sequences. e density plot of the distributions of antibody epitope scores in conserved and non-conserved sequences in the comparison between spike proteins from sars-cov and sars-cov-2. the results were considered statistically significant when *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001 using wilcoxon's signed-rank test. f the distributions of antibody epitope scores in conserved and non-conserved sequences in the comparison between spike proteins from mers-cov and sars-cov-2 using wilcoxon's signed-rank test. g surface epitope accessibility scores in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2, the grey dashed lines indicate the default threshold of surface epitope accessibility scores. h the distributions of surface epitope accessibility scores in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 using kruskal-wallis test. i the distributions of surface epitope accessibility scores in conserved and non-conserved sequences in the comparison between spike proteins from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 using wilcoxon's signed-rank test. j the distributions of surface epitope accessibility scores in conserved and non-conserved sequences in the comparison between spike proteins from mers-cov and sars-cov-2 using wilcoxon's signed-rank test. k illustration of antibody epitope identification. l venn plot of antibody epitopes in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2. m illustration of analyzing intersected epitopes of unique, shared and public groups. n plot of the number of intersected epitopes in spike proteins of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2. o number of shared and unique epitopes from conserved, non-conserved, and the combination of conserved and nonconserved regions in the spike proteins of sars-cov and sars-cov-2. the color and size of cycles represent the number of epitopes, and the "×" represents no epitope could be found. p structural model of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (yellow) in complex with its human cell receptor ace2 (cyan). the model was superimposed using the structure of the sars-cov spike protein and ace2 protein complex (pdb accession: 6acj) as template. the gray shadow represents the receptor-binding domain (rbd). q number of epitopes located in rbd and non-rbd from conserved, non-conserved, and the combination of conserved and non-conserved regions in the sars-cov-2 spike protein. the color and size of cycles represent the number of epitopes, and the "×" represents no epitope could be found. r plot of antibody epitope scores and surface epitope accessibility scores in the epitopes, each dot represent an epitope, the green dashed lines indicate the medians, respectively, the dot color represents the source of epitopes, the dot size represents the amino acid length of epitopes, the "*" represents the epitopes located in rbd, and the light green area shows the high-score epitopes. s detail information of the high-score antibody epitopes from the sars-cov-2 spike proteinacquisition and processing of sequence data.a total of 10 whole genome sequences of sars-cov-2 (2019-ncov) were downloaded on 30 january 2020 from the gisaid database 1 multiple sequence alignment was conducted on the spike protein sequences of sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 using clustal w 2 . next, the pairwise scoring matrix of the distances was computed using fitch similarity from aligned sequences 3 . and, based on the resulting scoring matrix, phylogenetic tree was constructed using neighbor-joining method 4 .the sequence-based antibody epitopes score was analyzed using bepipred-2.0 bioinformatic tool 5 , and the antibody epitope candidates were analyzed using the default threshold value of 0.50. the surface epitope accessibility was computed using emini surface accessibility scale method 6 . next, the antibody epitope candidates were filtered by the surface accessible epitopes score using the default threshold value of 1.0 (fig. 1k) .the 3-d cryo-electron microscopy structure of the sars-cov spike protein complexed with its host cell receptor ace2 protein were derived from protein data bank (pdb accession: 6acj) ) 7 . next, according to the sars-cov-2 spike protein sequence, the swiss-model bioinformatic tool 8 was used to model the 3-d complex structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein binding to ace2.all statistical analyses were performed by using r v3.6.1. wilcoxon signed-rank for two samples and kruskal-wallis test with dunn's multiple comparison test for multiple samples were performed using the stats package as appropriate. all statistical tests used 0.05 as the significance level, and p ≥ 0.05 were considered as not significant (n.s.), and p < 0.05coronaviruses (covs) typically cause mild to severe respiratory and intestinal infections in mammals, including humans [1] [2] . it belongs to the family coronaviridae which comes under the order nidovirales [3] [4] . covs are classified into four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus. the first two genera (i.e., alpha-and betacoronavirus mainly infect mammals, whereas, gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses foul avian species.more than 60 years have passed since the identification of first human cov (hcov) was documented as a respiratory tract modulator [5] [6] . in december 2019, several clusters (epidemiologically associated with a seafood and animal market in wuhan, china) of patients suffering fever, illness, severe respiratory tract infections and pneumonia of unknown origin were reported [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . this finally leaded to the isolation of a novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and the disease recently named as covid-19. world health organization (who) already characterized covid-19 as world pandemic [13] . this infection has spread over to 216 countries and territories [14] .before covid-19 outbreak, there were six species of hcovs that were reported for their association with respiratory tract infections ( table 1) .[ table 1 [15] . the seventh strain of hcov is novel coronavirus (2019-ncov aka sars-cov-2) which is taxonomically belongs to the betacoronavirus genre and possesses high nucleotide sequence similarity with sars-cov and mers-cov [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] .sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded rna viruses surrounded by an envelope (figure   1 ).sars-cov-2, about 30,000 bp single-stranded rna virus, utilizes host cellular components to accomplish its physiological affairs such as viral entry, the assembly and budding of virions, genomic replication, and protein synthesis, subsequently executes pathological damage to the host [21] [22] [23] . thus, punctuating any juncture of viral life cycle by small molecules, peptides, vaccines or physical elements may potentially gain therapeutic benefit to host. depending on several viral targets (figure 1 ) related to the stages of viral life cycle, novel anti-viral agents may be designed and discovered. nonetheless, different structure-based modeling techniques and numerous ligandbased computational techniques may be fruitful strategy to design newer inhibitors against sars-cov-2 [24] [25] [26] .meanwhile, the hefty menace posed by current outbreak of covid-19, it is obvious that the scientific community is looking for effective drugs within plausible time. the coherent development and well organised strategies remains the only hope to triumph the battle against partially known sars-cov-2. now, repurposing of existing anti-viral drugs based on previous ground work of closely related coronavirus and rapid screening of drug databases is one of the strategic and economic ways to eradicate covid-19 pandemic [27] [28] [29] . the traditional bioinformatics and chemo-informatics approaches readily generated new data into sars-cov-2 research at an explosive pace.considering the severity of the spread of covid-19, this study is in-line with the concept of finding the chemo-types to expedite the process of anti-hcov drug discovery. here, an exquisite picture of the recent research including target-based and biological screening is provided. we includes virtual (in silico) as well as experimental (in vitro) screening approaches in response to sars-cov-2 reported until april 2020. the main aim is to provide the scientific community with an overview of the medicinal chemistry of sars-cov-2 to allow the rapid development of antiviral agents. this work, a part of our rational drug design and discovery [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] , is an initiative to pave the way of anti-sars-cov-2 drug discovery paradigm that could help to facilitate the global efforts to fight against covid-19.the details structural biology of the sars-cov-2 virus is yet to be discovered. it contains a 30,000 bp, single-stranded positive sense rna genome encapsulated within a membrane envelope ( figure   1 ) [37] [38] [39] . it recruits multi-subunit replication machinery [40] . the genome of sars-cov-2 comprises about 30,000 nucleotides with ten open reading frames (orfs). the 3′ terminal regions encodes for several structural proteins including spike (s), membrane envelope (e) and nucleocapsid (n) proteins (figure 1) whereas, the 5′ terminal orf1ab responsible for two viral replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1b. upon proteolytic cleavage of these two viral replicase polyproteins fabricate sixteen non-structural proteins (nsp) (figure 2 ) [37] . [ table 2 may be placed here]the spike glycoprotein of coronavirus is the main conciliator of entry into the host cells [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] .this spike glycoprotein contains (i) a large ecto-domain, (ii) a single-pass transmembrane anchor, and (iii) a short c-terminal intracellular tail [44] . the ecto-domain consists of a receptor-binding unit s1 and a membrane-fusion s2 stalk. basically, the receptor-binding unit s1 binds to a specific cell surface receptor via its receptor binding domain (rbd), whereas the trimeric s2 fuses the viral membranes and host cell to enable the entry of viral genomes into host cells (figure 2 ).researchers already identified angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as a functional receptor for sars-cov [48] [49] [50] [51] . the crowned shaped spike glycoprotein of covs binds directly to ace2 on the host cells surface and plays critically in virus infection. ace2 is expressed widely with conserved primary structures throughout the animal kingdom. ace2 from fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, to mammals can potentially interact with rbd of sars-cov-2 [44]. therefore, blocking of the rbd and ace2 interaction is an obvious therapeutic intervention to treat diseases caused by covs. specific antibodies or small molecular inhibitors can disrupt the interaction of rbd with ace2.among the set of sixteen non-structural proteins, nsp5 is identified to play a pivotal role in the life cycle of sars-cov-2 replication as well as maturation (figure 2) . being a key component, the nsp5 is termed as main protease (mpro). like other rna viruses, the functional significance of this mpro or chymotrypsin-like protease (3clpro) of sars-cov-2 emerges as an attractive drug target for the development of anti-viral agents.recently, the 3d structure of 3clpro of sars-cov-2 was reported [1] . like other coronaviruses mpro, it also consists of three domains. the domain i (comprising of 8-101 amino acids) and ii rdrp active site is appointing two successive aspartate residues projected from a beta-turn structure making them surface accessible through the nucleotide channel. as configured to sars-cov, the robson [54] performed a preliminary bioinformatics studies to propose a synthetic vaccine and peptidomimetic antagonist against the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2. the author employed q-uel language to perform the bioinformatics approach. krsfiedllfnkv was identified as a well conserved sequence motif that corresponds to the known cleavage sites of the sars virus. this sequence motif formed the basis for design of specific synthetic vaccine epitope and peptidomimetic agent [54] .a group of scientists from the cairo university, egypt predicted covid-19 spike binding site to a cell-surface receptor namely glucose regulated protein 78 (grp78) by employing structural bioinformatics in combination with protein-protein docking [55] . notably, the region iv was supposed to be a pivotal driving force for grp78 binding (predicted binding affinity: -9.8 kcal/mol). prediction of this binding site sheds light on the mode of envelope protein recognition by the grp78 substrate-binding domain for future endeavours [55] .in a molecular modeling study to explore potential inhibitors of rna binding to n terminal domain (ntd) of nucleocapsid protein (n protein), sarma et al [56] pointed out two potential hits namely zinc000003118440 and zinc000000146942 (figure 3 ).the authors employed two ntd structures of n proteins namely 2ofz and 1ssk. firstly, a set of diverse compounds from asinex and maybridge library were docked. then 15 compounds for each of the targets were prioritized with significant docking scores. further mm-gbsa binding free energy, pharmacokinetic properties (qikprop), drug-likeness (swissadme) and molecular dynamics (md) studies were performed to screen the compounds. out of these two potential hits, one compound was a theophylline derivative. since theophylline derivative is commonly used as a bronchodilator, hence, the author further screened approved bronchodilators against the n protein 8 rna binding site of covid-19 [56] . the approved bronchodilators showed mm-gbsa binding affinity in the following order:formeterol> terbutaline > ipratropium bromide >tiotropium bromide > theophylline > salbutamol.recently, native or non-native protein-protein interactions (ppis) are emerged as a target for structure-based screening of small molecule. it may be an alternative drug design paradigm which could accelerate anti-viral drug discovery against various pathogens [57] [58] [59] . since the orthostatic/allosteric stabilization of non-native ppis of sars-cov-2 nucleocapsid protein results abnormal protein oligomerizaion and finally leading to loss of viral activity. scientists from national chung hsing university, taiwan acclaimed non-native ppis of n-terminal domain of the mers-cov nucleocapsid protein (mers-cov n-ntd) [60] . they reported a crystal structure of mers-cov n-ntd in a non-native dimeric configuration which turned a target for virtual screening of orthosteric stabilizers from acros and zinc drug databases. this finding provides valuable insight and further motivations into the design of new anti-virals based on stabilizing a non-native protein interaction interface of n protein [60] .gupta and co-workers [61] employed computational techniques to explore the best possible structure of the sars-cov2 e protein present in the pdb database. the author reported that e protein of sars-cov-2 is a pentameric protein comprised of 35 α-helices and 40 loops. near about 8,000 compounds were docked whereas 700 compounds were prioritized with significant affinities or docking scores. the docking study with e protein of sars-cov-2 and phytochemicals like belachinal, macaflavanone e &vibsanol divulged that amino acids such as v25 and f26 play crucially in the binding interactions. the functional behaviour of e protein of sars-cov-2 after 200ns molecular dynamics studies revealed that α-helix and loops of e protein escapades random movement and modulates normal ion channel activity to succour the pathogenesis in human and other vertebrates. unlikely the random manoeuvre of the e protein of sars-cov-2 gets reduced after binding with inhibitors [61] .khan et al [62] pinpointed three fda-approved drugs such as remdesivir, saquinavir and darunavir) and two small molecules (flavone and coumarin derivatives) as possible inhibitors of 3clpro by target-based virtual screening. a number of 8,000 compounds were docked and top 700 primary hits were distinguished by significant affinities or docking scores. then the binding interaction between the active site residue of 3clpro and the selected compounds were extensively scrutinized using the plif module in moe. further, md simulation and binding free energy calculations were recorded to evaluate the dynamic behaviour, stability of protein-ligand contact, and binding affinity of the hit compounds [62] .kandeel and al-nazawi [63] reported statistics of pairwise sequence comparison matrix among the main protease (mpro) of covs. a high pairwise sequence alignment identity (96.08%) was found between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 mpro, whereas only 51.61% identity was exposed for sars-cov-2 and mers-cov mpro. in consequence, the number of amino acid differences between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 mpro was only 12, while it was 153 between sars-cov-2 and mers-cov mpro. an early virtual screening (vs) study of fda approved drugs (retrieved from selleckchem inc.) against the first resolved sars-cov-2 mpro crystal structure (pdb: 6lu7) was performed. that helps the repurposing of already approved drugs to eradicate covid-19 [63] . detailed scanning of the binding mode of these drugs with sars-cov-2 mpro conferred that hydrophobic and hydrogen bonding interactions were the main imperators for binding.interestingly, telbivudine (figure 3) , an anti-hepatitis b virus agent, bind with the sars-cov-2mpro through hydrogen bond interactions with amino acid residues s49 and q189. moreover, a broad spectrum antiviral agent, ribavirin (figure 3) , interacted with the sars-cov-2 mpro by forming hydrogen bonds with side chain amino acid residue q189 and the backbone amino acid residue t25. ribavirin is officially approved against respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) infection. it is also used in combination with interferon α2b against hepatitis c virus. moreover, it also exhibited potency against sars-cov infection [63] .in a study to distinguish potential active herbs against 2019-ncov, ma et al. leading to viral eradication [52] .in another study, elfiky [67] reported sars-cov-2 rdrp targeted molecular docking study of some anti-polymerase drugs which have been approved for use against various viruses. not surprisingly, ribavirin, remdesivir, sofosbuvir, galidesivir, and tenofovirexhibited promising binding affinity against sars-cov-2 rdrp. these results were also consistence with previous one [52] . guanosine derivative (idx-184), setrobuvir, yak has potential to block the sarscov-2 strain. since these drugs have already passed the adme and toxicity measurements these may be used as a new therapeutic drug candidate against sars-cov-2.lung and co-workers [68] identified theaflavin, a polyphenolic constituent present in black tea, hydrophobic interactions were found to be the driving force in binding. theaflavin formed hydrogen bonds with d452, r553 and r624 of sars-cov-2 rdrp. additionally, a π-cation interaction was found with r553 [68] .calligari et al [69] autodockvina scoring −10.0 kcal/mol) was recognised as the best autodock vina scoring drug. in spite of hcv main protease measure very low identity with the sars-cov-2 homolog (only 7.5%), thus this finding was thunderbolt [69] . therefore, it may be inferred that the similar topology of active site of both proteases was the main driving force in binding of simeprevir. it fitted well into the two hydrophobic pockets fringed the catalytic dyad h41-c145 of sars-cov-2 mpro. it was also fitted into the hydrophobic loop f181-f185. moreover, the binding of simeprevir to sars-cov-2 protease was anchored by three hydrogen bonding interactions with e166, g143 and n142 [69] . in the same article, the homology modelling of sars-cov-2 s protein by the aid of itasser server was done by using sars-cov spike (pdb: 5wrg, 5 × 58, 5xlr) as a template.global pairwise sequence alignment measured that sars-cov-2 s protein shares about 76% of its primary sequence with its homolog in addition an overall similarity of 87%. autodock vina molecular docking of the homology modelled structure of s protein predicted umifenovir (db13609), enfuvirtide (db00109), and pleconaril (db05105) as potential inhibitors [69] .in a study to repurposing existing drugs against current pandemic covid-19, wu et al [70] predicted some potential drugs acting on a certain target or multiple targets of sars-cov-2.bioinformatics based homology modelling was utilised to build possible targets such as viral mpro, plpro, rdrp, helicase, spike, etc. next, these modelled proteins and human relative proteins including human ace2 and type-ii transmembrane serine protease enzymes were forwarded to systematically analyse and screen zinc drug database (zdd) along with database of traditional chinese medicine and natural products and the database of commonly used 78 anti-viral drugs [70] .this study seems to be very interesting due to its deep discussions and vast target predictability.the lead candidates emerged from this study required in vitro and in vivo studies for further conformations.the new drug discovery and development takes more than five to ten years of investigations as well as cost billions of dollars. thus, drug repositioning is the only cheap strategy to respond immediately. fda-approved drugs justify safe alternatives if at least modest anti-sars-cov-2 activity can be achieved. currently, academia and industry personnel are involved in the testing of -(i) approved drugs and/or (ii) drug candidates in clinical trials. the in vitro screenings of fda approved drugs as well as the compounds which are currently under clinical trials phases were well documented [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] and the need for further in vivo testing to facilitate drug discovery efforts against sars-cov-2.nafamostat ( figure 5) is a potent membrane fusion inhibitor of mers-cov [78] . now, it has been found to inhibit the 2019-ncov infection (ec 50 besides, this is agent marketed as an anti-protozoal drug [79] and also reported to possess antiviral against a broad range of viruses [80] .in the same article, wang et al [72] remdesivir have been illustrated few years ago [81] . now, it has been found to effectively block sars-cov-2 infection at low-micromolar concentration [72] . it exhibited half-maximal effective concentration (ec 50 ) of 0.77 μm against 2019-ncov in vero e6 cells with half cytotoxic concentration (cc 50 ) > 100 μm; selectivity index (si) > 129.87). remdesivir also inhibited virus infection in sars-cov-2 sensitive human liver cancer huh-7 cells [72] .a widely-used anti-malarial drug chloroquine (cq, figure 6 ) has been used for more than 70 years [82] , now, found to shows clinical potency against covid-19.[ figure 6 may be placed here]the molecular mechanism of chloroquine against sars-cov is known [83] [84] . very recently, wang et al [72] reported time-of-addition assay that explained the function of cq (ec 50 = 1.13 μm; cc 50 > 100 μm; si > 88.50) at both entry as well as at post-entry stages of the novel corona virus infection in vero e6 cells.the same group of researches further evaluated the in vitro anti-sars-cov-2 effect of hydroxychloroquine (hcq, figure 6 ) sulphate, a derivative of cq, in comparison to cq [73] .hydroxychloroquine sulphate [85] was introduced long before, first synthesized in 1946 [73] . upon introduction of a hydroxyl group into cq resulted in about 40% less toxic agent than cq in animals. both cq and hcq are weak bases and restrict the virus infection by-(i) triggering endosomal ph which is essential for virus/cell fusion and (ii) interfering with the glycosylation of ace2 receptor and spike protein of coronavirus [73] . additionally, both cq and hcq obstructed the sars-cov-2 transport from early endosomes (ees) to endolysosomes (els). interestingly, it exhibited very distinct binding mode than the other covalent or peptidomimetic 3clpro inhibitors [43] .in vitro screening of 48 drugs was screened against hcovs infection [71] . immunofluorescence analysis with an antibody specific for the viral n protein of sars-cov-2 was scored for each drug treated cells. the dose-response curve (drc) was developed after analysing the confocal microscope images of both viral n protein and cell nuclei. remdesivir (sars-cov-2 ic 50 = 11.41 µm), lopinavir (sars-cov-2 ic 50 = 9.12 µm) and chloroquine (sars-cov-2 ic 50 = 7.28 µm) were used as reference drugs. consequently, 24 drugs showed good activities with ic 50 ranges of 0.1 to 10 μm. an anti-helminthic drug, niclosamide, and a corticosteroid used to treat asthma and allergic rhinitis, ciclesonide, emerged as sars-cov-2 inhibitors with ic 50 of 0.28 μm and 4.33 μm, respectively. notably, niclosamide reduces mers-cov replication by inhibiting skp2 activity leading to enhancement in autophagy [86] . thus, a similar mechanism may be introduced by niclosamide to hamper sars-cov-2 infection [71] .zhang et al [87] reported structure-based design, synthesis and activity assessment of α-ketoamides as broad-spectrum inhibitors of coronavirus and enterovirus replication. these showed good inhibitory properties against the isolated proteases, viral replicons, virus-infected huh7 cells. nearequipotency against the enteroviruses, alphacoronaviruses, and betacoronaviruses was observed upon optimization of the p2 substituent of the α-ketoamides. the cyclopentylmethyl and cyclohexylmethyl at the p2 substituent disposed low-micromolar ec 50 values against the three virus genera in cell cultures. compound 11r was found promising against mers-cov in virus-infected huh7 cells [87] . by dint of high similarity among the 3clproteases of coronavirus, it is awaited that compound 11r is expected to display good anti-viral activity against covid-19 in near future.meanwhile, the clinical trial studies of some molecules have been started against covid-19 mainly through drug repurposing [88] ; those are depicted in table 2 .the medicinal chemistry of sars-cov-2 infection is still in its infancy, with target specific lead molecules are yet to identify. this study deals with the information currently available on potential targets for therapeutic invention and screening of new compounds or drug repurposing against sars-cov-2 (figure 8 ).as the 3d structure of the sars-cov-2 3c-like protease bears 96% identity with its ortholog from (sars-cov). interestingly, the residues involved in the catalysis, substrate binding and dimerization of 3clpro are 100% conserved. in addition, the polyprotein pp1ab sequences are highly similar (86% identity). depending upon the alike substrate specificities and high identities, we are of the opinion that the previous progress of specific sars-cov inhibitors development can undertaking a course of action on the design and discovery of inhibitors against sars-cov-2. our group have already explored the structural properties important for sars-cov viral 3clike protease inhibitors [30] . recently in a collaborative work, our research team suggested the implications of naphthyl derivatives against sars-cov-2 plpro enzyme though in-depth ligandreceptor interaction analysis [89] . we have already predicted some in-house glutamine-based molecules to use as a seed for drug design and optimization against plpro of sars-cov-2 [90].in fact, some other anti-viral drugs can also be taken into consideration. in this regards, target-based vs is one of the most important approaches used for drug repurposing. the computational analyses are not subordinate but are a right choice to enrich the basal knowledge during the long process leading to drug development (figure 8) . until any clear-cut treatment approach is prescribed for covid-19, the use of already approved drugs is only alternative strategy. howbeit, relatively limited computational resource or biased in silico screening may scattered the linearity of drug discovery of novel coronavirus. in the near future, the virtual hits may serve as a promising drug like molecule against sars-cov-2 after details in vitro and in vivo laboratory investigations.moreover, the availability of x-ray crystal structures of the important viral proteins will trigger more exhaustive docking calculation of diverse chemotypes. it is crystal clear that the prevention of covid-19 requires strong and sustainable global collaborative work [91] . data sharing is exigent to fill the knowledge gaps on this global pandemic. further progress of the scientific understanding regarding the structural and molecular biology of sars-cov-2 will legitimate the shape of lead compounds to achieve therapeutic goals. the development of medicinal chemistry through bioinformatics and chemo-informatics studies remains indispensable with a bit of savoir faire.the authors have no conflict of interests. sk. abdul amin is a senior research fellow at department of pharmaceutical technology, jadavpur university, kolkata, india. he is working under the guidance of tarun jha. his research area includes design and synthesis of small molecules with anti-cancer and anti-viral properties, computational chemical biology, and large-scale structure-activity relationship analysis. he has published sixty two research/review articles in different reputed peer-reviewed journals and three book chapters. he enjoys a good conversation on science, regional history, contemporary art and books.tarun jha, a professor at department of pharmaceutical technology, jadavpur university, kolkata, india, has supervised 16 ph.d. students and guided nine research projects funded by different organizations. he has published more than 150 research articles in different reputed peer-reviewed journals. his research area includes design and synthesis of anti-cancer small molecules. prof. jha is a member of the academic advisory committee of national board of accreditation (nba), new delhi, india. in early december 2019, the chinese health authorities reported several cases of pneumonia of unknown cause that had originated in wuhan, a city in the hubei province of china. the causative agent of this outbreak was identified to be a virus that belonged to the sarbecovirus subgenus, orthocoronavirinae subfamily which was previously referred to by its interim name 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) [1, 2] and was later named as sars-cov-2 [3] . due to the rapid spread of covid-19, the world health organization (who) declared it a global pandemic in march 2020 [4] . by mid-june 2020, over 7 million cases have been confirmed across 188 countries, resulting in more than 400,000 deaths [5] . unfortunately, there is no approved antiviral treatment or preventive vaccine for coronaviruses in humans. since supportive care is the only recommended interim treatment, it is imperative to identify repurposable lead compounds to treat covid-19 until a sars-cov-2-specific drug and a vaccine is developed.although the coronavirus genome consists of numerous conserved druggable enzymes, including papain-like protease (plpro), 3c-like protease (3clpro), non-structural proteins rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and helicase, development of clinically approved antiviral therapies has proven to be a difficult task [6] . the surface structural spike glycoprotein (s), a key immunogenic cov antigen essential for virus and host cell-receptor interactions, is an important target for therapeutic development. the spike protein consists of an n-terminal s1 subunit (receptor binding) and a c-terminal s2 subunit (membrane fusion). the s1 subunit contains the receptor-binding domain (rbd) which attaches to the host membrane, thus playing an important role in viral entry. sars-cov-2 utilizes the ace2 receptor for entry and the transmembrane protease, serine 2 (tmprss2) for spike protein priming [7] . crystallographic studies have shown that sars-cov-2 binds to the ace2 receptor, with a binding mode nearly identical to that of sars-cov [8] [9] [10] [11] . the binding affinity of the ace2 receptor to the rbd of the sars-cov-2 spike protein is reported to be significantly higher as compared to sars-cov [10, 11] .based on the importance of virus membrane fusion events in the viral life cycle and its infectivity, the spike protein of sars-cov-2 was targeted for drug screening. this study utilizes a virtual compound screening methodology to identify potential small molecule inhibitors specific to the rbd of the spike protein of sars-cov-2. the primary objective here was to screen existing fda-approved drugs in silico followed by experimental validation to identify repurposable drugs targeting further clinical validation.a model for sars-cov-2 spike protein was constructed using the crystal structure (6vsb_chain a) to correct missing residues. the amino acid sequence identity between the target sequence (genbank: qhd43416.1) and template (6vsb_chain a) was 99.58%. the sars-cov-2 model showed an rmsd of 0.4683 å relative to the crystal structure (6vsb_chain a). structure assessment of the predicted model using the ramachandran plot showed 90.04% residues in the most favored regions with 2.03% outliers. none of the outliers contained the residues present at the active site of the protein. the predicted model was further used for in-silico studies.initial docking simulations resulted in seven compounds with three compounds, antiviral825, antiviral2083 and antiviral 2981 with docking scores of -6.30, -6.20 and -6.00 kcal/mol from the enamine antiviral library, and four compounds, ponatinib, imatinib, ergotamine, and glecaprevir with docking scores of -8.47, -7.50, -8.00 and -7.10 kcal/mol from the zinc15 fda library respectively. the above libraries were chosen to help identify a repurposable drug that can potentially inhibit the sars-cov-2. the screened compounds had the highest affinities within their respective sets and had one or more binding conformations at the ace2 binding domain of the spike protein. the binding poses for the seven screened compounds at the rbd are shown in fig. 1a , and structures and descriptions of the screened drugs are given in table s3 under supplementary data. further verification of binding affinity for these compounds was done via molecular dynamics (md) simulations.the stability of the md simulations was evaluated using rmsd and rmsf diagrams. the rmsd diagram of protein (rbd)-ligands simulations (provided under fig. s3 ) showed that the simulations for all compounds remained stable after 8ns. also, the rmsds for all the seven simulations were around 4-6 å (fig. s3 ). the rmsf diagram showed that the structural fluctuations in the protein at the ligand binding site was stable (fig. s4 ).free energy calculations with the mm-gbsa method (fig. 1b) indicated that the compounds in the fda-approved drug library had significantly lower binding free energies (i.e., higher affinities) than the drugs in the enamine library, which is in agreement with the docking scores. ponatinib, an abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor used to treat leukemia [12] , displayed the most negative binding free energy -43.199 ± 3.467 kcal/mol, while imatinib, glecaprevir, and ergotamine also show binding free energies within a close range to ponatinib. the high affinity of the screened compounds is visible when compared with the negative control dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso), which is ineffective against coronaviruses [13] . interactions and the binding free energies of all the seven compounds with the spike protein are provided in fig. s2 and table s2 under supplementary data.among the screened drugs, abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib was selected for in vitro studies since it has also shown to inhibit sars-cov and mers-cov by blocking endosomal fusion at the cell-culture level [6, [13] [14] [15] . as shown in fig. 1a (inset and md simulation video supplied under supplementary information), imatinib is predicted to bind strongly to the rbd of spike protein, forming hydrogen bonds and pi-pi stacking interactions with tyr 449 and pi-pi stacking interactions with tyr 489, both of which are critical for interaction with ace2 [11, 16] . it has been suggested that tyrosine-kinase inhibitors do not affect the cleavage of the spike protein but inhibits spike-mediated endosomal fusion [6, 13, 14] . the high affinity of tyrosine-kinase inhibitors towards the spike protein is deduced from the initial docking results, where both imatinib and ponatinib have shown highly negative binding free energies. based on promising in silico data, and initial viral plaque assay results (fig. s1 ), imatinib was chosen to be advanced for further experimental validation.first, we evaluated the toxicity of imatinib when incubating the compound on vero cells for one hour or eight hours. in the experiments where the compound remained on the cells for eight hours toxicity was measured at concentrations of 25 µm, 12.5 µm, 6.3 µm, and 3.2 µm. however, in the 1-hour design, no toxicity was observed. next, we evaluated the ability of imatinib to inhibit replication and entry. at concentrations as low as 0.2 µm the compound was effective in suppressing 50% of plaque formation in the 8-hr design, and the ic50 value determined using linear regression was 130 nm. consistent with the toxicity data, toxicity was observed between 25 and 3.2 µm. the compound also showed efficacy in the 1-hour design, with higher ic50 values. these data indicate that imatinib inhibits virus replication in vitro as shown in fig. 2a and 2b.to evaluate if imatinib inhibits viral entry, we performed two fusion assays: endosomal (vero) and plasma membrane (vero-tmprss2) as shown in fig. 2c and 2d, respectively. based on cytotoxicity, at concentrations below 15 nm, no toxicity was observed microscopically (red arrow in the graph). vsv-g control revealed 100% infectivity (cytopathic effect at every concentration below this, suggesting the inhibitor did not affect vsv-g entry. vsv-g particles cells do not carry spike proteins and thus, no significant entry inhibition occurred, suggesting that entry inhibition is likely mediated through the spike protein. however, the effect on vero-tmprss2 cells was less clear for any of the coronaviruses used when compared to the vsv-g control. a similar level of toxicity was observed in these cells. it is worth noting that toxicity is probably the result of incubating cells with imatinib for 16 hours in the assay. taken together, there is evidence that imatinib binds to the spike and prevents viral entry, possibly by preventing endosomal entry.the binding kinetics of imatinib to the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike protein was evaluated using biolayer interferometry (bli). the analysis showed that imatinib binds to the sars-cov-2 rbd protein with an on-rate (kon) as (3.22 ± 0.45) × 10 3 m -1 s -1 and dissociates with an off-rate (koff) as (7.07 ± 1.87) × 10 -3 s -1 . this resulted in an equilibrium affinity constant (kd) 2.32 ± 0.9 µm which is calculated as a ratio of the koff and kon rates. the affinity values indicate that 50% of the rbds on the surface spike glycoproteins will be occupied at micromolar concentrations of imatinib. the affinity of imatinib for the sars-cov-2 spike rbd protein is still higher than the previously published values of nanomolar range (ligand id: bdbm13530) [17] for imatinib on abl tyrosine kinase [18] and in range with the micromolar affinities of imatinib to the src-family kinases, frk and fyn [19] indicating that our calculated binding affinity results are realistic, as shown in fig. 2e .there is an urgent need for finding a treatment against the current pandemic of the sars-cov-2. health experts across the globe are trying to use existing clinically approved drugs to treat patients until a specific drug is developed. the present study, using a combination of computational techniques followed by in vitro studies, identified imatinib, an fda approved anti-cancer drug as a potential treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. the data indicate inhibition of sars-cov-2 replication at ic50 of 130 nm. also, docking experiments show that imatinib forms strong interactions with the rbd of sars-cov-2 and has shown in-vitro inhibition. our results suggest that imatinib prevents viral replication and that, in analogy with other studies using coronaviruses, the most likely mode of action of imatinib is via inhibition of the spike protein. nevertheless, we cannot completely exclude that inhibition of tyrosine kinase also resulted in significant inhibition of virus replication [13, 14] . therefore, it is likely that imatinib causes both inhibition of cellular kinase and virus fusion resulting in inhibition of virus replication. the results provide further evidence supporting the recent clinical trials (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04346147, nct04357613, nct04356495, nct04394416 and, nct04422678) in covid-19 patients with imatinib.a swiss-model server [20] was used to construct a homology model of the sars-cov-2 spike protein using the crystal structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (pdb:6vsb_chain a) as the template [10] . the genome sequence wuhan-hu-1 (genbank: mn908947.3) was used as a representative of the sars-cov-2. spike protein sequence (genbank: qhd43416.1) was used as the target sequence [21] . the swiss-model structure assessment tool was used to validate the quality of the predicted model.around 5,800 compounds, including 3,700 nucleoside-like compounds from the enamine targeted antiviral library (enamine.net) and 2,100 food and drug administration (fda)approved drugs from the zinc15 database [22] were used for molecular docking. all molecules were prepared with obabel [23] from .sdf or .mol2 format to .pdbqt format. the 3d compound structures from the enamine library were resolved by obabel --gen3d command. the docking file of the protein model was prepared with mgltools v1.5.4 [24] and the molecules were docked at the rbd of the spike protein via autodock vina 1.1.2 [25] . the grid box of 40×60×30 size with 1.0 å spacing was fixed around the rbd (thr323-val511) of spike protein. docking simulations were done in three replicates, and the conformation with the highest binding score was recorded. the batch processing of docking and data collection was performed using an in-house script. data were analyzed statistically using r studio [26] and graphs were constructed with ggplot in r [27]. the ligand-receptor interactions were studied using schrödinger maestro [28], and molecules with high docking scores were selected from each screening library for further studies.most stable conformations of the selected molecules from docking simulations were further analyzed through md simulations which were performed using schrödinger-desmond [29] . the protein-ligand complexes were prepared by schrödinger's protein preparation wizard [30] . structures were refined by capping the c and n termini of the protein, adding missing hydrogens, optimizing hydrogen bonds, and were finally minimized using the opls3e force field [31] . a molecular dynamics system was built for each of the processed ligand-receptor complexes. the system was solvated in an orthorhombic box using the spc solvent model with a buffer distance of 10 å. the system charge was neutralized with na + or clions using a 0.1m concentration of nacl. all simulations were performed using desmond's default relax protocol with the opls3e force field. heavy atoms in the system were initially minimized with restraints under 10 °k, then further restrained by increasing the temperature to 300 °k and lastly relaxed under 300 °k npt ensemble to get the equilibrium status for the system. after relaxation, the simulation systems were performed under a 300 °k npt ensemble at 1.01325 bar pressure for 10.00ns. trajectories and related energy terms were recorded at an interval of 20 ps. post simulation analysis including complex root mean square deviation (rmsd), and ligand/protein root mean square fluctuation (rmsf) were performed via schrödinger simulation interaction diagrams.the molecular mechanism-general born surface area (mm-gbsa) binding energies [32] were calculated based on the last 5 ns of the simulation trajectories. twenty-six frames (one every 10 frames) were selected from 250 frames for mm-gbsa calculation for each molecule. prime mm-gbsa used the vsgb 2.1 solvation model [33] with the opls3e force field.the free binding energy δg was calculated with the equation below:codon-optimized mers-cov (isolate emc, vg40069-g-n) and sars-cov (isolate cuhk-w1; vg40150-g-n) s expression plasmids (pcmv) were ordered from sino-biological and subcloned into pcaggs using the clai and kpni sites. the last 19 amino acids of the sars-cov spike protein were deleted to enhance pseudovirus production. codon-optimized cdna encoding sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein (isolate wuhan-hu-1) with a c-terminal 19 amino acid deletion was synthesized and cloned into pcagss in between the ecori and bglii sites. pvsv-egfp-dg (#31842), pmd2.g (#12259), pcag-vsv-p (#64088), pcag-vsv-l (#64085), pcag-vsv-n (#64087) and pcaggs-t7opt (#65974) were ordered from addgene. s expressing pcaggs vectors were used for the production of pseudoviruses, as described below. the cdna encoding human tmprss2 (nm_005656; ohu13675d) was obtained from genscript. the cdna fused to a c-terminal ha tag was subcloned into pqxcih (clontech) in between the noti and paci sites to obtain the pqxcih-tmprrs2-ha vector.vero-tmprss2 cells were produced by retroviral transduction. to produce the retrovirus, 10 μg pqxcih-tmprrs2-ha was co-transfected with polyethylenimine (pei) with 6.5 μg pbs-gagpol (addgene #35614) and 5 μg pmd2.g in a 10 cm dish of 70% confluent hek-293t cells in opti-mem i (1x) + glutamax. retroviral particles were harvested at 72 hours post-transfection, cleared by centrifugation at 2000 x g, filtered through a 0.45μm low protein-binding filter (millipore), and used to transduce vero cells. polybrene (sigma) was added at a concentration of 4 μg/ml to enhance transduction efficiency. transduced cells were selected with hygromycin b (invitrogen).hek-293t cells were maintained in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem, gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs), 1x non-essential amino acids (lonza), 1mm sodium pyruvate (gibco), 2mm l-glutamine (lonza), 100 μg/ml streptomycin (lonza) and 100 u/ml penicillin. vero, vero-tmprss2, and veroe6 cells were maintained in dmem supplemented with 10% fbs, 1.5 mg/ml sodium bicarbonate (lonza), 10mm hepes (lonza), 2mm l-glutamine, 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 100 u/ml penicillin. all cell lines were maintained at 37°c in a 5% co2, humidified incubator.the protocol for vsv-g pseudovirus rescue was adapted from whelan and colleagues (1995). briefly, a 70% confluent 10 cm dish of hek-293t cells was transfected with 10µg pvsv-egfp-dg, 2µg pcag-vsv-n (nucleocapsid), 2µg pcag-vsv-l (polymerase), 2µg pmd2.g (glycoprotein, vsv-g), 2µg pcag-vsv-p (phosphoprotein) and 2µg pcaggs-t7opt (t7 rna polymerase) using pei at a ratio of 1:3 (dna:pei) in opti-mem i (1x) + glutamax. forty-eight hours post-transfection the supernatant was transferred onto new plates transfected 24 hours prior with vsv-g. after a further 48 hours, these plates were retransfected with vsv-g. after 24 hours the resulting pseudoviruses were collected, cleared by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 5 minutes, and stored at -80°c. subsequent vsv-g pseudovirus batches were produced by infecting vsv-g transfected hek-293t cells with vsv-g pseudovirus at a moi of 0.1. titres were determined by preparing 10-fold serial dilutions in opti-mem i (1x) + glutamax. aliquots of each dilution were added to monolayers of 2 × 10 4 vero cells in the same medium in a 96-well plate. three replicates were performed per pseudovirus stock. plates were incubated at 37°c overnight and then scanned using an amersham typhoon scanner (ge healthcare). individual infected cells were quantified using imagequant tl software (ge healthcare). all pseudovirus work was performed in a class ii biosafety cabinet under bsl-2 conditions at erasmus medical center.for the production of mers-cov, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 s pseudovirus, hek-293t cells were transfected with 10 µg s expression plasmids. twenty-four hours post-transfection, the medium was replaced for in opti-mem i (1x) + glutamax, and cells were infected at a moi of 1 with vsv-g pseudotyped virus. two hours post-infection, cells were washed three times with optimem and replaced with medium containing anti-vsv-g neutralizing antibody (clone 8g5f11; absolute antibody) at a dilution of 1:50,000 to block remaining vsv-g pseudovirus. the supernatant was collected after 24 hours, cleared by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 5 minutes and stored at 4°c until use within 7 days. coronavirus s pseudovirus was titrated on veroe6 cells as described above.transduction experiments were carried out by incubating pseudovirus with imatinib at concentrations ranging from 0-125nm in opti-mem i (1x) + glutamax for 1 hour at 37°c. pseudovirus-imatinib mixes were added to monolayers of 2 × 10 4 vero or vero-tmprss2 cells in a 96-well plate. plates were incubated for 16 hours before quantifying gfp-positive cells using an amersham typhoon scanner and imagequant tl software.to determine the toxicity profile of imatinib, we performed the mtt assay using a 1-hr and an 8hr design. briefly, a serial dilution of imatinib was prepared and incubated on vero cells for 1 hr at 37 o c. subsequently, cells were washed, further cultured for eight hrs. in the 8-hr design, cells were incubated with a serial dilution of imatinib for eight hours without a washing step.we tested serial dilutions of imatinib for its ability to neutralize sars-cov-2 (german isolate; gisaid id epi_isl 406862; european virus archive global # 026v-03883) using a plaque reduction neutralization test (prnt) as previously described [34] . fifty μl of the virus suspension (200 spot forming units) was added to each well and incubated at 37°c for either 1 hr. following incubation, the mixtures were added on vero cells and incubated at 37°c for either 1hr or 8 hrs. the cells incubated for 1 hr were then washed and further incubated in medium for 8 hrs. after the incubation, the cells were fixed and stained with a polyclonal rabbit anti-sars-cov antibody (sino biological; 1:500). staining was developed using a rabbit anti-sars-cov serum and a secondary alexa-fluor-labeled conjugate (dako). the number of infected cells per well were counted using the imagequant tl software.the binding kinetics of imatinib on sars-cov-2 rbd protein were studied using a blitz® system (fortébio). experiments were conducted using the advanced kinetics mode, at room temperature and a buffer system consisting of 1x kinetics buffer (fortébio), 5% anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso; sigma aldrich). recombinant his-tagged sars-cov-2 rbd protein (40592-v08h; sino biological) at a concentration of 10 µg/ml was loaded on anti-penta-his (his1k) biosensors (fortébio), followed by a washing step with assay buffer to block the unoccupied sensor surface. the association and dissociation profiles of imatinib (sigma aldrich) were measured at various concentrations (four-point serial dilutions from 6.25 µm to 0.78 µm). a reference biosensor loaded in the same manner with 0 µm imatinib was used for baseline correction in each assay. the final binding curves were analyzed with the blitz pro 1.3 software (fortébio) using the 1:1 global-fitting model. the assay was repeated twice to validate the binding constants. here, data is represented as mean ± sd. wuhan, hubei province of china in december 2019. the death toll rose to more than 68,000 among 1,250,000 confirmed cases around the globe (until april 4, 2020) [1] . the virus causing covid-19 is named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). based on the phylogenetic studies, the sars-cov-2 is categorized as a member of the genus betacoronavirus, the same lineage that includes sars coronavirus (sars-cov) [2] that caused sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in china during 2002 [3] . recent studies showed that sars-cov-2 has a close relationship with bat sars-like covs [4, 5] [7] ].interestingly, s glycoprotein is characterized as the critical determinant for viral entry into host cells which consists of two functional subunits namely s1 and s2. the s1 subunit recognizes and binds to the host receptor through the receptor-binding domain (rbd) whereas s2 is responsible for fusion with the host cell membrane [ [8] , [9] , [10] ]. mers-cov uses dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) as entry receptor [11] whereas sars-cov and sars-cov-2 utilize ace-2 (angiotensin converting enzyme-2) [12] , abundantly available in lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes, suggesting s glycoprotein as a potential drug target to halt the entry of sars-cov-2 [13] .according to recent reports, neutralizing antibodies are generated in response to the entry and fusion of surface-exposed s protein (mainly rbd domain) which is predicted to be an 4 important target for vaccine candidates [ [10] , [14] , [15] ]. however, sars-cov-2 has emerged with remarkable properties like glutamine-rich 42 aa long exclusive molecular signature (dsqqtvgqqdgsednqtttiqtivevqpqlemeltpvvqtie) in position 983-1024 of polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) [16] , diversified receptor-binding domain (rbd), unique furin cleavage site (prrar↓sv) at s1/s2 boundary in s glycoprotein which could play roles in viral pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment [17] . to date, few genomic variations of sars-cov-2 are reported [ [18] , [19] ]. there is growing evidence that spike protein, a 1273 amino acid long glycoprotein having multiple domains, possibly plays a major role in sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. viral entry to the host cell is initiated by the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of s1 head. upon receptor-binding, proteolytic cleavage occurs at s1/s2 cleavage site and two heptad repeats (hr) of s2 stalk form a six-helix bundle structure triggering the release of the fusion peptide.as it comes into close proximity to the transmembrane anchor (tm), the tm domain facilitates membrane destabilization required for fusion between virus-host membranes [ [20] , [21] ]. insights into the sequence variations of s glycoprotein among available genomes are key to understanding the biology of sars-cov-2 infection, developing antiviral treatments and vaccines. in this study, we have analyzed 320 genomic sequences of sars-cov-2 to identify mutations between the available genomes followed by the amino acid variations in the glycoprotein s to foresee their impact on the viral entry to host cell from structural biology viewpoint.all available sequences (320 whole genome and surface glycoprotein sequences of sars-cov-2) related to the covid-19 pandemic were retrieved from ncbi virus variation resource repository (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/) [22] . in addition, all 40 s glycoprotein sequences from different coronavirus families were retrieved for phylogenetic 5 analysis. the ncbi reference sequence of sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein, accession number yp_009724390 was used as the canonical sequence for the analyses of spike protein variants.variant analyses of sars-cov-2 genomes were performed in the genome detective coronavirus typing tool version 1.13 which is specially designed for this virus (https://www.genomedetective.com/app/typingtool/cov/) [23] . for multiple sequence alignment (msa), genome detective coronavirus typing tool uses a reference dataset of 431 whole genome sequences (wgs) where 386 wgs were from known nine coronavirus species.the dataset was then aligned with muscle [24] . entropy (h(x)) plot of nucleotide variations in sars-cov-2 genome was constructed using bioedit [25] . mega x (version 10.1.7) was used to construct the msas and the phylogenetic tree using pairwise alignment and neighborjoining methods in clustalw [26, 27] . tree structure was validated by running the analysis on 1000 bootstraps [28] replications dataset and the evolutionary distances were calculated using the poisson correction method [29] .variant sequences of sars-cov-2 were modeled in swiss-model [30] using the cryo-em spike protein structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6vsb) as a template. the overall quality of models was assessed in rampage server [31] by generating ramachandran plots (supplementary table 1 ). pymol and biovia discovery studio were used for structure visualization and superpose [32, 33] . 6 multiple sequence alignment of the available 320 genomes of sars-cov-2 were performed and 483 variations were found throughout the 29,903 bp long sars-cov-2 genome with in total 115 variations in utr region, 130 synonymous variations that cause no amino acid alteration, 228 non-synonymous variations causing change in amino acid residue, 16 indels, and 2 variations in non-coding region (supplementary table 2 ). among the 483 variations, 40 variations (14 synonymous, 25 non-synonymous mutations and one deletion) were observed in the region of orf s that encodes s glycoprotein which is responsible for viral fusion and entry into the host cell [34] . notable that, most of the sars-cov-2 genome sequences were deposited from the usa (250) and china (50) (supplementary fig. 1 ). positional variability of the sars-cov-2 genome was calculated from the msa of 320 sars-cov-2 whole genomes as a measure of entropy value (h(x)) [35] . excluding 5′ and 3′ utr, ten hotspot of hypervariable position were identified, of which seven were located at orf1ab (1059c>t, 3037c>t, 8782c>t, 14408c>t, 17747c>t, 17858a>g, 18060c>t) and one at orf s (23403a>g), orf3a (25563g>t), and orf8 (28144t>c) respectively. the variability at position 8782 and 28144 were found to be the highest among the other hotspots ( fig. 1 ).the phylogenetic analysis of a total of 66 sequences (26 unique sars-cov-2 and 40 different coronavirus s glycoprotein sequences) was performed. the evolutionary distances showed that all the sars-cov-2 spike proteins cluster in the same node of the phylogenetic tree confirming the sequences are similar to refseq yp_009724390 (fig. 2) . bat coronaviruses has a close evolutionary relationship as different strains were found in the nearest outgroups and clades (bat coronavirus bm48-31, bat hp-beta coronavirus, bat coronavirus hku9) conferring that 7 coronavirus has vast geographical spread and bat is the most prevalent host (fig. 2) . in other clades, the clusters were speculated through different hosts which may describe the evolutionary changes of surface glycoprotein due to cross species transmission. viral hosts reported from different spots at different times is indicative of possible recombination.the s glycoprotein sequences of sars-cov-2 were retrieved from the ncbi virus fig. 2 ). 8 alterations of amino acid residual charge from positive to neutral (h49y, r408i, h519q), negative to neutral (d111n, d614g, d936y), negative to positive (d1168h, d1259h), and neutral to positive (n74k, s247r) were seen in variants qhw06059, qhs34546, qis61422, qis61338, qik50427, qis30615, qis60978, qis60582, qio04367, and qhr84449 respectively due to substitution of amino acid that differ in charge. the remaining 15 variants were mutated with the amino acids that are similar in charge (fig. 4 a) . the sars-cov-2 spike protein variants were superposed with the cryo-electron microscopic structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein [8] . l5f, n74k, e96d, f157l, g181v, s247r, g476s, v483a, d1168h, and d1259h variants were excluded from superposition due to absence of respective residues in the 3d structure of template (pdb: 6vsb). the superposition showed that most of the residual change were causing incorporation of bulky amino acid residues (t29i, h49y, l54f, s221w, a348t, h519q, a520s, a930v, d936y, and a1078v) in place of smaller size residue except y28n, d111n, r408i, d614g, and f797c (fig. 4 b-p) . fig. 3) . the s2 subunit of spike protein, especially the heptad repeat region 2, fusion peptide domain, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail were found to be highly conserved in the sars-cov and the sars-cov-2 variants while the s1 subunit was more diverse, specifically the n-terminal domain (ntd) and receptor-binding domain (rbd).covid 19 is one of the most contagious pandemics the world has ever had with 1,250,000 confirmed cases to date (april 4, 2020) and the cases have increased as high as 5 times in less than a month [1] . phylogenetic analysis showed that the sars-cov-2 is a unique coronavirus presumably related to bat coronavirus (bm48-31, hp-betacoronavirus). during this study, we [15] , [38] , [39] , [40] ]. likewise, a number of studies targeting sars-cov-2 spike protein have been undertaken for the therapeutic measures [41] , but the unique structural and functional details of sars-cov-2 spike protein are still under scrutiny. we also found a variant (r408i) at receptor binding domain (rbd) that mutated from positively charged arginine residue to neutral and smaller sized isoleucine residue (fig. 4 i) . this change might alter the interaction of viral rbd with the host receptor because the r408 residue of sars-cov-2 is known to interact with the ace2 receptor for viral entry [42] . similarly, alterations of rbd (g476s, v483a, h519q, and a520s) also could affect the interaction of sars-cov-2 spike protein with other molecules which require further investigations. qia98583 and qis30615 variants were found to have an alteration of alanine to valine (a930v), and aspartic acid to tyrosine (d936y) respectively in the alpha helix of the hr1 domain. previous reports have indicated that hr1 domain plays a significant role in viral fusion and entry by forming helical bundles with hr2, and mutations including alanine substitution by valine (a1168v) in hr1 region are predominantly responsible for conferring resistance to mouse hepatitis coronaviruses against hr2 derived peptide entry inhibitors [43] . this study hypothesizes the mutation (a930v) found in that of sars-cov-2 might also have a role in the emergence of drug-resistance virus strains. also, the mutation (d1168h) found in the heptad repeat 2 (hr) sars-cov-2 could play a vital role in viral pathogenesis.the sars-cov-2 s protein contains additional furin protease cleavage site, prrars, in s1/s2 domain which is conserved among all 320 sequences as revealed during this study ( supplementary fig. 3 ). this unique signature is thought to make the sars-cov-2 more virulent than sars-cov and regarded as novel features of the viral pathogenesis (ref 11).according to previous reports the more the host cell protease can process the coronavirus s can accelerate viral tropism accordingly in influenza virus [[9] , [44] , [45] , [46] ]. apart from that, this could also promote viruses to escape antiviral therapies targeting transmembrane protease tmprss2 (clinicaltrials.gov, nct04321096) which is well reported protease to cleave at s1/s2 of s glycoprotein [47] . comparative analyses between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein showed 77% similarity between them where the most diverse region was .the sequences of the s proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were aligned and the full-length alignment is shown. accession numbers of sequences used in the analysis are found in the methods section.supplementary figure 2. sequence alignment of the s1/s2 region of sars-cov-2 with representatives of betacoronavirus lineages. the s protein sequence of 15 isolates of sars-cov-2 were aligned with representatives of all four betacoronavirus lineages (lineages are denoted by the letters a, b, c, and d). the sequence for the alphacoronavirus hcov-229e is also included in the alignment. displayed is the region corresponding to the s1/s2 cleavage site. red border indicates the insert of basic arginines identified for sars-cov-2 sequences. α: alphacoronavirus; β: betacoronavirus. accession numbers of sequences used in the analyses are found in the methods section. coronaviruses are zoonotic pathogens that are well known to evolve environmentally and infect many mammalian and avian species [1] . these diverse viruses often have effective transmission and immune evasion strategies, especially when outbreaks occur within dense human populations. in the past two decades, coronavirus outbreaks have arisen in human populations around the world, each with unique features but also sharing several similarities. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) emerged in 2002 in guangdong province, china, causing an outbreak that spread to 26 countries, with more than 8000 infections and 774 deaths and a case fatality rate of 9.5% [2] . more recently, the ongoing middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) outbreak that originated in 2012 in saudi arabia has spread to 27 countries with 2494 infections and 858 deaths, with a case fatality rate of 34.4% [3] . the recent surfacing of the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 (first identified on december 12th, 2019) was initially detected in wuhan, hubei province, china, and has now spread globally via travelers and breached the boundaries of 182 countries/regions [4, 5] . on march 11th, 2020, the world health organization officially declared a global pandemic. the rapidly evolving situation has prompted most affected countries to impose tight restrictions on border movements and unprecedented statewide lockdown measures. at the time of writing (april 06th, 2020), over 1.2 million cases and approximately 70,000 fatalities have been reported globally [5] . similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 infections in the early stages of the outbreak were observed in family clusters and hospital personnel [4, [6] [7] [8] . the outbreak occurring during the winter is another commonality between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [9] . currently, sustained community-based spread is occurring, which would make sars-cov-2 a community-acquired respiratory coronavirus, along with the other less pathogenic human community-acquired respiratory coronaviruses 229e, oc43, hku-1, and nl63 [10] .clinical signs associated with sars-cov-2 include pneumonia, fever, dry cough, headache, and dyspnea, which may progress to respiratory failure and death [7, 9, 11] . the incubation period for sars-cov-2 seems to be longer than for sars-cov and mers-cov, which have a mean incubation time of 5 to 7 days leading to challenges in contact tracing [12] . preexisting conditions and comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or kidney disease affect the severity of pathogenesis attributed to sars-cov and mers-cov, and thus far, similar patterns seem to exist with sars-cov-2 [7, 11] . sars-cov and mers-cov seem to exhibit deleterious morbidity and mortality on the elderly population (n 60 years of age), with most deaths occurring in this age group, and sars-cov-2 is currently portraying a comparable trend [7] .the coronaviruses belong to the coronaviridae family and the orthocoronaviridae subfamily, which is divided in four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus. sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 are all betacoronaviruses, a genus that includes many viruses that infect humans, bats, and other domesticated and wild animals [13] . betacoronaviruses have many similarities within the orf1ab polyprotein and most structural proteins; however, the spike protein and accessory proteins portray significant diversity [14] . mers-cov has maintained a stable genome since its emergence in 2012, unlike other coronaviruses that readily evolve and can undergo notable recombination events [15] .alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses including sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2, and other human coronaviruses like hcov-nl63 are thought to have originated in bats [14] [15] [16] . gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses are reported to have an avian origin but are known to infect both mammals and avian species [17] . human infections of bat-origin viruses typically occur through intermediate hosts. for sars-cov, these hosts are palm civets (paguma larvata) and racoon dogs (nyctereutes procyonoides). for mers-cov, the known host is the dromedary camel (camelus dromedarius) [14, 18] . sars-cov antibodies were first detected in palm civets and the animal handlers in wet markets [14] . mers-cov is thought to have been circulating for at least 30 years within the dromedary camel population based on retrospective antibody testing of serum from 1983 [14] . the source of the sars-cov-2 outbreak has been linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan, where it was initially confirmed that the majority of cases with onset prior to january 1st, 2020, were linked to the market [19] . the market sells many species including seafood, birds, snakes, marmots, and bats [7] . the market was closed on january 1st, 2020, and sampling and decontamination have occurred in order to find the source of the infection. origination of sars-cov-2 from bats has been strongly supported, but the presumed intermediate host remains to be identified. recent reports have suggested the malayan pangolins (manis javanica) as a possible intermediate host for sars-cov-2, with putative recombination signals found between pangolin, bat, and human coronavirus sequences [7, 9, [20] [21] [22] . however, the direct precursor sequence to the currently circulating human sars-cov-2 and putative intermediate host remain to be identified.the coronavirus spike protein (s) is the primary determinant of viral tropism and is responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion. it is a large (approx. 180 kda) glycoprotein that is present on the viral surface as a prominent trimer, and it is composed of two domains, s1 and s2 [23] . the s1 domain mediates receptor binding and is divided into two sub-domains, with the n-terminal subdomain (ntd) often binding sialic acid and the c-terminal subdomain (also known as c-domain) binding a specific proteinaceous receptor [24] . the receptor for sars-cov has been identified as angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2), similar to what has been recently identified with sars-cov-2 [9, 14, 25] . hela cells transfected to express or not the ace2 receptor from either human, chinese horseshoe bat, mouse, civet, and pig were infected with sars-cov-2, and it was reported that the virus was able to use all receptors except mouse ace2 [9] . sars-cov-2 was not found to use dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4), the receptor for mers-cov [9, 14, 25] . following receptor binding, the s2 domain mediates viralmembrane fusion through the exposure of a highly conserved fusion peptide [26, 27] . the fusion peptide is activated through proteolytic cleavage at a site found immediately upstream (s2′), which is common to all coronaviruses. in many (but not all) coronaviruses, additional proteolytic priming occurs at a second site located at the interface of the s1 and s2 domains (s1/s2) [28] . the use of proteases in priming and activation, combined with receptor binding and ionic interactions (e.g. h + and ca 2+ ) together control viral stability and transmission, and modulate the conformational changes in the s protein that dictate the viral entry process into host cells [23, 26, 29] . specifically, sars-cov and mers-cov both infect type ii pneumocytes in vivo; however, they individually infect ciliated bronchial epithelial cells and non-ciliated bronchial epithelial cells, respectively [14] . sars-cov-2 can infect ex vivo with the same range of cell culture lines as sars-cov and mers-cov, e.g. vero e6, huh-7 cells, though primary human airway epithelial cells have been reported to be its preferential cell type [15, 25, 30] . overall, how cell tropism of sars-cov-2 reflects a balance of receptor binding, endosomal environment, and protease activation, and the specifics of these mechanisms remain to be determined.the rapid dissemination and sharing of information during the sars-cov-2 pandemic has surpassed that of both mers-cov and sars-cov, where the latter virus was only identified after several months and with a genome available a month later [7] . the sars-cov-2 was identified and a genome sequence was available within a month from the initial surfacing of the agent in patients [7] . initial reports identified that sars-cov-2 contains six major open-reading frames in the viral genome and various accessory proteins [9] . the sars-like (sl) virus batcov-ratg13 (also named bat-sl-ratg13) was observed to have a remarkably high degree of genomic sequence identity with that of sars-cov-2 at over 96% overall sequence identity, and with two other bat sars-like viruses (bat-sl-cov-zc45 and bat-sl-cov-zxc21), both having around 88% sequence identity compared with sars-cov-2 on a genome-wide level [9] . when sars-cov-2 is compared to the clinically relevant human coronaviruses sars-cov and mers-cov, pairwise percent identities fall to around 79.6% and 50% on a genomic level, respectively [4, 9] . the s protein of sars-cov-2 was found to be approximately 75% homologous to the sars-cov spike [7, 9] .in this study, we perform phylogenetic, bioinformatic, and homology structural modeling analyses of sars-cov-2 s, in comparison with closely related viruses. we identify a distinct four residue insert (featuring two arginine residues) that maps to the s1/s2 priming loop of sars-cov-2, which is missing from all other sars-cov-related viruses but present in mers-cov s and in many other coronaviruses. we discuss the importance of this extended basic loop for s protein-mediated membrane fusion and its implications for virus transmission.comparison of amino acid identity of the spike (s) protein of sars-cov-2 with human sars-covto obtain an initial assessment of shared and/or specific features of the sars-cov-2 spike (s) envelope glycoprotein, a protein sequence alignment was performed to compare the sequence of the wuhan-hu-1 strain of the novel coronavirus with that of the closely related human sars-cov s strain tor2 sequence (supplementary figure 1) . the overall percent protein sequence identity found by the alignment was 76% (figure 1(a) ). a breakdown of the functional domains of the s protein, based on the sars-cov s sequence, reveals that the s1 receptor-binding domain was less conserved (64% identity) than the s2 fusion domain (90% identity). within s1, the ntd was found to be less conserved (51% identity) compared to the receptor binding domain (rbd; 74% identity), which is part of the cterminal subdomain (figure 1(a) ). the relatively high degree of sequence identity for the rbd is consistent with the view that sars-cov-2, like sars-cov, may use ace2 as its host cell receptor [9, 25, 31] . interestingly, when the more defined receptor binding motif (rbm) was analyzed (i.e. the region of sars-cov s containing residues that were shown to directly contact the ace2 receptor) the identity between the two sequences drops to 50% (figure 1(a) ), in this case hinting at possible differences in binding residues involved in the interaction with the receptor and/or binding affinities [31] [32] [33] . as expected, within the well-conserved s2 domain, subdomain identities were high for the fusion peptide region (fp, 93% identity), high for the heptad-repeat 1 region (hr1, 88% identity), identical for hr2 (100% identity) and high for both the transmembrane and the c-terminal endodomain (tm, 93% identity; e, 97% identity) (figure 1(a) ).early phylogenetic studies on sars-cov-2 genomic sequences revealed that it clustered closely with sequences originating from sars-like sequences from bats, within lineage b of the betacoronavirus genus. lineage a groups prototypical coronaviruses such as murine hepatitis virus (mhv) and human coronaviruses hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43. the other highly pathogenic coronavirus, mers-cov is found within lineage c, along with related camelderived mers-cov. lineage c also groups viruses from bats and other mammals such as hedgehogs. lineage d contains viral species infecting bats. to gain a better understanding of both shared and specific features of sars-cov-2 s protein, a phylogenetic analysis centered on s protein sequences of representatives of the four betacoronavirus lineages was carried out (figure 1(b) ). fifteen sequences of sars-cov-2 s sequences obtained from ncbi and gisaid from china and various export locations worldwide were analyzed along with representative members of lineages a-d betacoronaviruses. the analysis confirmed that all sars-cov-2 s sequences clustered very closely with bat sars-like sequences, with the closest matching sequence corresponding to a bat coronavirus (bat-cov) strain named bat-sl-ratg13. other closely related sequences found were from bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21. the sub-clade that groups sars-cov-2, bat-sl-ratg13, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-covzxc21 is distinct from the one grouping human and civet sars-cov along with other related bat sars-like viruses, such as bat-sl-lyra3.while bat coronaviruses are the established reservoir for sars-cov-2, the presumed intermediate host remains to be determined. based on the high degree of sequence identity in the rbd of sequences found in malayan pangolins (m. javanica), it was proposed that these mammals could be intermediate hosts [20] [21] [22] . subsequent wholegenome analysis revealed 85.5%-92.% identity to sars-cov-2, which is less than what is observed for bat-sl-ratg13 (96.3%) [34] . to explore the relationship of pangolin covs to sars-cov-2, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of the spike gene of pangolin covs isolated from animals smuggled into china in 2017 (guangxi province, gx) and 2019 (guangdong province, gd), compared to sars-cov-2, batcov-ratg13, and other betacoronaviruses (figure 2 ). pairwise comparison between sars-cov-2 s protein and that of batcov-ratg13 and representative sequences from guangxi pangolin (2017, abbreviated gx here) and guangdong pangolin (2019, abbreviated gd) confirm that overall batcov-ratg13 had the highest identity: 97% overall, 96% and 100% for s1 and s2, respectively (figure 2(a) ). the analysis reveals that pangolin s protein sequences are more divergent overall (92% identity for gx and 89% identity for gd), with most of the divergence concentrating in the s1 domain. notably, while the ntd domain of both gx and gd pangolin sequences fell to 88% and 67% identity, respectively, the rbd domain of the gd domain was confirmed to be remarkably well conserved compared to sars-cov-2 (97% identity compared to 87% identity for gx pangolin and 89% for batcov-ratg13). these observations are in line with previously reported putative recombination events occurring between pangolin, bat, and human betacoronavirus sequences [22] . phylogenetically, pangolin spike sequences from 2017 (gx) form a subclade that groups with ratg13 (figure 2(b) ). interestingly, the 2019 pangolin (gd) sequence appears to branch off early (i.e. it could represent an s protein sequence that diverged earlier) and forms its own subclade, distinct from the ratg13/2017pangolin and sars-cov-2/environmental subclades.an s protein sequence alignment focusing on the rbd region of sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and bat-sars-related viruses reveals that the n-terminal half of the rbd is relatively well conserved, whereas the c-terminal half, which contains the rbm, exhibits more variation (figure 3(a) ). notably, bat-sl-cov-zc45 and bat-sl-cov-zxc21 both have two deletions of 5 and 14 residues within the rbd. the composition of residues found at the two known coronavirus s cleavage sites was performed using alignment data (figure 3(b) and (c)). the region around arginine 667 (r667) of sars-cov s, the s1/s2 cleavage site, aligned well with sars-cov-2 and the bat sarsrelated sequences [56] . notably, an arginine at the position corresponding to sars-cov r667 is conserved for the other five sequences analyzed. the alignment shows that sars-cov-2 contains a four amino acid insertion 681 prra 684 that is not found in any other sequences analyzed, including the closely related bat-sl-ratg13 (figure 3(b) ). together with the conserved r685 amino acid found in sars-cov-2 at the putative s1/s2 cleavage site, the insertion introduces a stretch of three basic arginine residues that could potentially be recognized by members of the pro-protein convertase family of proteases [35, 36] . this insertion was conserved for all 15 sars-cov-2 sequences analyzed (supplementary figure 2) . within the betacoronavirus genus, the presence of a basic stretch of residues at the s1/s2 site is found for a number of species from lineages a (hcov-hku1, mhv, hcov-oc43) and c (mers-cov, batcov-hku5). the four-amino-acid insertion feature appears unique among lineage b viruses, as all other species analyzed in the extended alignment, none contained the stretch of basic residues identified in sars-cov-2 s (supplementary figure 2) . as expected from previous analyses, the s2′ cleavage site, located immediately upstream of the fusion peptide and corresponding to the residue position r797 in the case of sars-cov, was strictly conserved for sars-cov-2 and closely related bat sars-related sequences (figure 3(c) ). of note, the leucine (l) residue found at position 792 of the sars-cov sequence is substituted to serine (s) residue for sars-cov-2 s as well as the bat sars-related sequences. the fusion peptide sequence was found to be well conserved for all sequences analyzed.notably, protein alignment analyses show that pangolin sequences (as for other viruses in betacoronaviruses lineage b) do not show the presence of the predicted proteolytically sensitive s1/s2 fusion activation site present in sars-cov-2 ( figure 4 ). only environmental samples taken from the huanan seafood market appear to also harbor the s1/s2 insert. interestingly, the 2019 pangolin sequence shares the same motif immediately upstream of the s1/s2 insert found in sars-cov-2 s, 675 qtqtns 680 (sars-cov-2 numbering). this is also shared with batcov-ratg13, but not with the other pangolin sequences from 2017, which harbor a distinct motif, 673 hsmssl/f 678 (betacov/pangolin/guangxi/p4l/ 2017 | epi_isl_410538 numbering).to gain a deeper understanding of common and possibly distinguishing structural features found in sars-cov-2 s protein, homology modeling was undertaken. the analysis of modeled proteins provides a powerful tool to identify predicted structural characteristics, which can translate into structure-function changes in the studied protein. our laboratory has previously taken advantage of these tools, for structure-function studies of other covs s proteins [23, 37, 38] . to perform the modeling, it is first necessary to identify a suitable protein structure to be used as template, which will determine the accuracy of the predicted model. the s protein structure of several covs including the following have been reported previously: alphacoronavirus: hcov-nl63 and feline coronavirus uu4 (fcov-uu4); betacoronavirus: hcov-hku1, mhv, sars-cov, and mers-cov; gammacoronavirus: infectious bronchitis virus (ibv); and deltacoronavirus: porcine deltacoronavirus (pdcov) [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] . considering that genome and s protein alignments have showed that the sars-cov-2 belongs to the betacoronavirus genus, we focused our analysis on the s structures from viruses belonging to this genus. to select the template structure, the s figure 4 . amino acid composition of the s1/s2 region of sars-cov-2 and related sequences from bats, pangolins, and environmental samples. s protein sequences from sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and closely related environmental, pangolin, and bat coronaviruses were aligned using mafft. the region corresponding to the s1/s2 cleavage site (red arrow) is shown. accession numbers of sequences used in the analyses are found in the materials and methods section. protein amino acid sequences from four representative betacoronaviruses (hcov-hku1, mhv, sars-cov, and mers-cov) were aligned and the solved s protein structures were compared to determine their amino acid identity and the overall structural organization similarities among these proteins (supplementary figure 3a) . we observed an average of~30% identity among the four viral s proteins at the amino acid level, with the exception of hcov-hku1 and mhv, which share an amino acid identity of 59% at the s protein (supplementary figure 3a) . despite the differences at the amino acid level, the overall structure of the four betacoronavirus s proteins showed a similar folding pattern (supplementary figure 3b) , and major differences can only be spotted at specific sections of the functional domains where flexible loops are abundant (e.g. rbd and cleavage sites). considering this, we used modeller (v. 9.23, university of california) to build a first set of models for the sars-cov-2 s protein based on each of the above-mentioned structures (supplementary figure 4) . interestingly, we found no major differences at the secondary structures among the sars-cov-2 s protein-predicted models depending on the s structure that was used as template for the modeling construction. however, extended flexible loops at the rbd and/or clashes between s monomers at the s2 domain level were observed in the sars-cov-2 s models based on hcov-hku1, mhv, and mers-cov (supplementary figure 4 , first three panels). in contrast, the predicted sars-cov-2 s model based on the sars-cov s structure displayed a much better organized folding and no major clashes were observed between the s monomers (supplementary figure 4 , last panel).as we described previously, the identity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov at the s protein amino acid level was 76%, and phylogenetic analyses grouped sars-cov-2 in the lineage b of the betacoronavirus genus, closely related to sars-cov, as well as to other covs originating in bats (figure 1(b) ). these two considerations, in addition to our preliminary modeling results, suggested sars-cov s as the most suitable template for modeling the sars-cov-2 s protein. taking an alternative approach, the s protein sequence of sars-cov-2 was submitted to two structure homology modeling servers phyre 2 and raptorx [46, 47] . for both cases, the structural models with highest homology scores were based on the sars-cov s template structure (pdb id 5x58, data not shown), confirming the choice of using sars-cov s as template for generating structural models of sars-cov-2.to better compare the predicted structural characteristics of the sars-cov-2, we also performed homology modeling of four s proteins from bat-covs belonging to lineage b in our phylogenetic analysis, which are closely related to sars-cov-2. the modeled s proteins from the bat-covs ratg13, covzc45, covzxc21, and lyra3 were compared to the predicted structure of sars-cov-2 s and to the template structure of sars-cov ( figure 5 ). the amino acid homology of the modeled s proteins in comparison to the template sars-cov s was~71% for all the bat-cov s, with the exception of the lyra3 s, which shares a homology of 84.7% with the template s. overall, all the modeled s proteins shared a similar folding pattern in comparison to sars-cov s and both s1 and s2 domains showed a uniform organization ( figure 5 ). as expected, differences were mostly observed at the flexible loops forming the "head" of the s1 domain, especially at the ntd region (rbd region), where most of the amino acid variation was observed (figures 3(a) and 5) . the s protein amino acid identity among the bat-cov (including sars-cov-2) ranged between 75.3% and 96.7%, with lyra3 and ratg13 s proteins having the lowest and highest identity to sars-cov-2, respectively. despite amino acid variability, no major changes in the secondary structures and the overall folding of the proteins were observed among the modeled s structures of these viruses, suggesting a conserved organization for all the s proteins of the lineage b including sars-cov-2. nevertheless, differences at the flexible loops in both domains were observed, and their impact in the sars-cov-2 s protein function must be further studied.it was recently reported that the sars-cov-2 binds ace2 as a receptor to infect target cells [9, 25, 33, 48] . this finding appears to agree with previous reports describing the ability of bat-covs to successfully bind and use ace2 as a cellular receptor for infection [49] [50] [51] . this conservation in the receptor usage among sars-cov and sarslike bat-covs, contrasts with the high variability that are observed at the amino acid sequence of the rbm (figure 3(a) ). considering this high variability, we compared the predicted rbm structure of the sars-cov-2 and bat-covs to the one of sars-cov. interestingly, despite the variability, the modeled sars-cov-2-predicted rbm displayed a similar organization to sars-cov ( figure 6, top panel) . this was also observed in the ratg3 and lyra3predicted rbm structures (figure 6 , middle left and bottom right panels), suggesting that the rbm organization is well conserved among these viruses. in contrast, the predicted rbm of the covzc45 and covzxc21 viruses showed a different folding at this region in comparison to sars-cov ( figure 6 , middle right and bottom left panels). these two last viruses showed a 5-and a 14-amino-acid deletion, respectively, in the rbm sequence (figure 3(a) ), which can explain the differential folding in the modeled proteins.the alignment in figure 3 (b) shows a four-aminoacid insertion 681 prra 684 , as well as a conserved arginine corresponding to r685 at the s1/s2 site of the sars-cov-2. this insertion, which appears to be unique among lineage b betacoronaviruses, suggests a differential mechanism of activation for the sars-cov-2 compared to other sars-cov and sars-like batcov. at the structural level, the s1/s2 site has been shown to be difficult to solve for most covs structures, resulting in either incomplete structures (missing the complete s1/s2 site) or structures with an altered (i.e. mutated) s1/s2 site [42, 44, 45] . solving the structure of the s1/s2 site was also found to be an issue in the sars-cov s structure we used for our modeling analyses. we have previously shown that the s1/s2 site can be modeled in other cov s proteins, and it appears to be organized as a flexible exposed loop that extends from the s structure and suggest it could be easily accessible for proteolytic activation [37] .to better study the s1/s2 site structural organization, we modeled the sars-cov s protein based on the s structure of mhv (s1/s2 site mutated in the structure), and mers-cov and sars-cov (s1/s2 site missing in the structure) to see if the predicted structure of the s1/s2 site was similar despite the template structure. we observed no differences in the modeled sars-cov s protein at the s1/s2 site, predicting an exposed flexible loop in all the three models (data not shown). based on this, we proceeded to compare the s1/s2 site, as well as other major functional elements of the s2 domain (i.e. s2′ site and fusion peptide), in the predicted structure in our sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and bat-cov s models (figure 7) . remarkably, two features appear to exhibit distinctive characteristics in the sars-cov-2 s model: the fusion peptide, which is predicted to be organized in a more compact conformation for sars-cov-2 s than in sars-cov s (figure 7 , surface models), and the region corresponding to the s1/s2 cleavage site, which contains r667 in the case of sars-cov (figure 7 , s1/s2 alignment box and ribbon models). for sars-cov and the bat-cov proteins, the s1/s2 site forms a short loop that appears flanking closely to the side of the trimeric structure. in the case of sars-cov-2 s, the s1/s2 site is predicted to form an extended loop that protrudes to the exterior of the trimer (figure 7) . this feature suggests that the s1/s2 loop in sars-cov-2 s could be more exposed for proteolytic processing by host cell proteases. as mentioned before, solving the structure of the s1/s2 site appears to present difficulties for most of the reported cov s structures (figure 8, top panel) . however, the exposed loop feature has been demonstrated in both modeled and cryo-em cov s structures with similar amino acid sequences at the s1/s2 site (i.e. fcov and ibv, respectively) (figure 8, top panel) . interestingly, fcov viruses do not always display a s1/s2 site (figure 8 , figure 5 . sars-cov-2 and bat-covs s protein models. the modeled s protein of sars-cov-2, ratg13, covzc45, covczxc21, and lyra3 is compared to sars-cov s structure. the amino acid homology between the modeled proteins and sars-cov s is noted in red and amino acid differences in blue in both models and identity scale. the s amino acid identity between sars-cov-2 and bat-covs is also noted (black identity scale). figure 6 . sars-cov-2 and bat-covs modeled rbm. surface view of sars-cov s structure and sars-cov-2, ratg13, covzc45, covczxc21, and lyra3 s models. sars-cov rbm (red) and flanking residues (yellow) are noted. rbm in the modeled structures is also noted according to their amino acid homology (red) and differences (blue) to sars-cov. top panel), which results in distinct cell entry mechanisms. we also performed an analysis of the s2′ site of the sars-cov-2 in comparison to sars-cov and bat-cov s proteins. as expected, differences in the modeled s2′ site structure were not predicted in any of the studied spikes (figure 7 , s2′ ribbon models). this agrees with the fact that the s2′ site appears to be conserved in the studied sequences (figure 7 , s2′ alignment box) and as we described previously, the sars-cov functional r797 residue at the cleavage position 1 (p1) as well as the serine at position 798 (cleavage position p1′) are conserved in the sars-cov-2 and among the compared bat-covs. this feature also appears to be conserved in other covs (figure 8, bottom panel) ; however, mutations in the residues immediately upstream of the sars-cov r797 residue (or equivalent in each virus) have been shown to result in changes in the proteolytical requirements in other covs [28] . we observed mutations l to s and t to s, which are located upstream of the p1 arginine at positions p3 and p6 in the s2′ site of the sars-cov-2 in comparison to sars-cov. these mutations are not predicted to alter the structure of the s2′ in the sars-cov-2 ( figure 7 , s2′ ribbon models).the current covid-19 pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 is evidence of the potential of coronaviruses to continuously evolve in wild reservoirs and jump to new species. our study aims to contribute to our understanding of the sars-cov-2 from a phylogenetic and structural point of view, focusing on the functional and the proteolytically sensitive sites of the s protein. using phylogenetic analysis, we showed that the sars-cov-2 s protein is closely related to other sars-like viruses figure 7 . sars-cov-2 s1/s2 and s2′ activation sites. the s1/s2 and s2′ activation sites of sars-cov and sarscov-2 s models are shown in surface and ribbon views. s1/s2 and s2′ sites of bat-covs are shown in ribbon view. amino acid homology to sars-cov is noted as follows: s1/s2 site: homology (red) and differences (blue); s2′ site: homology (yellow) and differences (magenta). amino acid alignments of the s1/s2 and s2′ sites are shown, and homology is also noted.sars-cov-2 spike protein distinct activation loop originating in bats (figure 1(b) ), which agrees with early similar reports [34] . the identity of the s protein of batcov-ratg13 strain of bat coronavirus was shown to be 96.65%, suggesting this virus as the closest relative to sars-cov-2. while the origin of the novel coronavirus appears to be in bat reservoirs, there is still no definitive evidence of the possible intermediate host that could transmit the virus to humans. recent reports have suggested the malayan pangolins as an intermediate host for the sars-cov-2. in our analysis, we found that the pangolin spike sequences grouped in a subclade branching from ratg13. we additionally observed that the 2019 (guangdong) pangolin sequence appeared to branch off early in a distinct subclade from ratg13. based on these findings, we hypothesize that despite of having a common origin in bats, the phylogenetic relationship between pangolin covs and sars-cov-2 is not sufficient to support the claim that pangolins harbor the direct precursor to the currently circulating human sars-cov-2. in fact, our analysis suggests that both humans and pangolins could be considered final hosts of their respective coronavirus.in this study, we show the presence of a distinct insert that maps to the s1/s2 priming loop of the sars-cov-2 spike protein and is not shared with sars-cov or any sars-related viruses in betacoronavirus lineage b. during the preparation of this manuscript, the cryo-electron microscopy structures of sars-cov-2 s have recently been determined [33, 52, 53] . these studies have revealed in detail the structure of the sars-cov-2 spike rbd and how it contacts the ace2 host cell receptor with notable differences compared to sars-cov [54] . it has been described that the sars-cov rbm "down" conformation packs more closely to the ntd of the s protein [33] . in the same report, the sars-cov-2 rbd was shown to be angled to the center of the trimmer in its down conformation, which differs to the sars-cov rbm structure. interestingly, we observed in our models that the rbd is predicted to pack similarly to sars-cov and the rbm is also predicted to organize as a flexible loop with similar structure despite the lower amino acid identity between these two proteins ( figure 6 ). in a more recent report, it has been shown that ace2-binding mode of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 rbds is nearly identical, which supports the claim that the flexibility in the rbm is key to compensate the amino acid differences between the two covs proteins and agrees with our predicted models [54] .one of the common difficulties of the covs s protein cryo-em studies is the difficulty to solve proteolytically sensitive regions in the protein [39, 55] . since the s1/s2 region is proteolytically sensitive, it is common to introduce mutations in this site to prevent proteolytic priming and to allow efficient heterologous expression and purification [42] . this has resulted in a difficulty to solve the s1/s2 region in most of the available cov s protein structures, with a few exceptions for the s figure 8 . covs s1/s2 and s2′ site. the s1/s2 and s2′ activation sites of fcov, mers-cov and ibv. s models are shown ribbon views. amino acid homology to sars-cov is noted as follows: s1/s2 site: homology (red) and differences (blue); s2′ site: homology (yellow) and differences (magenta). amino acid sequences of the s1/s2 and s2′ sites are shown.proteins of viruses belonging to the alphacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus genera [40, 44] . considering that this region is proteolytically sensitive and has been shown to play a major role in the s protein function in other covs, the use of in silico modeling tools has become a useful alternative to study this region in the context of the structural organization of the protein [37, 38] . the sars-cov-2 s protein is not an exception to this issue and the recently reported structures do not allow resolution of the s1/s2 priming loop and/ or have the loop mutated. we used the structural modeling approach to better understand the organization of this region, which is not only suggested to be functionally active, but has been reported as one of the major differences between the sars-cov-2 and its closest relative ratg13 [25, 33] . we observed that the sars-cov-2 s1/s2 site is predicted to be organized as an exposed flexible loop, suggesting that the site is easily available for protease cleavage and suggesting a major role in sars-cov-2 s function ( figure 7) .the significance of the sars-cov-2 spike protein s1/s2 priming loop is yet to be explored experimentally, but we consider it may fundamentally change the entry pathway of this virus compared to other known viruses in betacoronavirus lineage b. the presence of the extended s1/s2 priming loop containing paired basic residues predicts that sars-cov-2 s would most likely be cleaved by golgi-resident proprotein convertases such as furin during virus assembly and delivery to the cell surface. indeed, analysis of western blots of vsvpseudoparticles containing sars-cov-2 s have shown the presence of cleaved s, in contrast to pseudoparticles containing sars-cov s [25] . in the case of mers-cov, but not sars-cov, it is known that priming of s by "pre-cleavage" occurs at the s1/ s2 site, giving sars-cov-2 cleavage activation properties more in line with mers-cov than sars-cov [25, [56] [57] [58] . the extended structural loop may also allow enhanced priming by trypsin-like proteases (ttsps) or even cathepsins. sars-cov-2 is currently believed to be highly sars-cov-like with respect to its receptor binding, and the modeling studies reported here are broadly in line with this finding despite the relatively low amino acid identity in the rbm. however, it is important to remember that changes in protease usage may allow coronaviruses to undergo receptor-independent entry (virus-cell fusion) as well as affect syncytia formation (cell-cell fusion) and tissue pathology [59] [60] [61] .our study provides a structural context to the s1/s2 insert, which has also been reported by others [52, 62] . the presence of a distinct insert containing paired basic residues in the s1/s2 priming loop is common in many coronaviruses in betacoronavirus lineage c (e.g. mers-cov), as well as in lineage a (e.g. mouse hepatitis virus, mhv) and lineage d, and is universally found in gammacoronavirus s (e.g. ibv) [40] . it is noticeably absent in most alphacoronaviruses, with the clear exception of type i canine and feline coronaviruses [28, 37] . one feature of the distinct insert for of sars-cov-2 that warrants attention relates to potential changes as the virus evolves. an equivalent loop is present in influenza ha (in this case adjacent to the fusion peptide), and insertions of basic residues into the loop are a primary marker of conversion from low pathogenicity to highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (e.g. h5n1) [63] . in coronaviruses, such loop modifications are known to affect mhv pathogenesis and to modulate neurovirulence and neuroinvasiveness of hcov-oc43 [64, 65] . the fcov is another example where s1/s2 loop modifications appear to lead directly to changes in viral pathogenesis [37, 66, 67] . in the case of fcov, the equivalent proteolytically sensitive structural loop is within a hypervariable region of the spike gene, suggesting that this region of spike is a significant driver of virus evolution [67] .at present, sars-cov-2 is behaving in a distinct manner compared to sars-cov. we believe our findings are of special importance considering that the available data indicates ace2 as a suitable cellular receptor for sars-cov-2 entry [48, 68] . in our modeling analysis, we observed that the rbm of the sars-cov-2 predicted a similar organization as sars-cov and that deletions at this rbm region in other bat-covs are reported to not impact its ability to bind ace2 [49] [50] [51] . this suggests that instead of receptor binding, the s1/s2 loop is a distinctive feature relevant to sars-cov-2 pathogenesis and marks a unique similarity to mers-cov. we would predict that the distinct insert in sars-cov-2 s would give the virus biological properties more in line with mers-cov and not sars-cov, especially with regard to its cell entry pathway. however, it may also impact virus spread and transmission. while many epidemiological features of sars-cov-2 still need to be resolved, there are many features of transmission that appear to align more with mers-cov than sars-cov. one component of transmission is the reproductive number (r 0 ), which is currently thought to be approximately 2.0-3.0 for sars-cov-2, broadly in line with than for sars-cov, and while mers-cov has a low r 0 in humans (b 1), it is high in camels and in outbreak situations (n 3) [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] . another study has reported that the serial interval (time from the disease onset in a patient to the onset of the disease in secondary case) can be estimated to be below 4 days, suggesting that transmission can occur before the onset of clinical signs [74] . these two parameters highlight the high transmissibility of the sars-cov-2. one notable feature of the s protein s1/s2 cleavage site was first observed during the purification of the mhv s protein for structural analysis [42] . mhv with an intact cleavage loop was unstable when expressed, and so we consider that the s1/s2 loop controls virus stability, likely via access to the down-stream s2′ site that regulates fusion peptide exposure and activity. as such, it will interesting to monitor the effects of s1/s2 loop insertions and proteolytic cleavability in the context of virus transmission, in addition to virus entry, pathogenesis, and evolution.sequencesthe severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2) is currently associated with a global pandemic causing coronavirus disease, first noted in december 2019 in wuhan province of china. the resultant disease is termed covid-19 (coronavirus disease-2019) and is characterized by acute respiratory disease and pneumonia. sars cov-2 has infected nearly 4 million people and caused nearly 300 000 deaths worldwide with a predilection of older people and/or people having other health issues including, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and other comorbidities. [1] [2] [3] sarscov-2 is the third human coronavirus that appeared for the first time in the 21st century. one of the other two coronaviruses is sars, which appeared in november 2002 in china and caused nearly 100 000 infections worldwide and more than 800 deaths. sars was effectively contained because the virus, although causing high degree of mortality in infected people, was apparently not effectively transmitted from one person to the other. 4, 5 the second human coronavirus, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers cov) appeared in 2013 and caused a limited epidemic of few thousand people, but high death rates of approximately 36% predominantly in the middle east (saudi arabia). the primary source of infection was found to be dromedary camels, although the virus was transmitted from person to person in close contact in hospital settings. [6] [7] [8] [9] all coronaviruses specify a spike (s) glycoprotein, which is embedded in viral envelopes in trimeric forms giving them their characteristic corona structures. the s glycoprotein is a major antigen responsible for both receptor-binding and membrane fusion properties. 9 angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) has been identified as the cell receptor for sars, 10 and also sars cov-2, while other unknown human receptors may be responsible for its wider infectious spread than sars.spike is cleaved into two major components s1 and s2 by cellular proteases. virus entry into cells is mediated after binding of a receptorbinding domain (rbd) located within the s1 ectodomain. cleavage of the s glycoprotein to produce s1 and s2 proteins is mediated by cellular proteases at the s1/s2 junction as well as at s2′ site located downstream of the s1/s2 proteolytic cleavage. the fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes is mediated by the s2 protein that contains a putative fusion peptide region. the mechanism of membrane pore formation that leads to membrane fusion involves the formation of a six-helix bundle fusion core by two heptad repeats hr1 and hr2 domains found in each s monomer forming the initial pore that results in membrane fusion. 11 the cellular serine protease tmprss2 has been implicated in priming s2′ cleavage, as well as ace2 cleavage both required for initiation of the membrane fusion event. [12] [13] [14] also, the sars spike (s) glycoprotein can be cleaved by the cellular protease cathepsin l at the low ph of endosomes, thereby exposing the s2 domain of the spike protein for membrane fusion. [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] cell surface expression of s mediates s-induced cell fusion and the formation of syncytia, which is a phenomenon similar to virus entry, requiring the presence of ace2.virus-induced cell fusion is a mechanism by which the virus can spread from cell-to-cell by a ph-independent mechanism avoiding the extracellular space and potentially evading neutralizing antibody. 21, 22 it has been demonstrated that the rbd domain of sars cov-2 spike (s-new; sn) has a higher binding affinity for the ace2 receptor than that of sars spike (s-old; so), while the s2 proteins of these two viruses are nearly 90% identical. 3, 22, 23 nelfinavir mesylate was developed as an anti-human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) protease inhibitor. 24, 25 also, it was reported that nelfinavir mesylate inhibited sars replication and cytopathic effects in cell culture. 26 in addition to its potent activity against the hiv protease, nelfinavir mesylate was found to produce multiple effects on cellular processes including the induction of apoptosis and necrosis as well as induction of cell-protective mechanisms, including cell cycle retardation and the unfolded protein response. [27] [28] [29] these nelfinavir mesylate effects have been exploited for anticancer purposes. [30] [31] [32] previously, we investigated the structure and function of the sars s glycoprotein in transient transfection-membrane fusion assays. 33, 34 based on these initial studies, we undertook screening of a number of compounds that may inhibit s-mediated fusion after transient expression in african green monkey kidney cells (vero). we report herein that the sars cov-2 s (sn) causes extreme s-mediated membrane fusion in comparison to cell fusion caused by transient expression of sars s (so). importantly, we report that nelfinavir mesylate inhibited s-mediated fusion at micromolar ranges. in-silico docking experiments, revealed the possibility that nelfinavir binds to the s2 amino terminus within the s trimer and thus, may directly inhibit the formation of the heptad-repeat complex that causes smediated membrane fusion. based on these results, further research of nelfinavir's effect in human covid-19 patients is warranted.african green monkey kidney (vero) cells were maintained in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem) with 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs) and 2% primocin (invitrogen, inc., carlsbad, ca). parental vector plasmids, respectively. the s1 subunit of the s-n expression construct contained the same amino terminus up to aa700 (gly). the n-terminal domain of the s-n s2 subunit was engineered to be exactly as in s1 containing the n-myc tag at its amino terminus and encompassing the s2 s-n amino acid sequence 701-1273. nelfinavir mesylate was dissolved in dmso at a 10 mm concentration (stock) and a series of dilutions was made in serum-free dmem.following transfection, 500 μl of nelfinavir mesylate solution was added to each well. vero cells transfected with either s-o or s-n and incubated with the drug for 48 hours at 37°c with 5% co 2 . the tissue culture plates were observed for fused cells, and then, phase contrast and fluorescent images were taken under either formalin or methanol fixed conditions.docking of the nelfinavir mesylate to the spike protein of sars cov-2 was performed using autodock. 35 crystal structure of nelfinavir was obtained from the complex of hiv protease nelfinavir crystal structure from the protein data bank (pdb id: 2q64). 36 structure of the s protein of sars cov-2 was reported by wrapp et al 23 (pdb id: 6vsb). the trimer structure of the spike protein was used for docking as protein structure of the spike protein exists under dynamic condition while binding to the receptor and fusion to host cell. grid for docking was created on the spike protein structure at particular docking site as the center but covering a grid box of 102 or 126å in x, y, z directions from the center of the grid. one grid site was created around protease cleavage site s1/s2 and another covering the hr1 region of the protein in the trimer ( figure s1 ). docking calculations were performed using the lamarckian genetic algorithm with 150 starting conformations and 10 million energy evaluations. olympus ix71 fluorescent microscope was used for live and phase contrast images using cellsens software. zeiss axio observer z1 fluorescent microscope was used for fluorescent images using zen software. figure 1a ,b,e,f). in addition, the s1 and s2 domains of s-n were cloned independently into the transient expression vector pcmv3, encompassing amino acid domains for s1 (aa16-aa700) and s2 (aa701-aa1273). both s1 and s2 domains were expressed with an myc epitope tag at their amino termini ( figure 1c,d) . the s1 domain included the s1/s2 cleavage site ( figure 1c figure 2b ). co-expression of s1 and s2 was performed to test whether the sn-mediated cell fusion could be reconstituted by coexpression of both domains. expression of either s1, s2, or s1 + s2 domains of s-n was readily detected by immunohistochemistry with the anti-n-myc antibody; however, there f i g u r e 1 schematics of spike glycoproteins and recombinant gene constructs. (a) structure of sars-cov-2 spike (1273aa) glycoprotein, showing s1 and s2 domains and the cleavage sites s1/s2 and s2′. (b) structure of pcmv3-sp-n-myc (sn). sars-cov-2 spike (aa16-aa1273) was cloned into plasmid expression vector at kpnl and xbal restriction sites. the n-terminal 15 amino acids were replaced with signal peptide (sp′) and n-myc sequence. (c) structure of pcmv3-s1-n-myc (s1-n). the s1 domain (aa16-aa700) was cloned into the plasmid expression vector at kpnl and xbal restriction sites. the n-terminal 15 amino acids were replaced with signal peptide (sp′) and n-myc sequence. (d) structure of pcmv3-s2-n-myc (s2-n). the s2 domain (aa701-aa1273) was cloned at kpnl and xbal restriction sites. the n-terminal contains signal peptide (sp′) and n-myc sequence. (e) structure of sars spike (1255aa) glycoprotein, showing s1 and s2 domains and the cleavage sites s1/s2 and s2′. (f) structure of p3xflag-cmv-s (so). sars spike was cloned into plasmid expression vector as previously described. fp, fusion peptide; hr1, heptad repeat 1; hr2, heptad repeat 2; ntd, nontranslated domain; rbd, receptor-binding domain; sars cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; sp, sars signal peptide; sp′, signal peptide was no cell fusion observed at 48 hpt as evidenced by only well-defined single cells that were stained with the anti-myc antibody (figure 3 ), as well as at later times (not shown), suggesting that the s1 and s2 domains have to be part of the entire molecule to be processed correctly for induction of s-mediated cell fusion. f i g u r e 3 expression of sars cov-2 spike (sn) domains. vero cells were transfected with pcmv3-sp-n-myc plasmid expressing either the s1, s2, or s1 + s2 domains of s-n tagged with the n-myc epitopes at their amino termini. expression was detected with mabs against the epitope tags at 48 hours posttransfection and compared to vehicle containing equivalent amount of lipofectamine 2000 reagent. methanol fixed cells were incubated with mouse anti-myc antibody and stained with hrp staining followed by goat anti-mouse secondary antibody incubation. images were taken at ×10 magnification. hrp, horseradish peroxidase; sars cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; sn, s-new recently, it was shown that a peptide that targeted the s-n hr1 domain s inhibited sars-cov-2 virus replication, virus entry, and virus-induced cell fusion. 37 therefore, we performed in-silico docking experiments to investigate the possibility that nelfinavir may directly bind near this s region. these theoretical docking experiments revealed that nelfinavir may bind near the hr1 helix and in between the hr1 and hr2 helices (figures s1 and s2 ). 1000) . cellular tubulin was stained with rabbit anti-alpha tubulin (abcam; 1:200) and anti-rabbit secondary antibody conjugated with alexa fluorophore 488. dapi was used to stain nuclei of cells. fluorescent images were taken at ×40 magnification. dapi, 4′,6-diamidino-2phenylindole; dmso, dimethyl sulfoxide; sn, s-new; so, s-old uncleaved form that may be proteolytically processed either within endosomes or at cell surfaces by proteases such as tmprss2, which is known to be required for spike activation during virus entry. 12 we utilized the s-n and s-o transient expression system to screen for currently available drugs that may inhibit s-mediated cell fusion and the formation of syncytia. these drugs included cardiac glycosides such as ouabain and digoxin, the anti-hiv fusion inhibitor fuzeon (enfuvirtide) and kinase inhibitors including gleevec (imatinib mesylate). these drugs did not substantially inhibit s-mediated cell fusion even at concentrations of 100 μm. however, we found that id:2910197). therefore, it may be possible that nelfinavir can be used at even lower concentrations than those prescribed for patients with hiv. these results are significant because nelfinavir did not appear to inhibit overall s-n or s-o synthesis and cell surface expression. we considered the possibility that nelfinavir may act not as a protease inhibitor but as a direct inhibitor of spike-mediated membrane fusion.computational modeling revealed that nelfinavir may directly bind to the trimeric form of s-n and s-o near the putative fusogenic domain, and thus, it may directly inhibit s-mediated cell fusion (figures s1 and   s2 ). nelfinavir has been reported to have pleotropic effects on multiple cellular processes including inducing apoptosis an er stress under certain conditions and has been investigated for anticancer purposes. 32, 41, 42 thus, it is possible that cellular signaling processes are affected that alter to posttranslational processing of s-n and s-o, without affecting their cell surface expression. it is also possible that nelfinavir may inhibit cellular proteases including tmprss2 that may be required for s-n and s-o fusion activation. other protease inhibitors are currently being investigated for their ability to inhibit sars cov-2 replication and spread. however, there are no concrete results that have been obtained in clinical trials yet. 43 preliminary experiments indicate that s-n and s-o may be cleaved in vero cells in the presence of nelfinavir, although it is not currently known whether this cleavage occurs efficiently. in addition, transfected cells expressing s-n or s-o in the presence of nelfinavir did not appear to exhibit morphologies indicating of cellular cytotoxicity, suggesting that nelfinavir is not cytotoxic at the concentrations used in this study. overall, these experiments suggest that nelfinavir should be used to combat sars cov-2 infections early during the first symptoms exhibited by infected patients to minimize virus spread and give sufficient time to infected patients to mount a protective immune response. coronavirus belongs to the large family of viruses, i.e., coronaviridae family and the order nidovirales (cui et al. 2019; kumar et al. 2020; phan et al. 2018) . genomic structures and phylogenetic relationship reveals that subfamily coronavirinae contains the four genera alpha coronavirus and betacoronavirus which are restricted to mammals and responsible for respiratory illness in humans such as middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) and sars coronavirus (sars-cov) (cui et al. 2019; kumar et al. 2020; payne 2017; phan et al. 2018) . the other two genera gamma coronavirus and delta coronavirus infect both birds and mammals (cui et al. 2019; kumar et al. 2020; payne 2017; phan et al. 2018 ). sars-cov and mers-cov show severe respiratory diseases in humans, and four others (hcov-nl63, hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, and hku1) cause normal upper respiratory illness in the hosts which are immunocompetent, even though some can induce severe infections in elders, young children, and infants (cui et al. 2019; cascella et al. 2020) . alpha and betacoronaviruses can give rise to intense burden on animals; these include recently emerged swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (sads-cov) and the porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus and porcine enteric diarrhea virus (pedv) (cui et al. 2019; banerjee et al. 2019) .continuous development and urbanization increases the frequent integration of many different animals in crowded and populated places may have made easy the emergence and reemergence of a number of these viruses (lau and chan 2015;  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/nbk45714/). on the other hand, high mutation and recombination rates are reported in coronaviruses, which may allow the coronaviruses to cross the barrier of species and adopt to new hosts (lau and chan 2015;  https://clarivate.com/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2020/01/coronavi rus- report-1.30.2020.pdf; liu et al. 2020) .the 2003 sars epidemic has awakened the world's researchers and scientists on the transmission capability of the coronaviruses from animals to humans. the primary reservoir of the sars-cov is horseshoe bat (lau and chan 2015; wang et al. 2006) . current sequence databases revealed the animal origin of the human coronaviruses: mers-cov, sars-cov, hcov-229e, and hcov-nl63 are considered to have originated in bats (cui et al. 2019; wang et al. 2006) . sarsassociated coronaviruses are found in bats from china and worldwide continuously (lau and chan 2015) .recently in 2020, sars-cov-2, a novel coronavirus has emerged from china which affect globally with a total of 191,127 confirmed cases and 7807 deaths (as of march 18, 2020) (kampf et al. 2020 ; https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/ coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200314-sitrep-54-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn¼dcd46351_ 6). figure 13 .1 represents the total reported confirmed cases and deaths due to novel coronavirus (https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situ ation-reports). the current pandemic of coronavirus-linked acute respiratory disease known as coronavirus disease 19 (covid-19) is the third recognized spillover to humans through animal coronavirus in only the last two decades (https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41564-020-0695-z; kampf et al. 2020 ). table 13 .1 represents the discovery of human coronaviruses.the viruses of the family coronaviridae contain enveloped and positive-stranded rna coutard et al. 2020) . coronaviruses have the largest 26--32 kilobase (kb) positive-sense rna genome kumar et al. 2020; shoeman and fielding 2019) . the four major structural proteins [membrane (m), envelope (e), spike (s), and nucleocapsid (n)] which create complete virus particle, encoded by the genome (kumar et al. 2020; wu et al. 2020; guo et al. 2020) .the evolution and emergence of novel coronaviruses are mostly due to the lack of proofreading mechanism in rna recombination among the present coronaviruses (kumar et al. 2020 ). the s gene which encodes viral spike (s) glycoprotein has been proposed the higher frequency of recombination (kumar et al. 2020 (2020) longer spike protein of 2019-ncov has remarkable difference when compared with the bat sars-cov and sars-like coronaviruses (kumar et al. 2020) . in this chapter, we will discuss about the emergence and reemergence of the sars coronaviruses and genetic variations from sars-cov to sars-cov-2.13.1.1 sars-cov to sars-cov-2: rna recombination, antigenic shift, and antigenic driftreported phylogenetic analysis revealed the close relationship between covid-19 and bat sars-like coronavirus kumar et al. 2020) . although both emerged from the sars coronavirus, suggesting the newly spread 2019-ncov into human is very much related to sars-cov (kumar et al. 2020 ). figure 13 .2 represents the evolutionary relationship between different lineage of betacoronavirus and their respective cellular receptors through which they interact with the host cell.as per sequence alignment data, the sequence of spike glycoprotein of covid-19 and sars-cov shows 76.2% individuality, 87.2% resemblance, and 2% gaps. this data indicates that covid-19 spike glycoprotein exhibits higher sequence similarity with 12.8% of variation with sars-cov. the study performed by kumar et al. (2020) , on variation of sequences of minimal receptor-binding domain (rbd), revealed 73.3% uniqueness, 83.9% matches, and 0.4% gaps, suggesting a difference of 16.1% and tertiary structure of minimal receptor-binding domain. covid-19 may have changes in virus-binding capacity shift and infectivity into the receptors of the host cell, due to notable deviation in minimal rbd of s-glycoprotein. the viruses belong to coronaviridae family enclosed envelope and positivestranded rna . coronaviruses have the largest 26-32 kilobase (kb) positive-sense rna genome. the genome of coronaviruses contains open reading frames (orfs) of variable number (6-11). in the first orf, two thirds of the total viral rna are located. upon infection, two large precursor polyproteins, namely pp1a and pp1ab, has been translated by viral genome in the host cells. these translated precursor polyproteins get processed into 16 mature nonstructural proteins (nsp1-nsp16) by viral proteinases. these nonstructural proteins have been numbered according to the position from n to c terminus (kumar et al. 2020; narayanan et al. 2014 ). figure 13 .3 depicts the structure of coronavirus representing essential proteins, accessory proteins, and nsp1-16. the remaining orfs encode accessory proteins. the remaining part of viral genome encodes spike (s) glycoprotein, small envelope (e) protein, matrix (m) protein, and nucleocapsid protein (n). all these four are essential structural proteins. s protein is attached to the host receptor ace2, including two subunits s1 and s2. the cellular tropism by rbd and virus host range is determined by s1. virus cell membrane fusion is determined by s2 pradhan et al. 2020; belouzard et al. 2009; du et al. 2009 ). transmembrane nutrient transport and formation of envelop were performed by m protein. n protein and e protein along with several accessory proteins obstruct with host immune response pradhan et al. 2020 ). the nonstructural proteins play a vital function at the time of viral rna replication and transcription (kumar et al. 2020; narayanan et al. 2014) . the assigned functions of these 16 mature nonstructural proteins are mentioned in table 13 .2. several nsps are unique enzymes implicated in one or more important step(s) in viral replication.other nsps appear to be entirely involved in virus-host interactions (de groot et al. 2012) .coronavirus sars-cov-2 is positive ssrna and enveloped virus. genome encodes 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps) and 4 essential structural proteins and several accessory proteins.the comparison of the glycosylation sites between covid-19 and sars-cov of the spike glycoproteins unveiled the presence of novel glycosylation sites in covid-19, such as ngtk, nfti, nltt, and ntsn (kumar et al. 2020) . the presence of novel glycosylation sites in covid-19 might be due to the variation in sequence. along with the deviation in reported four glycosylation sites, i.e., ngtk, nfti, nltt, and ntsn, covid-19 spike glycoprotein exhibits the similar glycosylation sites, also present in sars-cov (nitn, ngti, nitn, nfsq, nesl, nctf, and nntv). there is a possibility of interaction between covid-19 and host receptor through novel glycosylation sites which may have an effect on the process of internalization and linked pathogenesis (kumar et al. 2020 ).a study carried out to determine the antigenicity by comparing the antigenic variations in both spike glycoproteins of covid-19 and sars-cov revealed the individuality of most of the ctl epitopes in covid-19 compared to the sars-cov. however, six identical epitopes risncvady, cvadysvly, rsfiedllf, rvdfcgkgy, mtsccsclk, and lkgvklhy are present in spike glycoprotein of covid-19 and sars-cov (kumar et al. 2020) . in covid-19, some epitopes are identified with difference in single amino acid change. as per available information and research data of antigenicity, covid-19 shows little antigenic similarities with sars coronavirus. it is possible that antigenic similarity may cause similar antigenic response, and therefore, it can be used as one of the precautionary approach. variation and similarity in spike glycoprotein and epitopes may be useful to design newer and effective vaccines (kumar et al. 2020 ).the length of encoded proteins in covid-19 and sars-like coronaviruses was found nearly same ). however, longer spike protein of covid-19 showed a notable difference compared to the bat sars-like coronaviruses and sars-cov. on the whole 12.5% of difference in sequences of s glycoprotein and difference in minimal rbd with 23.6% may cause structural differences in spike glycoproteins of covid-19 and sars-cov (kumar et al. 2020) . the studies performed to measure the average distance between the molecules of superimposed proteins, i.e., rmsd, depict the 1.38 å local rmsd value between two glycoproteins. this illustrates regardless of 12.8% sequence variation that there is an insignificant structural divergence among the spike glycoproteins of sars-cov and covid-19. the absence of structural divergence in spike glycoproteins of sars-cov and covid-19 raises a hope for the treatment of brutal covid-19. as there is structural similarity in sars-cov and covid-19, the previously trialed and tested attachment inhibitor used for sars-cov can be used as the present choice of treatment for covid-19 (kumar et al. 2020 ).genetic recombination is an important evolutionary mechanism in positive-strand rna viruses. recombination drives toward the diversity in viral genome by the creation of novel chimeric genomes (bentley and evans 2018; loriere and holmes 2012) . irrespective of single-or multiple-segment genome, rna recombination may occur in the entire rna viruses (loriere and holmes 2012) . cross-species transmission in rna viruses is the most common approach to get entered into a new host. the process of recombination assists the entry of viruses as it facilitates viruses to explore a larger proportion of the sequence area, than mutation. this increases the probability of finding a genetic configuration that assists host adaptation (loriere and holmes 2012) . both replicative and non-replicative recombination mechanism works for the viruses. in replicative recombination, the major role is played by viral polymerase; however, other viral or cellular proteins may exist. on the contrary, cellular components are solely responsible for non-replicative recombination (bentley and evans 2018) .recently emerged many human diseases are originated from rna viruses. there are three mechanisms by which viruses go through evolutionary changes. these are mutations also known as antigenic drift, re-assortment (antigenic shift), and recombination (shao et al. 2017) . the emergence of viral diseases in human exhibits active viral genome recombination or re-assortment. coronavirus that emerged in turkey was a recombinant infectious bronchitis virus which attained a spike proteinencoding gene from coronavirus 122 (loriere and holmes 2012) . there is a possibility of emergence of covid-19 through rna recombination.• the third epidemic of the twenty-first century:-sars-cov was reported as the first epidemic of the twenty-first century in 2003 following by mers-cov in 2012. -covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 is the third epidemic which is declared pandemic by the who.• severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) portray a number of similarities:-virus homology: as per sequence alignment data, the spike glycoprotein sequence of covid-19 and sars-cov shows 87.2% resemblance; sequences of minimal receptor-binding domain (rbd) show 83.9% similarity. -presence of similar glycosylation sites and similar epitopes.-routes of transmission of both the viruses (i.e., contact, droplets, and fomite).• along with the similarities, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) depict a number of dissimilarities also:-such as 12.5% of difference in s glycoprotein sequence and difference in minimal rbd with 23.6%. -other behavioral differences, such as rate of transmission and severity of covid-19 is much higher than sars-cov.• the emergence of novel coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) might be due to rna recombination as the positive-sense rna viruses are well reported for their ability of rna recombination which make them potent to cross the species barrier. • the structural similarity of covid-19 with sars-cov could be encashed in terms of:-use of available treatment for the inhibition of attachment with the host cell. this could be an effective way to control the spread of disease. -can use some drug/compound to block the entry into host cell by binding to the receptor.the newly emerged coronavirus sars-cov-2 is strongly related to the predecessor sars-cov. sars-cov is becoming pandemic which is declared as public health emergency of global concern. the presence of novel glycosylation sites in sars-cov-2 makes it possible to become pandemic due to its antigenic divergence. at this time, it is important to understand and educate the mass to follow the instructions given by the authorities and avoid any social gathering. by this at least we can delay the transmission in widespread community. slowdown of transmission rate will provide time to the researchers and scientists to prepare well and develop vaccine and treatment for this novel coronavirus. the similarity of sars-cov-2 to sars-cov in terms of antigenic sites proposes the scope of sars-linked peptide-based vaccine to prevent covid-19. the structural similarity of sars-cov-2 to sars-cov suggests the use of attachment inhibitor, specific to coronavirus as the current option of the treatment. although the mechanism of species to species transfer of the sars coronavirus is difficult to understand, sars-cov 2003 epidemic makes it clear that animal coronaviruses are budding threats to the human community. still researches are going on covid-19. limited information on novel coronavirus makes some boundaries to explain the complete antigenicity and structure of covid-19.complete genome analysis is required to understand the similarities and differences of sars-cov-2 with the previously reported viruses. complete genome analysis also helps in the development of vaccines and medicines against covid-19. it is required to understand and do the complete research on the emergence and reemergence of coronaviruses and to understand the change in proteins and genome. transmission through crossing the species barrier is another area to focus on.the sars-cov-2 spike is a type 1 fusion machine, responsible for virus-cell entry via 49 ace2 receptor interactions and tmprss2 protease activation in the endosome 8 . it is substantially 50 glycosylated 9,10 . it is also divergent from other beta-coronavirus pathogens known to have infected 51 humans 2 , and it continues to diversify 7 . cryo-em structures of the sars-cov-2 spike 3,4 reveal 52 two prevalent conformations: a single-up conformation and an all-down conformation, related to 53 3 the orientations of the receptor-binding domains (rbds). however, the extent to which spike 54 glycosylation, sequence diversity, and conformational heterogeneity impact antibody elicitation or 55 antibody-mediated neutralization is unclear. 56 accumulating data indicates that individuals who recover from covid-19 often do not 57 have high levels of neutralizing antibody activity 11 , and there are worrisome reports of re-infection 58 of recovered individuals [12] [13] [14] . moreover, reports of antibody cr3022 disassembling spike 15 suggest 59 unusual fragility. 60 to facilitate a molecular understanding of the sars-cov-2 spike and its evasion from 61 antibody, we measured the unfolding enthalpy of the spike as well as its binding to cr3022 62 antibody and to ace2 receptor as a function of ph. we also determined cryo-em structures of the 63 spike, alone and in complex with ace2 receptor, at physiological and endosomal phs. we 64 delineated the molecular mechanism that mediates the raising and closing of rbds, which utilizes 65 a refolding region with multiple aspartic acid residues, a ph-dependent switch, which when fully 66 protonated locks rbds in the down position. overall, our findings suggest a ph-dependent 67 mechanism of conformational masking, whereby reduced folding at physiological ph underlies the 68 ease by which antibodies like cr3022 bind to spike and their prevalent elicitation. recognition of 69 ace2, however, leads to endosomal entry, resulting in reduction of ph and induction of antibody 70 shedding through ph-dependent conformational changes of the spike. 71 72 spike at physiological ph is at a minimum of unfolding enthalpy 73 to provide insight into the stability of the spike over the course of virus-cell entry, we used 74 differential scanning calorimetry (dsc) to measure the unfolding enthalpy of the soluble trimeric 75 ectodomain (spike), which included gsas and pp mutations and the t4 phage fibritin 76 4 trimerization domain 4,16 , as a function of ph. notably, at physiological ph we observed spike to be 77 at a minimum of unfolding enthalpy (73.3 kcal/mol) or ~10% the normalized unfolding enthalpy of 78 the average globular protein 17 (fig. 1a, left) . the amount of folding energy increased rapidly as 79 ph dropped, increasing ~10-fold by ph 6 before decreasing as ph reduced further. analysis of 80 melting curves (fig. 1a, right) indicated three distinct peaks: a peak at ~48°c, which dominated 81 under basic conditions and decreased at acidic conditions; a peak at ~65°c, which was barely 82 present at physiological ph, but rapidly increased to dominate as ph dropped to 5.5-6.0; and a 83 peak at ~55°c, which first appeared as a shoulder at ph 6, but then increased to dominate and 84 shifted to lower temperature at ph lower than 5.5. 85 in sharp contrast to spike, analysis of the spike n-terminal domain (ntd) and rbd as 86 separate proteins indicated each of them to have typical unfolding enthalpies (>90% that of the 87 average normalized globular protein) (extended data fig. 1) . 88 to understand how the reduced folding enthalpy might influence spike structure, we used 89 negative stain-electron microscopy (em) to visualize the spike as a function of ph (extended 90 data fig. 2) . at ph 7.4, we observed the spike to be mostly disordered. however, when ph 91 decreased, we observed well-formed trimers, which showed some clustering at ph 5.5-6.0 before 92 resolving into separate particles at ph 4.0-4.5. overall, we observed concordance between the 93 presence of well-formed trimers and folding enthalpy measured by dsc, with mostly unfolded 94 trimers at physiological ph and substantially increased folding at endosomal ph. to enter the endosome 8 . we used isothermal titration calorimetry (itc) to determine whether 100 binding of cr3022 to spike was compatible with ace2 interaction. we chose to use a monomeric 101 version of ace2 to test more sensitively the impact of antibody inhibition. first, we titrated ace2 102 into soluble spike, and observed 1.9 ace2 molecules to bind per spike trimer, with an affinity of 103 94 nm (fig. 1b, left) . next, we fully titrated the antigen-binding fragment (fab) of cr3022 into 104 soluble spike (extended data fig. 3a ) and further titrated ace2 into the spike-cr3022 complex 105 formed to observe 2.3 ace2 molecules to bind each spike-cr3022 complex, with an affinity of 106 130 nm (fig. 1b, right) . the sars-cov-2 spike thus appears capable of recognizing ace2 even 107 in the presence of antibody cr3022, indicating that cr3022-bound spikes could enter the 108 endosomal compartment. 109 to gain insight into the impact of ph on ace2 and cr3022 interactions with spike, we 110 characterized their affinities both to spike and to rbd, expressed as a separate molecule, at 111 physiological and endosomal ph. we chose to use dimeric ace2 to more closely mimic native 112 interactions with spike. at endosomal phs, surface plasmon resonance (spr)-determined ace2 113 binding affinities to both spike and rbd were somewhat reduced from 0.82 nm to 7.0 nm and 114 from 1.0 nm to 14 nm at ph 4.5 for spike and rbd, respectively (extended data fig. 3b ). with 115 cr3022 igg, affinities were high to both spike and rbd at physiological ph, though with a 10-116 fold difference (0.49 and 0.052 nm to spike and rbd, respectively) ( fig. 1c) . at ph 5.5, this 10-117 fold difference in affinity was retained (1.7 and 0.23 nm, respectively). however, at ph 4.5, 118 cr3022 still bound to rbd (1.1 nm), but affinity to spike was dramatically reduced with a k d > 119 1000 nm -an affinity difference of at least ~1000-fold (fig. 1c, extended data fig. 3c) . because 120 cr3022 still bound strongly to the isolated rbd, we attribute the dramatically reduced affinity of 121 cr3022 for spike at low ph to conformational constraints of the spike (fig. 1d) . cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2 spike with ace2 at physiological and endosomal ph 124 structures of ace2 and cr3022 have been determined in complex with rbd as a separate 125 domain 6,18-20 , but less is known about their interactions with trimer. to provide structural insight 126 into the recognition between ace2 and spike trimer, we mixed soluble ace2 with spike trimer at 127 a 6:1 molar ratio at ph 7.4 and collected single-particle cryo-em data on a titan krios. we 128 observed spike binding ace2 at stoichiometries of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 with prevalences of 15%, 129 43%, and 38%, respectively (fig. 2a) . while the membrane-proximal region of the spike in these 130 complexes remained 3-fold symmetric, the ace2-binding regions showed asymmetry with, for 131 example, superposition of the double-ace2-bound complex onto itself based on membrane-132 proximal regions leading to displacement of ace2 molecules by almost 13 å (fig. 2b) . however, 133 we could see no evidence of coordinated movement, with the rbd domain on each protomer 134 appearing to engage ace2 without significantly impacting the up (or down) motion of the 135 neighboring protomers. thus, ace2 receptor engagement required rbd movement that did not 136 appear to destabilize the spike nor to trigger a substantial structural rearrangement beyond raising 137 of the rbd. 138 to provide insight into the impact of endosomal ph, we again mixed soluble ace2 with 139 spike trimer at a 6:1 molar ratio, but this time at ph 5.5, and determined the structure of the 140 complex using cryo-em. similar to physiological ph, we observed spike binding ace2 at 141 stoichiometries of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 with prevalences of 27%, 32%, and 27%, respectively ( fig.   142 2c). we superposed triple-ace2-bound complexes determined at ph 7.4 and ph 5.5 and observed 143 the membrane-proximal regions of the spike to align closely, while ace2 molecules showed 144 displacements of 3.1, 6.0, and 10.8 å (fig. 2d) . overall, structures of the spike with ace2 showed   145   7   about equal distribution of single-, double-, and triple-ace2-bound states at both physiological   146   and endosomal ph.   147   148 ligand-free cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2 spike at low ph 149 in light of the similarity of ace2 complexes at ph 7.4 and 5.5 (fig. 2) but substantial 150 differences at these phs observed for ligand-free spike by negative stain em (extended data fig.   151 2), we analyzed the structure of the spike at ph 5.5 by single-particle cryo-em. we determined a 152 consensus structure from 1,083,554 particles at a resolution of 2.7 å, in which most of the spike 153 was well resolved, except for a lone rbd for which reconstruction density was poor ( fig. 3a ; fig. 5c, panel b) . interestingly, 158 unlike for ace2-bound complexes, no double-or triple-rbd-up conformations were observed. 159 two classes with prevalences of 23% (conformation 1 -2.9 å resolution) and 26% (conformation the spike at ph 5.5. in the remaining classes, the rbd did not assume a defined position, 165 suggesting mobility of this domain even at endosomal ph. 166 to determine how even lower ph affected conformational heterogeneity, and since 167 cr3022 retained binding to spike at ph 5.5, we sought to obtain a cryo-em structure of the ligand-168 8 free spike at ph 4.0. single particle analysis of a dataset comprising 911,839 particles resolved an 169 all-rbd-down conformation (fig 3b, extended data fig. 6a-b) . the map was refined to 2.4 å 170 resolution, enabling individual water molecules to be observed (fig. 3c) and 89 additional residues 171 to be modeled, which were undefined in published cryo-em structures 3,4 . fig. 7b ). this region, which for reasons described below we named the 'switch' region, was fully 185 defined in protomer b and partially resolved in protomer a (residues 825-829 and 849-858) and 186 protomer c (residues 825-840 and 851-858). notably, this region was almost entirely unresolved in 187 our structures with ace2 and in published spike structures 3,4 (fig. 4a, bottom) . 188 the asymmetry in distribution of refolding regions in the trimer between single-up and all-189 down structures (fig. 4b) suggested the 'up' rbd to require concerted adjustments throughout the tyr837 of unprotonated-switches (fig 5a, left) and recognizing a backbone carbonyl in protonated-258 switches (fig. 5a, right) . to test the impact of this mutation on unfolding enthalpy, we performed 259 dsc measurements at ph 7.4, 5.5, and 4.0 (fig. 5c) . while the enthalpies at ph 5.5 and 4.0 were 260 similar to those of wild-type spike, the unfolding enthalpy at ph 7.4 was dramatically increased, 261 with the appearance of a high melting temperature peak for the variant (fig. 5d) , seen for the wild-262 type only at low ph. the dramatic difference in melting enthalpy demonstrated the substantive 263 energetic effect of altering a interprotomer-switch interface. to test the influence of this increased 264 unfolding enthalpy on ace2 interaction, we performed biolayer interferometry (bli) on dimeric 265 ace2 recognizing spike or the asp614gly variant. at ph 7.4 we observed higher binding of the 266 wild-type spike than the asp614gly variant to dimeric ace2 (fig. 5e, left) , consistent with dsc 267 showing more unfolding enthalpy for the variant spike, thereby reducing its ability to bind dimeric 268 ace2 with avidity. 269 we next tried to understand the impact of the asp614gly mutation on the switch-based 270 mechanism locking rbd in the down position at low ph. as switches with disorder in the region 271 contacting sd2 were associated with "up" rbds, we hypothesized that mutation of asp614 to gly 272 would more closely mimic the loss of interaction between sd2 and switch, as exemplified by 273 rbd b and switch c. indeed, bli measurements at ph 4.0 showed dimeric ace2 to bind the 274 asp614gly variant with greater apparent affinity (fig. 5e, right) , consistent with the higher 275 probability of rbds adopting the "up" position, and providing an explanation for its increased 276 infectivity 25 . to test the impact on antibody binding, we used bli to measure the affinity of 277 cr3022 to spike and asp614gly variant. similar to what we observed with dimeric ace2, 278 cr3022 bound wild-type spike more tightly than gly variant at physiological ph, with this 279 behavior inverting at low ph where folding and ph switch induced antibody shedding from wild-280 type but less so from variant spike (fig. 5f ). lastly, we tested the ability of antibody cr3022 to 281 neutralize the asp614gly variant, using a pseudovirus format. the asp614gly variant showed a 282 modest increase in neutralization sensitivity to cr3022 (fig. 5g) , indicating its conformational 283 13 masking to be mostly intact, with the observed increase in spike binding to cr3022 at low ph 284 perhaps compensated with respect to neutralization by altered spike interactions with ace2. how-in the face of spike conformational masking -to neutralize sars-cov-2? we 304 envision three scenarios. first, antibodies that block ace2 interaction, if the spike can be prevented 305 from binding ace2, it will not be able to start the endosomal entry pathway. second, antibodies 306 14 with extremely high affinity, we show that conformational masking reduces affinity of cr3022 at 307 ph 4.5 by 1000-fold, so that it no longer neutralizes. however, antibodies with orders of magnitude 308 tighter affinity might still bind and neutralize, despite a 1000-fold reduction in affinity at low 309 endosomal ph; in this context, we note that cr3022 does have 100-fold higher affinity to the 310 sars-cov spike and is able to neutralize sars-cov virus 6 . third, antibodies that bind to the all- cryo-em data processing and structural refinement for individual spikes 501 each dataset was divided into subsets which were initially processed independently in 502 parallel using frederick research computing environment (frce) computing cluster and later 503 combined for the final refinement. movie frame alignment was performed using motioncorr2 60 . 504 ctffind4 was used to determine the parameters of ctf 61 . the remaining processing steps were 505 performed using relion 3.0 (ref. 59 ) unless otherwise stated. for spike at ph 4.0, a small particle 506 set was selected manually and used to obtain 2d classes which were utilized as templates to select 507 a larger set of particles. an initial 3d model was obtained using eman 2.1 62 from the 2d classes 508 generated from this extended particle set. this 3d model was then subjected to 3d auto-509 refinement, and the resulting map was used to generate low-pass filtered picking templates for the 510 entire dataset. for spike at ph 5.5, particle picking was performed with cryolo 1.5 63 using a 511 general network model, and an initial 3d model was obtained with eman 2.1 from a subset of 512 resulting 2d classes. the following steps included rounds of 3d classification, 3d auto-513 refinement, ctf refinement, and particle polishing. map resolutions were calculated using the in late endosome-early lysosome, shed antibodies no longer bind spike, which can now be activated by the low-ph protease tmprss2.binding to ace2 facilitates endocytosis; as ph drops, spike folds and begins to shed antibodies like cr3022 that recognize cryptic epitopes.at physiological ph, the weak folding constraints of the spike enable antibodies like cr3022 to bind with avidity. antibody (µg/ml) 10 -3 10 -2 10 -1 10 0 10 1 10 2 several key residues, including r847, q853, and y837, switched interactive partners upon refolding. asp614 is colored orange and purple blue at ph 5.5 and ph 4.0, respectively. surrounding residues interacting with the switch are labeled in italics, and hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed lines. b, schematic of the ph-switch locking of rbd in the down position. c, unfolding enthalpy measured by dsc for the spike and its asp614gly variant at ph 7.4, 5.5, and 4.0. d, melting curves at ph 7.4 (left) and 4.0 (right). e, bli measurements of ace2 binding to the spike and its asp614gly variant at ph 7.4 and 4.0. f, bli measurements of cr3022 binding to the spike and its d614g variant at different phs. g, pseudovirus neutralization of sars-cov-2 and its d614g variant by antibody cr3022. 3 the orientations of the receptor-binding domains (rbds). however, the extent to which spike 54 glycosylation, sequence diversity, and conformational heterogeneity impact antibody elicitation or 55 antibody-mediated neutralization is unclear. 56 accumulating data indicates that individuals who recover from covid-19 often do not 57 have high levels of neutralizing antibody activity 11 , and there are worrisome reports of re-infection 58 of recovered individuals [12] [13] [14] . moreover, reports of antibody cr3022 disassembling spike 15 suggest 59 unusual fragility. 60 to facilitate a molecular understanding of the sars-cov-2 spike and its evasion from 61 antibody, we measured the unfolding enthalpy of the spike as well as its binding to cr3022 62 antibody and to ace2 receptor as a function of ph. we also determined cryo-em structures of the 63 spike, alone and in complex with ace2 receptor, at physiological and endosomal phs. we 64 delineated the molecular mechanism that mediates the raising and closing of rbds, which utilizes 65 a refolding region with multiple aspartic acid residues, a ph-dependent switch, which when fully 66 protonated locks rbds in the down position. overall, our findings suggest a ph-dependent 67 mechanism of conformational masking, whereby reduced folding at physiological ph underlies the 68 ease by which antibodies like cr3022 bind to spike and their prevalent elicitation. recognition of 69 ace2, however, leads to endosomal entry, resulting in reduction of ph and induction of antibody 70 shedding through ph-dependent conformational changes of the spike. 71 72 spike at physiological ph is at a minimum of unfolding enthalpy 73 to provide insight into the stability of the spike over the course of virus-cell entry, we used 74 differential scanning calorimetry (dsc) to measure the unfolding enthalpy of the soluble trimeric 4 trimerization domain 4,16 , as a function of ph. notably, at physiological ph we observed spike to be 77 at a minimum of unfolding enthalpy (73.3 kcal/mol) or ~10% the normalized unfolding enthalpy of 78 the average globular protein 17 (fig. 1a, left) . the amount of folding energy increased rapidly as 79 ph dropped, increasing ~10-fold by ph 6 before decreasing as ph reduced further. analysis of 80 melting curves (fig. 1a, right) indicated three distinct peaks: a peak at ~48°c, which dominated 81 under basic conditions and decreased at acidic conditions; a peak at ~65°c, which was barely 82 present at physiological ph, but rapidly increased to dominate as ph dropped to 5.5-6.0; and a 83 peak at ~55°c, which first appeared as a shoulder at ph 6, but then increased to dominate and 84 shifted to lower temperature at ph lower than 5.5. 85 in sharp contrast to spike, analysis of the spike n-terminal domain (ntd) and rbd as 86 separate proteins indicated each of them to have typical unfolding enthalpies (>90% that of the 87 average normalized globular protein) (extended data fig. 1) . 88 to understand how the reduced folding enthalpy might influence spike structure, we used 89 negative stain-electron microscopy (em) to visualize the spike as a function of ph (extended 90 data fig. 2) . at ph 7.4, we observed the spike to be mostly disordered. however, when ph 91 decreased, we observed well-formed trimers, which showed some clustering at ph 5.5-6.0 before 92 resolving into separate particles at ph 4.0-4.5. overall, we observed concordance between the 93 presence of well-formed trimers and folding enthalpy measured by dsc, with mostly unfolded 94 trimers at physiological ph and substantially increased folding at endosomal ph. 95 binding of ace2 receptor and cr3022 antibody at physiological and endosomal ph 97 for variation in ph over the course of virus entry to impact the binding of antibody, the 98 antibody would need to allow spike recognition of the ace2 receptor, thereby enabling the virus 99 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 5 to enter the endosome 8 . we used isothermal titration calorimetry (itc) to determine whether 100 binding of cr3022 to spike was compatible with ace2 interaction. we chose to use a monomeric 101 version of ace2 to test more sensitively the impact of antibody inhibition. first, we titrated ace2 102 into soluble spike, and observed 1.9 ace2 molecules to bind per spike trimer, with an affinity of 103 94 nm (fig. 1b, left) . next, we fully titrated the antigen-binding fragment (fab) of cr3022 into 104 soluble spike (extended data fig. 3a ) and further titrated ace2 into the spike-cr3022 complex 105 formed to observe 2.3 ace2 molecules to bind each spike-cr3022 complex, with an affinity of 106 130 nm (fig. 1b, right) . the sars-cov-2 spike thus appears capable of recognizing ace2 even 107 in the presence of antibody cr3022, indicating that cr3022-bound spikes could enter the 108 endosomal compartment. 109 to gain insight into the impact of ph on ace2 and cr3022 interactions with spike, we 110 characterized their affinities both to spike and to rbd, expressed as a separate molecule, at 111 physiological and endosomal ph. we chose to use dimeric ace2 to more closely mimic native 112 interactions with spike. at endosomal phs, surface plasmon resonance (spr)-determined ace2 113 binding affinities to both spike and rbd were somewhat reduced from 0.82 nm to 7.0 nm and 114 from 1.0 nm to 14 nm at ph 4.5 for spike and rbd, respectively (extended data fig. 3b ). with 115 cr3022 igg, affinities were high to both spike and rbd at physiological ph, though with a 10-116 fold difference (0.49 and 0.052 nm to spike and rbd, respectively) ( fig. 1c) . at ph 5.5, this 10-117 fold difference in affinity was retained (1.7 and 0.23 nm, respectively). however, at ph 4.5, 118 cr3022 still bound to rbd (1.1 nm), but affinity to spike was dramatically reduced with a k d > 119 1000 nm -an affinity difference of at least ~1000-fold (fig. 1c, extended data fig. 3c) . because 120 cr3022 still bound strongly to the isolated rbd, we attribute the dramatically reduced affinity of 6 123 cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2 spike with ace2 at physiological and endosomal ph 124 structures of ace2 and cr3022 have been determined in complex with rbd as a separate 125 domain 6,18-20 , but less is known about their interactions with trimer. to provide structural insight 126 into the recognition between ace2 and spike trimer, we mixed soluble ace2 with spike trimer at 127 a 6:1 molar ratio at ph 7.4 and collected single-particle cryo-em data on a titan krios. we 128 observed spike binding ace2 at stoichiometries of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 with prevalences of 15%, 129 43%, and 38%, respectively (fig. 2a) . while the membrane-proximal region of the spike in these 130 complexes remained 3-fold symmetric, the ace2-binding regions showed asymmetry with, for 131 example, superposition of the double-ace2-bound complex onto itself based on membrane-132 proximal regions leading to displacement of ace2 molecules by almost 13 å (fig. 2b) . however, 133 we could see no evidence of coordinated movement, with the rbd domain on each protomer 134 appearing to engage ace2 without significantly impacting the up (or down) motion of the 135 neighboring protomers. thus, ace2 receptor engagement required rbd movement that did not 136 appear to destabilize the spike nor to trigger a substantial structural rearrangement beyond raising 137 of the rbd. 138 to provide insight into the impact of endosomal ph, we again mixed soluble ace2 with 139 spike trimer at a 6:1 molar ratio, but this time at ph 5.5, and determined the structure of the 140 complex using cryo-em. similar to physiological ph, we observed spike binding ace2 at 141 stoichiometries of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 with prevalences of 27%, 32%, and 27%, respectively ( fig.   142 2c). we superposed triple-ace2-bound complexes determined at ph 7.4 and ph 5.5 and observed 143 the membrane-proximal regions of the spike to align closely, while ace2 molecules showed 7   about equal distribution of single-, double-, and triple-ace2-bound states at both physiological   146   and endosomal ph.   147   148 ligand-free cryo-em structures of sars-cov-2 spike at low ph 149 in light of the similarity of ace2 complexes at ph 7.4 and 5.5 (fig. 2) but substantial 150 differences at these phs observed for ligand-free spike by negative stain em (extended data fig.   151 2), we analyzed the structure of the spike at ph 5.5 by single-particle cryo-em. we determined a 152 consensus structure from 1,083,554 particles at a resolution of 2.7 å, in which most of the spike 153 was well resolved, except for a lone rbd for which reconstruction density was poor ( fig. 3a ; fig. 5c, panel b) . interestingly, 158 unlike for ace2-bound complexes, no double-or triple-rbd-up conformations were observed. 159 two classes with prevalences of 23% (conformation 1 -2.9 å resolution) and 26% (conformation 160 2 -2.9 å resolution) corresponded to two different single rbd-up conformations. a third 161 prevalent class representing 10% of the particles had all rbds down. for all three of these 162 prevalent classes -and unlike in the consensus structure -density for all rbd domains was well 163 resolved (extended data fig. 5c, panel c) , indicating multiple different orientations of rbd in 164 the spike at ph 5.5. in the remaining classes, the rbd did not assume a defined position, 165 suggesting mobility of this domain even at endosomal ph. 166 to determine how even lower ph affected conformational heterogeneity, and since 167 cr3022 retained binding to spike at ph 5.5, we sought to obtain a cryo-em structure of the ligand-168 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 8 free spike at ph 4.0. single particle analysis of a dataset comprising 911,839 particles resolved an 169 all-rbd-down conformation (fig 3b, extended data fig. 6a-b) . the map was refined to 2.4 å 170 resolution, enabling individual water molecules to be observed (fig. 3c) and 89 additional residues 171 to be modeled, which were undefined in published cryo-em structures 3,4 . fig. 7b ). this region, which for reasons described below we named the 'switch' region, was fully 185 defined in protomer b and partially resolved in protomer a (residues 825-829 and 849-858) and 186 protomer c (residues 825-840 and 851-858). notably, this region was almost entirely unresolved in 187 our structures with ace2 and in published spike structures 3,4 (fig. 4a, bottom) . 188 the asymmetry in distribution of refolding regions in the trimer between single-up and all-189 down structures (fig. 4b) suggested the 'up' rbd to require concerted adjustments throughout the 190 trimer. to delineate these, we determined angles and rigid-body translations between each of the 191 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . notably, refolding regions were observed to reside at critical inter-protomer contacts or at 212 key joints between domains, especially the sd2 to sd1 joint, which cradles the switch of the 213 neighboring protomer, and the sd1 b joint with up-rbd b made up of refolding residues 522-530 b . 214 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. tyr837 of unprotonated-switches (fig 5a, left) and recognizing a backbone carbonyl in protonated-258 switches (fig. 5a, right) . to test the impact of this mutation on unfolding enthalpy, we performed 259 dsc measurements at ph 7.4, 5.5, and 4.0 (fig. 5c) . while the enthalpies at ph 5.5 and 4.0 were 260 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . 12 similar to those of wild-type spike, the unfolding enthalpy at ph 7.4 was dramatically increased, 261 with the appearance of a high melting temperature peak for the variant (fig. 5d) , seen for the wild-262 type only at low ph. the dramatic difference in melting enthalpy demonstrated the substantive 263 energetic effect of altering a interprotomer-switch interface. to test the influence of this increased 264 unfolding enthalpy on ace2 interaction, we performed biolayer interferometry (bli) on dimeric 265 ace2 recognizing spike or the asp614gly variant. at ph 7.4 we observed higher binding of the 266 wild-type spike than the asp614gly variant to dimeric ace2 (fig. 5e, left) , consistent with dsc 267 showing more unfolding enthalpy for the variant spike, thereby reducing its ability to bind dimeric 268 ace2 with avidity. 269 we next tried to understand the impact of the asp614gly mutation on the switch-based 270 mechanism locking rbd in the down position at low ph. as switches with disorder in the region 271 contacting sd2 were associated with "up" rbds, we hypothesized that mutation of asp614 to gly 272 would more closely mimic the loss of interaction between sd2 and switch, as exemplified by 273 rbd b and switch c. indeed, bli measurements at ph 4.0 showed dimeric ace2 to bind the 274 asp614gly variant with greater apparent affinity (fig. 5e, right) , consistent with the higher 275 probability of rbds adopting the "up" position, and providing an explanation for its increased 276 infectivity 25 . to test the impact on antibody binding, we used bli to measure the affinity of 277 cr3022 to spike and asp614gly variant. similar to what we observed with dimeric ace2, 278 cr3022 bound wild-type spike more tightly than gly variant at physiological ph, with this 279 behavior inverting at low ph where folding and ph switch induced antibody shedding from wild-280 type but less so from variant spike (fig. 5f ). lastly, we tested the ability of antibody cr3022 to 281 neutralize the asp614gly variant, using a pseudovirus format. the asp614gly variant showed a 282 modest increase in neutralization sensitivity to cr3022 (fig. 5g) , indicating its conformational 283 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 13 masking to be mostly intact, with the observed increase in spike binding to cr3022 at low ph 284 perhaps compensated with respect to neutralization by altered spike interactions with ace2. how-in the face of spike conformational masking -to neutralize sars-cov-2? we 304 envision three scenarios. first, antibodies that block ace2 interaction, if the spike can be prevented 305 from binding ace2, it will not be able to start the endosomal entry pathway. second, antibodies 306 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 14 with extremely high affinity, we show that conformational masking reduces affinity of cr3022 at 307 ph 4.5 by 1000-fold, so that it no longer neutralizes. however, antibodies with orders of magnitude 308 tighter affinity might still bind and neutralize, despite a 1000-fold reduction in affinity at low 309 endosomal ph; in this context, we note that cr3022 does have 100-fold higher affinity to the 310 sars-cov spike and is able to neutralize sars-cov virus 6 . third, antibodies that bind to the all- was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. were cloned into the pvrc8400 vector, as described previously 51 , expressed and purified as 385 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 21 estimation were carried out in cryosparc 2.14 (ref. 54 ). the 3d reconstructions were performed 454 using c1 symmetry for all complexes as the ace2-bound region showed flexibility that prohibited 455 typical symmetry operations in the triple-bound complex. however, the rbd-ace2 region was 456 assessed in greater detail through particle expansion with c3 symmetry which was used to build 457 that region of the model. 458 the coordinates of sars cov-2 spike ectodomain structures, pdb entries 6vxx and 459 6m0j 3 , were employed as initial models for fitting the cryo-em map of theace2 bound structures. cov-2 s with a concentration of 1 mg/ml was diluted with the target buffer 10 times, and the 469 diluted sample was incubated on ice for 15 min. immediately before negative staining, the sample 470 was further diluted 5 times with the following buffer: 10 mm sodium acetate, 150 mm nacl (for 471 ph 3.6-5.5); 10 mm hepes, 150 mm nacl (for ph 7.4); 10 mm trizma-hcl, 150 mm nacl (for 472 ph 8.8). a 4.7-µl drop of the diluted sample was applied to a glow-discharged carbon-coated 473 copper grid for 10-15 s. the drop was removed with filter paper, and the grid was washed by 474 applying consecutively three 4.7-µl drops of the buffer used for diluting the sample and removing 475 them with filter paper. protein molecules adsorbed to the carbon were negatively stained by 476 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 22 applying consecutively three 4.7-µl drops of 0.75% uranyl formate in the same manner. the grid 477 was air-dried and screened for staining quality and particle density using a hitachi h-7650 478 transmission electron microscope (tem). datasets were collected using an fei t20 tem 479 equipped with an eagle ccd camera. the microscope was operated at 200 kv, the pixel size was was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. .cryo-em data processing and structural refinement for individual spikes 501 each dataset was divided into subsets which were initially processed independently in 502 parallel using frederick research computing environment (frce) computing cluster and later 503 combined for the final refinement. movie frame alignment was performed using motioncorr2 60 . 504 ctffind4 was used to determine the parameters of ctf 61 . the remaining processing steps were 505 performed using relion 3.0 (ref. 59 ) unless otherwise stated. for spike at ph 4.0, a small particle 506 set was selected manually and used to obtain 2d classes which were utilized as templates to select 507 a larger set of particles. an initial 3d model was obtained using eman 2.1 62 from the 2d classes 508 generated from this extended particle set. this 3d model was then subjected to 3d auto-509 refinement, and the resulting map was used to generate low-pass filtered picking templates for the 510 entire dataset. for spike at ph 5.5, particle picking was performed with cryolo 1.5 63 using a 511 general network model, and an initial 3d model was obtained with eman 2.1 from a subset of 512 resulting 2d classes. the following steps included rounds of 3d classification, 3d auto-513 refinement, ctf refinement, and particle polishing. map resolutions were calculated using the 514 gold-standard approach 64 at the fsc curve threshold of 0.143. resmap 1.1.4 was used to asses 515 local resolution 65 . local map sharpening was performed using phenix.auto_sharpen 66 . spider 516 22.1 was used for map conversion and re-sizing 67 . correlations between cryo-em maps and atomic 517 models were assessed using phenix.mtriage 68 . ucsf chimera was used for docking and 518 visualization 69 . despite the fact that c3 symmetry was imposed during the reconstruction of spike 519 for the ph 4.0 dataset, the resulting map displayed some asymmetrical features in some regions, 520 such as that around residue 830. therefore, the three chains of the atomic model were built and 521 refined individually. the coordinates of sars cov-2 spike ectodomain structures, pdb entries 522 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 24 6vxx and 6vyb, were used as initial models for fitting the cryo-em map of the spike structures 523 at ph 4.0 and ph 5.5 structures. iterative model building and real space refinement were carried 524 out using coot 55 and phenix to accurately fit the coordinates to the electron density map. 525 molprobity 56 was used to validate geometry and check structure quality. videos 1-4) . 535 the structural heterogeneity of the consensus ph 5.5 map in the rbd region was analyzed 536 using local 3d classification. to obtain an accurate mask encompassing the conformational space 537 of the dynamic rbd, the four 3d variability volumes corresponding to the beginning and the end 538 of the trajectories defined by eigenvectors 0 and 2 were first aligned to the consensus cryo-em 539 map. for each of the four volumes, the density corresponding to the dynamic rbd was isolated by 540 performing volume segmentation in ucsf chimera 69 . these rbd sub-volumes were added 541 together, and a soft mask was created from the resulting composite volume by low-pass filtering 542 the density to 15 å, extending the resulting volume by 2 pixels, and adding a soft edge of 5 pixels 543 using relion_mask_create. local 3d classification of the consensus dataset within this mask was 544 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint 25 performed without particle alignment in relion 3 59 , followed by global 3d refinement of each of 545 the resulting six maps. 546 547 identification of sars-cov-2 spike refolding regions between ph 5.5 and ph 4.0 structures. 548 we used a sliding window of 11 amino acids and 21 amino acids respectively to align and bio-layer interferometry (bli) 560 a fortébio octet htx instrument (fortébio) was used to assess binding over a wide ph 561 range. experiments were setup in tilted black 384-well plates (geiger bio-one) in 10mm of the 562 corresponding buffer, plus 150mm nacl, 0.02% tween20, 0.1% bsa and 0.05% sodium azide. 563 buffers used for ph 8.0 to 4.0 are as described above in the dsc section. plates were agitated at 564 1,000 rpm, and the temperature was set to 30°c. anti-human igg fc capture biosensors (fortébio) 565 were used to immobilize 300nm cr3022 igg or dimeric ace2-fc for 150 seconds at ph 7.4. 566 following loading of cr3022 igg, sensors were placed in the ph 7.4 buffer for 30 seconds and 567 and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . in late endosome-early lysosome, shed antibodies no longer bind spike, which can now be activated by the low-ph protease tmprss2.binding to ace2 facilitates endocytosis; as ph drops, spike folds and begins to shed antibodies like cr3022 that recognize cryptic epitopes.at physiological ph, the weak folding constraints of the spike enable antibodies like cr3022 to bind with avidity.antibody cr3022 spike and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprint antibody (µg/ml) 10 -3 10 -2 10 -1 10 0 10 1 10 2 several key residues, including r847, q853, and y837, switched interactive partners upon refolding. asp614 is colored orange and purple blue at ph 5.5 and ph 4.0, respectively. surrounding residues interacting with the switch are labeled in italics, and hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed lines. b, schematic of the ph-switch locking of rbd in the down position. c, unfolding enthalpy measured by dsc for the spike and its asp614gly variant at ph 7.4, 5.5, and 4.0. d, melting curves at ph 7.4 (left) and 4.0 (right). e, bli measurements of ace2 binding to the spike and its asp614gly variant at ph 7.4 and 4.0. f, bli measurements of cr3022 binding to the spike and its d614g variant at different phs. g, pseudovirus neutralization of sars-cov-2 and its d614g variant by antibody cr3022. and is also made available for use under a cc0 license.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. this article is a us government work. it is not subject to copyright under 17 usc 105the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.04.187989 doi: biorxiv preprintthe pandemic coronavirus disease (covid-19) by sars-cov-2 virus has caused tremendous suffering to tens of millions of people around the world. even though quite a few clinical studies involving different approaches are undergoing for the treatment of the disease, there is no effective cure yet up to date. vaccines therefore is urgently needed for the preventing further spread of the covid-19.the corona virus, sars-cov-2, consists of a large rna genome, four structural proteins, 16 nonstructural proteins, and some accessory proteins. the four structural proteins include spike, envelope, membrane, and nucleocapsid proteins, of which the spike glycoprotein is of particular interest for it is a popular vaccine target for corona virus.antibodies targeting the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov and mers-cov, especially its receptor-binding domain (rbd), was found to efficiently neutralize virus infection [1, 2] .antibodies from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 patients however showed limited cross neutralization, in spite of the high sequence similarity between two viruses [3] . other vaccine approaches include the production of live attenuated whole virion vaccines, inactivated whole virion vaccines, recombinant protein vaccines, and mrna based vaccines [4] . sars-cov-2 was found to enter cells through binding of the host cellular receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) via its spike glycoprotein soon after its outbreak in china [3] . later the cryo-em revealed the structure of sars-cov-2 s-rbd complexed with its receptor human ace2 [5] [6] [7] [8] . the s1 subunit of spike glycoprotein undergoes a hinge-like conformational transition from "down" conformation to "up" conformation before binding to ace2 [8] . the receptor-binding motif (rbm, 72 amino acid in total) of spike glycoprotein in close contact of ace2 receptor was identified for its sequence between 437 -508 [9] , and this rbm was consistent with the identified s-rbd [8] . this conformational transition state has become the target for antibody-mediated neutralization, and the atomic-level understanding of this transitional state and the identification of s-rbm would facilitate the vaccine design and development against sars-cov-2.ferritin is a 24-mer protein assembly consisting of heavy chain (21 kd) and light chain (19 kd) . it has a cage-like structure in a way similar to sars-cov-2. because of its unique structure, ferritin is a promising nanoplatform for antigen presentation and immune stimulation [10] [11] [12] [13] . its spherical architecture has an outer diameter of 12 nm, suitable for rapid tissue penetration and draining to lymph node [14] . in this work, we engineered a human ferritin heavy chain (hftn) by fusing and presenting the rbm of its spike glycoprotein as potential vaccine of sars-cov-2.human ace2(his tag) (10108-h08h) ，ace2 rabbit antibody (10108-rp01)， goat anti-rabbit/hrp secondary antibody(ssa004, and sars-cov-2 (2019-ncov) and rbd of spike glycoprotein (mfc tag)(40592-v05h) were purchased from sino biological (beijing, china). the refolding solution was concentrated and buffer exchanged to 25 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 8.0) with a millipore lab scale tangential flow filter (tff) system. after buffer exchange, rbm-hftn was found to have a typical soluble ferritin structure. the fusion protein with its right space structure was further purified by using anion exchange chromatography (flow through mode), followed with a size-exclusion chromatography to remove aggregates and other low molecule impurities.the physico-chemical properties of fusion rbm-hftn were analyzed by sec-hplc overnight. after blocking with 5% bsa, ace2 protein (concentration 0.5 μg/ml) was allowed to bind to the surface coated proteins for 2 h at 37c, followed by washing with washing buffer three times. anti-ace2 antibody (dilution 1:1000) was incubated for 1.5 hours at 37c followed by washing for three times. secondary antibody/hrp (1:5000 dilution) in 5% bsa was incubated 37c for 0.5 h followed by washing for three times. the tmb substrate was added and incubated for 30 min, and then the absorbance was read at 650 nm wavelength.ferritin heavy chain protein has found many biological applications in nanomedicines and molecular diagnostics [15] [16] [17] . lately, a few constructs based on ferritin have been developed as antivirus and anticancer vaccines [10, 11, 13] . because ferritin heavy chain protein is derived from a natural occurring protein in human, itself has low immunogenicity.its 24-mer assembly cage-like structure has four different symmetries, six 4-fold axes, eight 3-fold axes, twelve 2-fold axes, and twenty-four c3-c4 interfaces. by presenting a fusion protein at the 3-fold axes, ferritin was able to display eight trimers of fused protein, resulting in enhanced immunogenicity of protein on display [18] . in this work we engineered a human ferritin heavy chain fused with the rbm of spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 at its nterminus with (ggggs)3 short peptide linker ( figure 1a ). we chose a short polypeptide sequence (72 amino acid) of spike glycoprotein rbm (s-rbm) based on latest 3-d cryo-em studies of spike glycoprotein-ace2 complex [8, 9] . because this sequence doesn't appear to have a stable 3-d structure, we engineered it at the n-terminus, so that the fused s-rbm subunits are distant from each other and won't affect the formation 24-mer assembly. for the same reason, we chose a minimal size of rbd so that it is properly displayed on the surface of ferritin. in spite of those considerations, the rbm-hftn fusion protein was found mainly in the inclusion bodies, instead of in soluble form.hypothetically, the designed rbm-hftn fusion protein may involve in two different pathways against virus infection. first and most importantly, the rbm-hftn may act as vaccine against sars-cov-2, and antibodies responsive to spike glycoprotein rbm may subsequently neutralize sars-cov-2, followed by removal of virus by immune system ( figure 1b, upper pathway) . two antibodies found in covid-19 patients were shown to block the binding between virus s-protein rbd and cellular receptor ace2 [19] . their therapeutic effect was validated in mouse model by reducing virus titer in infected lungs [19] . those findings supported our hypothesis that by properly presenting s-protein rbd/rbm, the designed rbm-hftn has great potential as an anti-sars-cov-2 vaccine, thus inducing the production of antivirus antibodies. the second pathway, more obvious and direct, is to block the cellular entry of sars-cov-2 by preoccupy the ace2 receptor with rbm-hftn and suppress the virus proliferation ( figure 1b , lower pathway). the first pathway is more effective for prevention of virus infection. the second pathway is valuable for treatment after virus infection as antagonist of ace2 receptor.the expressed rbm-hftn was found in the form of inclusion bodies in the bacteria lysis precipitates (supplementary figure s2) rbd of spike glycoprotein (mfc tag) and rbm-hftn of varied concentration in 100 l was incubated in maxisorp plate and ace2 was allowed to bind to the surface coated proteins.their binding was detected by ace2 antibody followed by its secondary antibody. in this indirect elisa, the maximum binding intensity correlates with the binding site on surface.as indicated by the results in figure 3 , s-rbd showed higher plateau than rbm-hftn, suggesting more binding sites are available in s-rbd coated wells than in rbm-hftn coated wells. the ec50s of the binding between ace2 and s-rbd, rbm-hftn were estimated to be 60.66 nm and 23.36 nm respectively. apparently rbm-hftn has higher binding affinity than s-protein in binding to their same ace2 receptor. the apparent higher binding affinity may attribute to the cage-like structure of rbm-hftn, which presents multiple copies (24 copies) of rbm on the surface. this result suggested that the rbm is properly presented on surface of heavy chain human ferritin and is recognizable by the ace2 receptor. its potential as sars-cov-2 vaccine and as antagonist of ace2 receptor is being further studied in animal experiments.the receptor-binding motif (rbm) of sars-cov-2, a 72-amino acid polypeptide, was fused with n-terminus of human heavy chain ferritin (hftn) through a proper linker. the constructed rbm-hftn was found in inclusion bodies of bacterial lysis and was able to refold by gradual dialysis. the purified rbm-hftn was found to be in good purity, expected size and morphology. its biological activity towards ace2 receptor was confirmed by elisa and the fusion protein rbm-hftn bodes well as potential vaccine and therapeutics against sars-cov-2 as ace2 receptor antagonist.t. ke holds ownership interest (including patents) in kunshan xinyunda biotech co., ltd.no potential conflicts of interests were disclosed by the other authors. lactoferrin (lf) is a versatile glycoprotein, which plays a key role in many biological functions [1] . in this work, we focus on the lf as a crucial player in natural immunity, since it has been proposed to play a strong antiviral activity against a wide range of rna and dna viruses [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . lf is composed of a single chain of about 700 residues folded into two symmetrical lobes. each lobe possesses a metal-binding site, able to bind iron but also other ions like cu 2+ , zn 2+ and m n 3+ [7, 8] .this protein is present in saliva, tears, seminal fluid, white blood cells, and milk of mammals [9] . from its discovery in 1939 [10, 11] lactoferrin has been identified as the most important iron-binding protein in milk. besides, in recent years, lactoferrin has been found involved in a multitude of biological processes. in fact, despite the name, the iron cargo capacity of lf is not the prominent activity exerted by this molecule. instead, it performs antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer activities [8, 12] , together with a broad antimicrobial action against bacteria and fungi. the latter activity, in particular, is due to lf's ability to reversibly bind two atoms of iron with high affinity in the presence of bicarbonate. the iron-free form of lf, apo-lactoferrin (apolf), deprives bacteria of iron, thus inhibiting their metabolic activities in vivo.besides all the aforementioned activities, lf has been demonstrated to prevent infection of a wide range of diverse viral species [13] .many viruses make use of glycans, such as sialic acid (sia) or glycosaminoglycan, like heparan sulfate (hf) as attachment factors. see, for example, [14] for details on glycans. when the contact between the virus particle and these receptors is established, they roll toward their spe-cific viral receptor and subsequently enter the host cell, for instance by fusing with the host cell membrane [15] .while the interaction between lf and hf has been observed [16] , studies on its interaction with sialic acid derivatives are still missing. on the other hand, lf has been reported to interact with virus structural proteins, s, m, and e [17] .in general, depending on the specifics of the virus, lactoferrin prevents infection of the target cell by either (i) interfering with the attachment factor or (ii) by binding to host cell molecules that the virus uses as a receptor or co-receptor (competition) or (iii) by direct binding to virus particles, as described for herpesvirus [18] , polioand rotavirus [19, 20] , and possibly human immunodeficiency virus [21] . see, for example, [22] for a more detailed discussion.while we are writing this article, a novel virus, first observed in the autumn of 2019, has rapidly become pandemic. this virus, called sars-cov-2, belongs to the coronavirus family and causes severe acute respiratory syndrome [23, 24] , somewhat similar to those caused by two other coronaviruses, sars-cov and mers-cov, which crossed species in 2002-2004 [25, 26] and 2012 [27] . in fact, sars-cov-2, similarly to sars-cov and mers-cov, attacks the lower respiratory system, thus provoking viral pneumonia. however, this infection can also lead to effects on the gastrointestinal system, heart, kidney, liver, and central nervous system [24, 28, 29] .as for sars-cov [30] [31] [32] , recent in vivo experiments confirmed that also sars-cov-2 cell entry is mediated by high-affinity interactions between the receptorbinding domain (rbd) of the virus s glycoprotein and the human-host angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor [33] . the spike protein is located on the arxiv:2007.07341v1 [q-bio.bm] 14 jul 2020 virus envelope and promotes the host attachment and fusion between the viral and cellular membrane. [34, 35] . structural studies determined the structures of such protein both in free form and bound to ace2 [36] . further studies investigate the possible interaction of sars-cov-2 to sialic acids [37] [38] [39] [40] or heparan surfate receptors [39] , both considered involved in sars-cov-2 as well as in other coronavirus infections [14, 16, [41] [42] [43] .while the use of lf as an antiviral against previous coronaviruses infections has been poorly investigated, except for [16] , where evidence of an effect in the attachment process is shown, new studies are proving the antiviral effect of lactoferrin against the novel sars-cov-2 infection. in particular, administration of a liposomal formulation of lf to a significant sample of covid-19 positive patients, has been shown to provide an immediate beneficial effect [44] .here, we computationally investigate the possible molecular mechanisms behind the observed antiviral action of lactoferrin. in particular, we make use of a recently developed computational protocol based on the 2d zernike polynomials, able to rapidly characterize the shape conformation of given protein regions [37] . in this framework using a simple pairwise distance, it is possible to evaluate the similarity between 2 protein pockets or the shape complementarity between the binding regions of 2 interacting proteins.in order to assess whether lactoferrin could influence the attachment factors, we investigated the ability of lt to bind to sialic acid (sia) or heparan sulfate (hs) receptors [14] , both considered involved in sars-cov-2 infection [37] [38] [39] [40] as well as to other coronavirus infections [16, [41] [42] [43] .we moreover checked for a possible direct interaction between lf and ace2 receptor, which could inhibit the interplay between spike and ace2 binding necessary to the virus infection. finally, we investigate the possible interaction between lf and the 3 proteins present on the sars-cov-2 membrane, i.e. the spike (s), membrane (m), and envelope (e) proteins.the entry of the virus inside the host cells requires the occurrence of a sequence of molecular interactions. sialoside (sia) and/or heparan sulfate (hf) chains mediate the attachment of the virion to the cell surface. once in the proximity of the cellular receptor (ace2), sars-cov-2 spike protein binds to the receptor and initiates the internalization process. figure 1a shows a sketch of the mechanism. the observed antiviral action of lf may consist of interference in one or more of those steps. we thus investigate in the next three sections the possibility of direct binding between lactoferrin and sia, ace2, and sars-cov-2 spike protein, respectively (see figure 1b) .possible binding regions for sialic acid, the terminal molecule of the sia receptors on human lactoferrin are investigated on the basis of the procedure described in [37] , i.e. we select the portion of the molecular surface of the mers-cov spike protein in interaction with sialic acid, experimentally solved in [45] (figure 2a ), and we search for similar patches on the lf molecular surface.within the same strategy, we search for similar patches on the surface of human lactoferrin.in the 2d zernike framework, the geometrical shape of a protein surface patch is compactly summarized in a set of ordered numerical descriptors, whose number -121 in our case -modulate the detail of the description. dealing with ordered numerical descriptors, the comparison between different protein patch can be performed with a euclidean distance. figure 2b and c show the four most geometrically similar patches identified in the apo and holo form of lf. an a posteriori check of the electrostatic potential on the patches, allows us to select only some of the possible solutions identified based on the shape comparison analysis, i.e. the ones having also a similar electrostatic surface with the sia binding site on the mers-cov spike.the region on lf surface identified as the most similar to the mers region interacting with sialic acid, both in shape and in electrostatics, is the one centered on val 346.to check whether the action of lactoferrin can be ascribed to a competition with the virion spike proteins in binding directly the ace2 receptor ( figure 1 ), we performed a blind search of the molecular surfaces of both ace2 and human lf to identify possible binding regions having a meaningful shape complementarity. under this hypothesis, if the interaction between the lf and the ace2 receptor occurs, lf could hinder the molecular binding between the spike protein of sars-cov-2 and the corresponding ace2 receptor. figure 3 shows the molecular surface of the ace2 receptor colored according to its propensity to bind regions of the lf protein.the redder the region, the greater the shape complementarity between that region and another one found on the surface of the putative molecular partner, i.e. holo lactoferrin. as one can see from figure 3 , a complementary region is indeed present, however, it is located far from the binding site of the spike (grey in the figure) and in a part of ace2 that looks toward the membrane. to better visualize the result, we have represented two points of view of the binding between spike and ace2, one rotated 180 o with respect to the other. on the other hand, we can see that the ace2 region interacting with the sars-cov-2 spike protein has no low shape complementarity with lf regions. (1) competition for the binding with glycan chains, and/or (2) competition for binding ace2 receptor and/or (3) direct interaction with one of the proteins in the virion envelope, i.e. with s, m or e proteins.a third possible mechanism at the basis of the observed antiviral activity of lf could be ascribed to a direct interaction with the membrane proteins present on the virion envelope. in particular, sars-cov-2 presents three different kinds of proteins on its membrane, i.e. s, m, and e proteins [46, 47] . while the 3d structure of the s protein has been determined -even if some loop regions in the s1 sub-unit are not solved -unfortunately, no structures are available for the e and m proteins. thus, the molecular surfaces of lf were compared with those of the three proteins in order to check whether an interaction with lactoferrin is possible. for this analysis, we adopted the same computational procedure used in the previous paragraph.for both s, m, and e proteins, we sample their whole molecular surface and compared all the possible patches with those of lf. in this way, all molecular surfaces, both membrane proteins, and lf ones are colored according to the corresponding binding propensity. e and m presented a possible region of interactions located in the intra-membrane region (data not shown). the most robust and relevant result of this analysis regards the compatibility between the spike and lactoferrin. according to our findings, lf presents two regions of high complementarity with one portion of the c-terminal domain of the spike s1 subunit and another located in the n-terminal part.to test the reliability of the found signals, we performed a molecular dynamics simulation of the spike trimer (see methods for details) and sampled 5 configurations for each of the three chains at equilibrium (see in particular, for each chain, we performed a principal component analysis (pca) on the frames of the dynamics and thus projected them on the plane identified by the two principal components. upon clustering these points we obtain 5 subgroups. for each subgroup, we extract the centroidal configuration. since distant points in the pca plane correspond to the different 3d structure, picking one point from each identified cluster assured that the selected configurations have high structural differences between them in the explored configuration space (see figure 4b) .remarkably, repeating the blind search for complementarity regions on the 15 surfaces of the extracted spike monomers, we found conservation of the signal over the conformational noise. figure 4c) shows the identified regions and their conservation in the different sampled frames.among the found regions, the one involving the spike c-terminal domain is the one with higher shape complementarity. in particular, according to our method, human lactoferrin could interact with the spike protein with the surface region centered in residue ala 539. alternatively, the spike protein may interact with the lf pro-tein using a molecular patch centered in the residue phe 490. it must be pointed out that the complementarity achieved by these patches is comparable with those of experimentally solved complexes. indeed, analyzing the shape complementarity of over 4600 x-ray protein-protein complexes (see methods for details), we have the distribution shown in figure 4d , where the lower the distance the higher the complementarity of the binding region. red dotted line shows the complementarity found between the spike and lt. as it is evident the proposed patch is characterized by values of shape complementarity typical of experimental complexes.finally, to further support this result with an independent and external methodology to our approach, we performed a completely blind molecular docking analysis between the spike protein and the lf protein. to this end, zdock server was used as a state of the art of molecular docking software [48] . as per default settings, only the first 10 docking poses have been selected and the predicted contacts analyzed. in particular, five out of ten poses show bindings involving the spike region involve the region we found with our protocol when the residues are defined in contact if their c-alpha atoms have a distance less than 8å. in the last decade, the zernike formalism has been widely applied for the characterization of molecular surfaces [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] .very recently, we developed a new representation, based on the 2d zernike polynomials, which allows an extremely efficient, fast, and completely unsupervised description of the local geometrical shape, allowing for easy comparison between different regions of molecules. through this compact description, it is possible both to analyze the similarity between 2 different regions -suggesting, for example, a similar ligand for binding regions -and to study the complementarity between interacting surfaces [37] .here, we used our novel method to shed some light on the molecular mechanisms ruling the observed antiviral action human lactoferrin exerts against sars-cov-2 infection [44] .in particular, we focused on the early stages of the infection, i.e. the attachment and entry of the virus to the host cell, when lactoferrin can interfere with the virushost interaction without the need to be internalized in the cell. we thus tried to establish whether lactoferrin could compete with the virus in binding to sialic acid, the sticky end of sialoside chains, which has been suggested to mediate the attachment of sars-cov-2 to the host cell. interestingly, comparing the binding region of sialic acid in the mers-cov coronavirus with patches on the lactoferrin surface, we found possible spots on both apo and holo forms of lf, which could compete in forming low affinity but high avidity interactions.we then proceeded to test the hypothesis of an inter-action between lactoferrin and the primary sars-cov-2 protein receptor, ace2. a blind search for complementarity regions highlighted a hot-spot in a region that in physiological conditions is oriented toward the membrane, while no significative complementarity is present in the ace2 region involved in the interaction with the virus spike protein. at last, we analyzed the three membrane proteins on the virus envelope, i.e. the e, m, and s ones. similarly to ace-2, both e and m presented possible interacting regions in portions of the surface, that are buried in the virion membrane under normal conditions (data not shown). on the other hand, the spike protein showed two main hot spots, one in the n-terminal domain of the s1 subunit and another in the c-terminal one. those two regions are robust to molecular noise, as the signal endures using different configurations sampled from a molecular dynamics simulation and each of the three chains of the trimer. notably, the most complementary region is the one in the c-terminal region, the one involved in the spike-ace2 interaction. thus our finding suggests a possible competition between ace2 and lactoferrin for the binding of the sars-cov-2 spike, which may explain the observed antiviral action.the protein, whose structures are analyzed in this paper are:• human lactoferrin, in the apo (pdb id: 1cb6) and holo (pdb id: 1lfg) forms.• ace2, in its apo state (pdb id: 1r42).• sars-cov-2 s protein, modeled using i-tasser [54] .• sars-cov-2 m protein, modeled using i-tasser [54] .• sars-cov-2 e protein, modeled using i-tasser [54] .to set a reference for the measured complementarities, a dataset of protein-protein complexes experimentally solved in x-ray crystallography is taken from [55] . we only selected pair interactions regarding chains with more than 50 residues. the protein-protein dataset is therefore composed of 4605 complexes. for each complex, the binding region is identified as the portions of the two protein molecular surfaces distant less than 3å.for each protein of the dataset (x-ray structure in pdb format [56] ), we use dms [57] to compute the solventaccessible surface, using a density of 5 points perå 2 and trimer chains rmsd each residue of the proteins is colored from white to red according to its increasing shape complementarity with the partner. d) comparison between the complementarity score (red dashed line) of the best binding site (zernike disks) and the distribution of complementarity scores belonging to 4600 binding regions of experimental complexes. a water probe radius of 1.4å. the unit normals vector, for each point of the surface, was calculated using the flag −n.a molecular surface is represented by a set of points in the three-dimensional space. we define a surface patch, as the group of points that fall within a sphere of radius r s = 6å, centered on one point of the surface. once the patch is selected,• we fit a plane that passes through the points and reorient the patch in such a way to have the z-axis perpendicular to the plane and going through the center of the plane.• we define the angle θ as the largest angle between the perpendicular axis and a secant connecting a given point c on the z-axis to any point of the patch. c is then set in order that θ = 45 • . r is the distance between c and a surface point.• build a square grid and associate each pixel with the mean r of the points inside it. this 2d function can be expanded on the basis of the zernike polynomials (see next section).once a patch is represented in term of its zernike descriptors, the similarity between that patch and another one can be simply measured as the euclidean distance between the invariant vectors. the relative orientation of the patches before the projection in the unitary circle must be considered. in fact, if we search for similar regions we must compare patches that have the same orientation once projected in the 2d plane, i.e. the solventexposed part of the surface must be oriented in the same direction for both patches, for example as the positive z-axis. if instead, we want to assess the complementarity between two patches, we must orient the patches contrariwise, i.e. one patch with the solvent-exposed part toward the positive z-axis ('up') and the other toward the negative z-axis ('down').each function of two variables, f (r, φ) (polar coordinates) defined inside the region r < 1 (unitary circle), can be decomposed in the zernike basis aswithbeing the expansion coefficients, while the complex functions, z nm (r, φ) are the zernike polynomials. each polynomial is composed by a radial and an angular part,where the radial part for any n and m, is given bysince for each couple of polynomials, the following relation holds z nm |z n m = π (n + 1) δ nn δ mm (5) the complete set of polynomials forms a basis and knowing the set of complex coefficients, {c nm } allows for a univocal reconstruction of the original image (with a resolution that depends on the order of expansion, n = max(n)). since the modulus of each coefficient (z nm = |c nm |) does not depend on the phase, i.e. it is invariant for rotations around the origin of the unitary circle, the shape similarity between two patches can be assessed by comparing the zernike invariants of their associated 2d projections. in particular, we measured the similarity between patch i and j as the euclidean distance between the invariant vectors, i.e.the starting structure of the sars-cov-2 spike trimeric complex was taken from the model structure proposed by the i-tasser server [54] . all steps of the simulation were performed using gromacs 2019.3 [58] . topologies of the system were built using the charmm-27 force field [59] . the protein was placed in a dodecahedric simulative box, with periodic boundary conditions, filled with 131793 tip3p water molecules [60] . we checked that each atom of the trimer was at least at a distance of 1.1 nm from the box borders. the addition of 3 sodium counterions rendered the systems electroneutral. the final system, consisting of 448572 atoms, was first minimized with 2064 steps of steepest descent. relaxation of water molecules and thermalization of the system in nvt and npt environments were run each for 0.1 ns at 2 fs time-step. the temperature was kept constant at 300 k with v-rescale algorithm [61] ; the final pressure was fixed at 1 bar with the parrinello-rahman algorithm [62] which guarantees a water density of 1004 kg/m 3 , close to the experimental value. lincs algorithm [63] was used to constraint h-bonds.finally, the systems were simulated with a 2 fs timestep for 140 ns in periodic boundary conditions, using a cut-off of 12å for the evaluation of short-range non-bonded interactions and the particle mesh ewald method [64] for the long-range electrostatic interactions.the recent pandemic 2019 novel coronavirus, also known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) (zhou, yang, et al., 2020) has resulted in 295,101 deaths with a fatality rate of 6.85% and has infected a total of 4,307,287 individuals around the globe, as of 9:28 am cest, 15 may 2020 (world health organization, 2020). the spectrum of sars-cov-2 infection is found to have a very wide range of severity, from asymptomatic carriage to mild respiratory tract infection and severe to fatal pneumonia (singhal, 2020) . besides this, sars-cov-2 is characterized by very high morbidity and high mortality, which emphasizes the urgent medical as well as a public health need for validation, development and approval of effective prophylactic and therapeutic interventions against the covid-19 .the coronaviruses (cov) are single-stranded enveloped, positive-sense rna with the largest genome size that ranges approximately from 26 to 32 kilobases as observed till date. the cov uses its spike (s) glycoprotein (180 kda) to bind its receptor, and mediate membrane fusion and virus entry. indeed, s proteins are typical homo trimeric class i fusion proteins, and protease cleavage is required for activation of the fusion potential of s protein. a two-step sequential protease cleavage starts with activation of s proteins covs, which involves prime cleavage between two subunits (i.e. s1 and s2) and activates cleavage on s2' site (belouzard et al., 2009; cotten et al., 2013; ou et al., 2020; wan et al., 2020) . depending on virus strains and cell types, cov s proteins may be cleaved by one or several host proteases, including furin, trypsin, cathepsins, transmembrane protease serine protease-2 (tmprss-2), tmprss-4, or human airway trypsinlike protease (hat). availability of these proteases largely mediating attachment and membrane fusion on target cells . upon the entry, the viral particle is encoded and ready for translation orf 1a and 1b into polyproteins pp1a (4382 amino acids) and pp1ab (7073 amino acids) that are processed by proteases 3-c-like protease (3cl pro ) and papain-like protease (pl pro ). subsequently, these polyproteins are cleaved into at least 16 non-structural proteins (nsps), which assembles and form the replication-transcription complex . importantly, the homology modelling revealed that sars-cov-2 s and sars-cov s share the same functional host cell receptor i.e. angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace-2) . besides, the sars-cov-2 rbd-sd1 106 fragment (s residues from 319-591) have reported having ace-2 binding site (wrapp et al., 2020) . the affinity with which ace-2 bounds to sars-cov-2 s ectodomain is 10-to 20-fold higher than ace-2 binding to sars-cov s. due to the high binding affinity of sars-cov-2 s for human ace-2, the sars-cov-2 exhibits greater ability to transmit from person-to-person (wan et al., 2020) . furthermore, the genomic rna, acting as a messenger rna (mrna) has been found to play a critical role in the initial rna synthesis of the infectious cycle, template for replication, transcription and also act as a substrate for packaging (ricagno et al., 2006; snijder et al., 2016) . the nsp15 is a nidoviral rna uridylate-specific endoribonuclease (nendou) and possess c-terminal catalytic domain, which is specific for uridine acting on both, single-and double-stranded rna (elfiky, 2020a) . reports reveal that the nendou activity of nsp15 is the main contributor for the protein interference with innate immune response and thus, it is said that nsp15 plays a pivotal role in the biological progression of coronavirus (bhardwaj et al., 2008) . therefore, the drugs under investigation, if targets the conserved sites can be likely to block the entry, replication and proliferation of the virus and thus may exhibit a wide spectrum of activity (adeoye et al., 2020; elfiky, 2020b; joshi et al., 2020; pan et al., 2020; prajapat et al., 2020; tian et al., 2020; wu et al., 2020) .although, scientific fraternity and interdisciplinary research groups are putting their sincere efforts to combat pathogenic sars-cov-2 by applying variable holistic approaches to understand the possible features of pathogenesis, for the effective prognosis and early identification/detection of cases along with the development of effective therapeutic interventions including prevention, prophylactics, vaccines and treatment measures against covid-19, a public health emergency of international concern. in principle, the cost-effective and time-efficient computational technique provides a powerful network-based tool (cheng et al., 2018) to test a novel hypotheses conceptualizing systematic drug repositioning strategy for rapid identification of therapeutic lead and/or potential leads combinations effective against 2019-ncov/sars-cov-2 from existing approved and/or preclinical drugs (kandeel & al-nazawi, 2020 ; serafin et al., 2020; sinha et al., 2020; zhou, hou, et al., 2020) .a promising published report on glycyrrhizin, a bioactive constituent of liquorice (glycyrrhiza glabra l. family: fabaceae), which is a key medicine of traditional chinese medicine (tcm) system, indicates its role in the treatment of patients suffering from an infection caused by sars-cov (cinatl et al., 2003) . moreover, according to tcm theory, liquorice is primarily effective for fatigue and debilitation, asthma with coughing, excessive phlegm, respiratory infections and for relieving drug toxicity (grienke et al., 2014; wang et al., 2013) . further, bioactive compounds of liquorice have been reported with antimicrobial, antiviral and immunoregulatory features. in brief, glycyrrhizic acid has been reported for its efficacy against hiv-1 chronic hepatitis c virus, coxsackievirus a16 and enterovirus 71 and kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (curreli et al., 2005; de clercq, 2000; sabouri ghannad et al., 2014; wang et al., 2013) . the licochalcone a and isoliquiritigenin has been effective in preventing the acute lung injury induced of pathogenic origin (liu et al., 2019) . liquiritin has also been reported for their anti-viral potential against hiv (grienke et al., 2010) .application of computational resource and power in drug discovery research to screen molecular databases has become faster and less expensive approach towards the scientific community worldwide (okimoto et al., 2009) . the structure-based screening of chemical or phytochemical databases already reached at a new height due to the availability of large numbers of crystal target. with the help of excellent algorithms and pharmacoinformatics tools molecular docking can predict the almost true conformational state of a protein-ligand complex and predicts the binding affinity of the small molecules about correctly (meng et al., 2011) . in the current investigation, we have conceptualized the structure-based antiviral screening of natural products from liquorice with the aim to obtained structurally potential inhibitors by targeting the crystal structure of prefusion sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease from sars-cov-2, which expedites the discovery of leads in treatment against covid-19. initially, the phytochemicals are screened through molecular docking approach. further, the molecular dynamics (md) simulation study is carried out to explore the dynamic behavior of the molecules. finally, the affinity of the small molecules is checked through the mm-pbsa (molecular mechanics poisson-boltzmann surface area) based binding energy calculation.virtual screening of phytochemicals through pharmacoinformatics approach has become a pivotal tool in the drug discovery research. availability of crystal structure of protein molecules has given a new dimension towards the structure-based screening of small to large chemical databases. to explore promising anti-covid molecules, a set of 20 reported bioactive compounds of liquorice (glycyrrhiza species) were retrieved from the pubchem database (kim et al., 2016) . in brief, the names search for bioactive compounds of glycyrrhiza glabra which has been documented for their antitumor, antimicrobial, antiviral and immunoregulatory efficacies viz. glycyrrhizinic acid (cid_14982), licochalcone a (cid_5318998), licochalcone b (cid_5318999), licochalcone c (cid_9840805), licochalcone d (cid_10473311), licochalcone e (cid_46209991), licochalcone f (cid_44130137), licochalcone g (cid_49856081), glyasperin a (cid_5481963), glyasperin b (cid_480784), glyasperin c (cid_480859), glyasperin d (cid_480860), isoliquiritinapioside (cid_6442433), 1-methoxyphaseollidin (cid_480873), dehydroglyasperin c (cid_480775), kanzonol q (cid_11253965), liquiritin (cid_503737), hedysarimcoumestan b (cid_11558452), 5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-2,4-dimethylquinoline (cid_5321849), 5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-4-methylquinoline (cid_185667) (bode & dong, 2015; jiang et al., 2020; kim & ma, 2018; liu et al., 2019; prajapati & patel, 2015; yang et al., 2017) ; was carried out in pubchem database. the resulting 3d structures in sdf file format were directly used in the generation of input pdbqt files for autodock vina. the 2d format of all molecules were downloaded and transformed to 3d coordinates and subsequently optimized with openbabel2.3.2 gui. the molecular docking simulation study was performed on the autodock vina program (trott & olson, 2010) to select the binding site of both proteins the already available information was considered. the region around the bound citric acid in the nsp15 was considered as the active site. in the case of spike glycoprotein, it is mentioned that amino acid residues in a range of 319 to 591 recombinantly expressed and measures the ace2 binding using biolayer interferometry (wrapp et al., 2020) . hence the coordinate of ser325 amino residue was considered as the position of the grid box. to confine the active site of the protein molecule, the grid box information was obtained from the adt with the help of above information. in case of pdb id: 6w01, grid box was generated around the bound citric acid having co-ordinate of à63.624, 72.524 and 28.280 for -x, -y and -z-axis respectively. on the other hand, for pdb id: 6vsb, the grid coordinate was considered as 204. 457, 199.799 and 246.898 along the x-, y-and z-axis respectively. the grid box size for both crystal structures was determined by manual inspection and set as 50x50x50. the configuration file was created by adding the grid, receptor and ligand information before the execution of molecular docking. to adjudge the molecular docking study, two standard drug molecules, lopinavir and rivabirin (cao et al., 2020) were considered as control molecules throughout the study. in recent past, a number of findings have been reported the efficacy of lopinavir, a protease inhibitor and ribavirin, a nucleoside analogue in suppressing the shedding of sars-cov-2 (hung et al., 2020; lim et al., 2020; sheahan et al., 2020) . all 20 phytochemicals along with above two drug molecules were also prepared by adding polar hydrogen and gasteiger charges in adt. each molecule was saved as pdbqt format for autodock vina input after detection and set of torsion angles. the molecular docking outcomes were analyzed based on binding energy and binding interactions profile. highest binding energy among the drugs was used as a threshold to select the best phytochemicals for both the receptors. the binding interactions between ligands and the receptor were assessed through the protein-ligand interaction profile (plip) (salentin et al., 2015) .molecular dynamics (md) simulation study is one the crucial and effective tools to explore the dynamic nature of the protein-ligand complex and the relative stability. the highest binding affinity scorer ligand in respect to each protein i.e. glycyrrhizic acid for spike glycoprotein and glyasperin a for nsp15 endoribonuclease complex with respective protein was selected for further md simulation study. the md simulation was done on gromacs-2018.2 software tool (www.gromacs.org) installed at the lengau chpc server, cape town, south africa. this study was performed for 100 ns with a 2fs of time step at a 1 atm constant pressure and 300 k constant temperature. to generate the protein topology the all-atoms charmm36 force field was considered. during the study, each protein-ligand complex system was created within the cubic box of 1 å from the center of the system. the system was solvated by the tip3p water model. sufficient numbers of na þ and cl à ions were added to neutralize the simulation system and further minimized the system by employing the steepest descent algorithm of 10,000 steps. to address the long-range distances the van der waals and electrostatic interaction cutoff range were set to 0.9 and 1.4 nm respectively. the swissparam tool (daina et al., 2017) was used to generate ligand topology. after each of 1ps interval, the trajectory information was saved for further analysis. the entire system was equilibrated through the nvt (constant number of particles, volume, and temperature) followed by npt (constant number of particles, pressure, and temperature) ensemble approaches to distribute the solvent and ions equally around the protein-ligand complex. further root-meansquare deviation (rmsd), root-mean-square fluctuation (rmsf) and radius of gyration (rg) were calculated to determine the molecular complex stability in terms of conformation and performance. the binding free energy was then determined through the molecular mechanics poisson-boltzmann surface area (mm-pbsa) method with the help of g_mmpbsa tool (islam & pillay, 2019 , 2020 . theory and details of this method have been given in our previous publication (bhowmick et al., 2019; parida et al., 2020) .the structure-based screening is one of the crucial approaches to explore small to large molecular databases to find promising molecules for a specific target. in the current study, an effort was taken to find out anti-spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease molecules from a set of 20 phytochemicals through molecular docking and md simulation studies. the flow diagram of the work is given in figure 1 . the binding site of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein was considered around the ser325 which is already reported as active site residue . in the case of nsp15 endoribonuclease the binding site was selected around the co-crystal ligand. all 20 phytochemicals along with lopinavir and ribavirin were docked in the spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease.details of each of phytochemicals and binding energies against the spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease are given in table s1 (supplementary file). the binding energy of lopinavir and ribavirin was found to be à7.4 and à5.6 kcal/mol respectively when docked in the spike glycoprotein. moreover, the lopinavir and ribavirin were docked in the nsp15 endoribonuclease and binding energy was found to be à8.3 and à6.6 kcal/mol respectively. to select best phytochemical, the threshold binding energy for spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease was considered as à7.4 and à8.3 kcal/mol, respectively. from table s1 (supplementary file) it can be seen that cid_14982, cid_503737, cid_5481963 and cid_6442433 were satisfied above criteria for both spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease. moreover, cid_480775 and cid_10473311 were found to have binding energy less than à8.30 on docking in the nsp15 endoribonuclease. hence, cid_14982, cid_503737, cid_5481963 and cid_6442433 were found to be promising molecules for both enzymes. in addition to the above cid_480775 and cid_10473311 were found promising against nsp15 endoribonuclease. two-dimensional representation of all six promising molecules is given in figure 2 .all the above proposed final molecules were found structurally diverse. all molecules consist of several pharmacophoric features including hydrogen bond (hb) acceptor (hba), hb donor (hbd), hydrophobic (hy), etc., those might be crucial for potential binding interactions with the catalytic amino acids at the active site. in brief, the hbd and hba features in cid_14982 (figure 3 ) were found crucial in hydrogen bond interactions with gln298, his625, gln321 and arg319, while the hy region was found to be important in the interaction with ile624 and val620 residues in the spike glycoprotein. in the case of nsp15 endoribonuclease of the sars-cov-2, the hbd and hba features were revealed as important in interactions with residues tyr343, his235, his250, while the hydrophobic interactions formed with residues tyr343. likewise, the hbd, hba, aromatic ring features in the other five compounds (figure 3 ) were found to be crucial for the interactions with similar residues at the binding site of both the proteins. to further assess the binding interactions of each of the molecule were explored with respective enzymes. the stability of the molecules inside the protein was explored through all-atoms md simulation. finally, the binding free energy was calculated through the mm-pbsa approach.the binding interaction profile of all proposed molecules was explored to analyze the catalytic amino acid residues responsible for holding the molecules inside the receptor cavity of spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease. the protein-ligand interaction profiler (plip) webserver (salentin et al., 2015) was used to explore two-dimensional binding interactions. the binding mode in surface view of proposed phytochemicals and considered drug molecules was explored using the pymol. the binding energies of all six proposed molecules and considered drug molecules are given in table 1 .all four proposed spike glycoprotein inhibitors along with lopinavir and ribavirin were docked in the spike glycoprotein and binding interactions are given in figure 4 . on successful docking, the complex between spike glycoprotein and lopinavir was explored and found that the lopinavir properly positioned into the catalytic site assembled by arg273, asp627, his625, ala292, val320, val595, val620, gln619, tyr612, ile624, phe318 and pro295 amino acids with binding energy à7.4 kcal/mol. amine group of tetrahydro pyrimidine of lopinavir showed h-bonding with asp627, carboxyl with arg273 and amide with his625, ala292. the phenyl ring of lopinavir formed p-p parallel stacking with his625. the triazole nitrogen of ribavirin showed h-bonding with his625, hydroxymethyl group of tetrahydrofuran with glu298, ser316 and the hydroxyl group of tetrahydrofuran with ala623 amino acid with binding energy à5.6 kcal/mol. the triazole ring of ribavirin formed p-p perpendicular stacking with his625. docking study on the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein revealed that the glycyrrhizic acid (cid_14982) exhibited the best binding mode among all the ligand and standard drugs. it was properly positioned into the binding pocket of spike glycoprotein constructed by his625, glu298, arg319, gln321, gln321, val320, tyr343, thr323, ile624 and asn317 amino acids with a binding energy of à9.2 kcal/mol. the glycyrrhizic acid has two oxane (tetrahydropyran) ring substituted with five hydroxyl and two carboxyl groups buried properly into the binding pocket of s1 subunit and showed h-bonding with his625, glu298, arg319, gln321, val320 and three p-cation interaction with his625. it also has 7 methyl groups which provide a proper grip between hydrophobic pockets. the equal distribution of polar (i.e. 5 -oh and 2 -cooh group) and non-polar (i.e. 7 methyl group) provide a good balance between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity (cid_14982 in figure 4) .the hydroxyl group of chromenone ring of glyasperin a (cid_5481963) showed h-bonding with val620, val320, carboxy of chromenone ring with gln321 and other hydroxyl groups of the phenyl ring with glu298 amino acid residue with binding energy à7.9 kcal/mol (cid_5481963 in figure  4 ). the liquiritin (cid_503737) has chromenone ring substituted by hydroxyl group showed h-bonding with gln321, the carboxyl group of chromenone ring with val620 and the hydroxyl group of oxane moiety with cys291, his625 amino acid residues with a binding energy of à7.7 kcal/mol (cid_503737 in figure 4 ). the phenyl ring substituted by hydroxyl group showed h-bonding with gln321, val320, the hydroxyl group of oxane ring with glu298, his625, the hydroxyl group of a furan ring with glu298 and carboxyl group of isoliquiritinapioside (cid_6442433) showed h-bonding with val620 amino acid residue with a binding energy of à7.4 kcal/mol (cid_6442433 in figure 4 ). from the above observations it can be explained that all proposed molecules for the spike glycoprotein hold similar or better binding interactions in comparison to the both lopinavir and ribavirin. the binding mode in three-dimensional space of all molecules were extracted which are given in figure 5 . it can be seen that all molecules perfectly fitted inside the receptor cavity of spike glycoprotein. the important amino residues and their involvement in binding interactions with spike glycoprotein inhibitors are given in table 2 .best six phytochemicals found through virtual screening were docked in the nsp15 endoribonuclease and binding energy is given in table 1 . important amino acids found in binding interaction formation with proposed molecules are given in table 3 . both standard lopinavir and ribavirin was docked and binding energy found to be à8.3 and à6.6 kcal/ mol respectively. lopinavir was properly positioned into the catalytic site constructed by his235, thr341, glu340, tyr343, trp333 and lys345 amino acids with a binding energy of à8.3 kcal/mol. pyrimidine of lopinavir showed h-bonding with glu340 and carboxyl with his235, thr341. the phenyl ring of lopinavir formed p-p parallel stacking with trp333 and p-p perpendicular stacking with tyr343 ( figure 6 ). ribavirin was found to interact into the binding pocket with a binding energy of à6.6 kcal/mol ( figure 6 ). the simulation study on the crystal structure of nsp15 endoribonuclease revealed that glyasperin a (cid_5481963) have chromenone ring substituted with three hydroxyl and 3-methylbut-2-enyl group and a phenyl ring which is substituted with a hydroxyl and a 3-methylbut-2-enyl group showed h-bonding with tyr343, lys290 leu346, asn278 and lys345 with a binding energy of à9.2 kcal/mol ( figure 6 ). glyasperin a showed the highest stable binding mode i.e. lowest binding energy among all the docked test ligand and standard drug lopinavir and ribavirin. glyasperin b, c and d have 2, 4-dihydroxy phenyl ring attached to chromen ring but in glyasperin a one hydroxy of phenyl is substituted with a 3methylbut-2-enyl group at 3rd position which showed additional hydrophobic interaction with phe269 and val292, due to which glyasperin a exhibited better binding affinity. the isoliquiritinapioside (cid_6442433) have furan ring substituted with hydroxyl group showed h-bonding with glu340, asp240 and ser294 showed p stacking and hydrophobic interaction with isoliquiritinapioside ( figure 6 ) (à9.0 kcal/mol). the hydroxyl group of chromenone ring of liquiritin (cid_503737) showed h-bonding with leu346, asn278, leu246, lys290, gln245, two p-cation interactions with lys290, his235 amino acid residues (à8.8 kcal/mol) ( figure 6 ). the hydroxyl group of chromene ring of dehydroglyasperin c (cid_480775) showed h-bonding with ser294, val292 and thr341, his250 with a binding energy of à8.4 kcal/mol. the phenyl ring of dehydroglyasperin c formed p-p parallel stacking with tyr343 and p-p perpendicular stacking with trp333 ( figure 6 ). structure of dehydroglyasperin c has resembled with glyasperin a, but due to lack of one 3-methylbut-2-enyl group on phenyl ring decreases its hydrophobic interaction and also a binding affinity with protein. the glycyrrhizic acid (cid_14982) have oxane ring-substituted with hydroxyl and carboxyl groups exhibited h-bonding with ser294, cys291, his250 and thr341 amino acids with binding energy à8.3 kcal/mol and three p-cation interactions with lys290, his235, his250 ( figure 6 ). licochalcone d showed hbonding with lys290, asn278, gly248, leu346, his250, pro344 (à8.3 kcal/mol) and phenyl ring formed p-p parallel stacking with trp343 ( figure 6 ). the isoliquiritinapioside and glycyrrhizic acid have oxan ring, and liquiritin and dehydroglyasperin c have chromenone ring showed good binding with active site located between the two b-sheets, carries residues lys290, tyr343, his235. the lys290 in which his235 has been proposed to constitute the catalytic triad and tyr343 is believed to govern uridyl specificity. moreover, a us patent (us005843990a) signifies the use of pyran-chromenone compounds in inhibiting the growth or replication of a viruses, which is not limited to herpes simplex virus (types 1 and 2), hiv-1, hiv-2, cytomegalovirus, varicella zoster virus, papillomavirus, feline leukaemia virus, avian sarcoma viruses like hepatitis types a-e, rous sarcoma virus, influenza virus, measles, rubella and mumps viruses (baker, 1998) . the position of the binding pose in three-dimensional space (figure 7) was clearly explained all six molecules perfectly fitted inside the receptor cavity of nsp15 endoribonuclease.in order to check the stability of glycyrrhizic acid-glycoprotein and glyasperin a-nsp15 endoribonuclease complexes, an all-atoms md simulation of time span of 100 ns was performed. on successful completion of the md simulation the entire trajectory of each complex was considered to explore the rmsd, rmsf and rg. the average, maximum and minimum value of rmsd, rmsf and rg were obtained from the entire frames and given in table 4 .the protein backbone rmsd is one of the critical parameters obtained from the protein-ligand complex which gives the overall information about the stability and insight into the structural conformation in the dynamic states during the md simulation. the system equilibration in terms of stability can be explained through the rmsd analysis. the lower range of rmsd along with consistent variation throughout the simulation can be inferred the stability of the protein backbone.on the other hand, the higher rmsd and (or) high fluctuation to the native structure indicates comparatively low stability of the protein-ligand complex. it is always preferable to accept the protein biomolecule with the lower range of rmsd but higher deviated rmsd can also be acceptable which might indicate that the protein is probably undergoing large or some sort of conformational change during the simulation. the rmsd of each frame for both complexes was calculated and it is given in figure 8 . the average, maximum and minimum rmsd values of both complexes are given in table 4 . the average rmsd value was found to be 1.149 and 0.231nm for the backbone of spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease respectively. it is also important to note that not a single frame of glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease backbone was deviated higher than 1.531 and 0.350 nm in comparison to the respective native structure when bound with glycyrrhizic acid and glyasperin a, respectively. on close inspection, it can be seen that spike glycoprotein backbone bound with glycyrrhizic acid fluctuated from beginning to about 20 ns and afterwards it was equilibrated until the end of the simulation. a similar pattern was also observed in case of nsp15 endoribonuclease backbone bound with glyasperin a. above observation clearly explained the stability of the protein-ligand complexes during the all-atoms md simulation.the individual amino residue in the protein-ligand complex plays a critical role in complex stability. the fluctuation of the amino residues can be inferred by the rmsf parameter which explains the average deviation of each amino residue over time from the reference position. more precisely it can be said that it analyzes the specific part of the protein structure that are fluctuating from its mean structure. the amino acid or group of amino acids with high rmsf value indicate the greater flexibility attained by the complex, whereas lower rmsf indicates lesser flexibility for the complex. the rmsf of individual amino residues of both glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease bound glycyrrhizic acid and glyasperin a is given in figure 9 . the average, maximum and minimum rmsf values are given in table 4 .the average rmsf was found to be 0.634 and 0.148 nm for spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease, respectively. in case of spike glycoprotein bound with glycyrrhizic, the amino acids were found consistent except in the range 200 to 500. the fluctuation of the above amino acids might be due to lack of inter-and intra-molecular binding interactions. on the other hand, the rmsf plot of amino acids belongs to the nsp 15 endoribonuclease bound with glyasperin a was found consistent. due to the free end of both proteins, the end amino acid was found to fluctuate highest in comparison to others.the compactness and rigidity of the protein-ligand complexes can be assessed through the rg parameter obtained from md simulation trajectory. it can be defined as the mass-weighted root-mean-square distance of a collection of atoms from their common center of mass (baig et al., 2014) . therefore, the overall dimensions and the alteration in the macromolecular structure during the md simulation can be explored by the rg parameter. the rg values for each frame of both complexes were calculated and plotted against the time simulation, and it is given in figure 10 . moreover, to explore in more details the average, maximum and minimum rg values were calculated and showed in table 4 .the rg value was varied from 4.104 and 4.877 nm, and 2.193 and 2.320 nm for the spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease, respectively. the rg parameter of the spike glycoprotein system bound with glycyrrhizic acid was gradually decreasing from about 4.8 nm and finally equilibrated around 2 nm. in the case of nsp15 endoribonuclease bound with glyasperin a, the rg was consistent throughout the simulation except for few fluctuations around 40 ns. hence, the trend of rg plot against the time simulation and low fluctuation of the same undoubtedly explain that residual backbone and folding of both spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease have remained consistent after binding with glycyrrhizic acid and glyasperin a, respectively.the binding energy calculated through the mm-pbsa approach is considered to be more accurate than binding energy calculated by any other means including molecular docking. the binding energy of any small molecule can give an idea about the affection towards the macromolecule. to explore the affinity of both glycyrrhizic acid and glyasperin a towards the glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease respectively, the binding free energy was calculated from the entire trajectory of md simulation through the mm-gpbsa approach. higher negative binding energy explains more affinity towards the receptor. the binding free energy of each molecule was plotted against the time of simulation and it is given in figure 11 . the average, minimum and maximum binding energy of all frames were also calculated and it is given in table 4 . from table 4 , it can be seen that average binding free energy was found to be à331.723 kj/mol and à124.036 kj/mol for glycyrrhizic and glyasperin a, respectively. in the case of glycyrrhizic, few frames at the beginning of the md simulation were found with positive binding energy but after about 7 ns all frames showed high negative value. new orientation and conformation gained by the complex after 7 ns might be the reason for change binding energy of the molecule. the binding free energy of glyasperin a was found to be almost constant throughout the simulation. not a single frame was found to have positive binding free energy. hence, the binding energy of both molecules suggests that glycyrrhizic and glyasperin a possess a strong affinity to inhibit the spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease, respectively.the pharmacoinformatics approaches such as molecular docking and md simulation studies were carried out to explore a set of molecules belong to the natural products. all the selected molecules including two anti-viral drugs, lopinavir and rivabirin were docked in the covid-19 targets such as spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease. the binding energies from the molecular docking study and binding interaction were explored in details. several crucial amino residues were found to interact with all the molecules. a total of six phytochemicals were found promising compounds based on comparative analysis of binding interactions and binding energy with lopinavir and ribavirin against spike glycoprotein and nsp15 endoribonuclease. further, high binding energy scored one molecule from each of spike glycoprotein (glycyrrhizic acid) and nsp15 endonuclease (glyasperin a) were used for the md simulation in complex with the respective target molecule. many parameters were calculated from the md simulation and found that both molecules were retained inside the protein in the dynamic states. finally, the binding free energy of both molecules was calculated from the md simulation trajectories. high negative binding free energy value of both molecules substantiated their strong affinity towards the target molecule. it can be concluded that that glyasperin a might block the nsp15 endoribonuclease activity with uridine specificity and glycyrrhizic acid connect well with the widespread binding pocket of spike glycoprotein due to its bulky nature. moreover, it can be said that the glycyrrhizic acid disturbed the connection of the virus with ace-2 receptor at entry-level and after entry into host cell glyasperin a inhibits the replication process of the virus. hence, both proposed molecules might be important molecules to control the covid-19 subjected to experimental validation.covid-19 pandemic situation has tremendously turned the entire world into a place of horrible death tragedy. sars-cov-2, initially named as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) by the world health organization (who) is the causative agent of the recent serious respiratory complications resulting the covid-19 pandemic [1, 2, 3, 4] . though the symptoms of covid-19 infection appear after an incubation period of approximately 5.2 days, the period from the onset of covid-19 symptoms to death ranged from 6 to 41 days with a median of 14 days [5, 6] . it has already completed its world tour, and around 213 countries are now experiencing the deadly scene occurred by covid-19 including 41, 52,670 infected patients and 2, 84,536 global death cases till 12th may, 2020 [7] . the scientific community is racing to explore the effective remedy against this severe health complications, but till to date there are no any potential therapeutics have been approved for clinical use [8] .there have been few key proteins of sars-cov-2 that could be targeted as the vaccine or drug surface [9] . similar to sars and mers, non-structural proteins (e.g. 3-chymotrypsin-like protease coronavirus main protease, papain-like protease, helicase, and rna-dependent rna polymerase), structural proteins (e.g. spike glycoprotein) and accessory proteins were investigated in the genome of sars-cov-2 where non-structural proteins constitute two-thirds of the entire genome [10] . among the structural proteins, nucleocapsid (n) protein is prerequisite for rna genome assembly where membrane (m) and envelope (e) proteins are associated in viral assembly in the host environment [11] . moreover, spike (s) protein is mainly responsible for the viral entry into the host cell, and that is why spike protein is now being considered as a major therapeutic target for drug and vaccines against sars-cov-2 [12] . again, the s protein interaction with the human ace2 interface has been revealed at the atomic level, and the efficiency of ace2 usage was found to be a main factor of coronavirus transmissibility in human to human [13] . on the contrary, coronavirus main protease (m pro) or 3c-like proteinase (3clp) was reported for their ability to cleave the polyproteins into individual polypeptides that are required for replication and transcription [14] . the 3clp is autocleaved initially from the polyproteins to become a mature enzyme leading the translation of the messenger rna [15] . then the 3clp cleaves all the 11 downstream non-structural proteins. as 3clp plays a vital role in the replication cycle of virus in the host, it has been reported as the attractive target against the human sars virus [16] . rna-dependent rna polymerase, other key target protein of sars-cov-2 catalyses the synthesis of viral rna possibly with the support of other non-structural proteins as co-factors [17, 18, 19] .the computational drug repurposing method could allow the immediate search of potential antiviral therapy in case of re-emergence of viral infections as like as covid-19 pandemic situation [20, 21, 22] .computational drug repurposing has already been used to identify promising drug candidates for other virus associated diseases like dengue, ebola, zika, and influenza infections [23, 24] . most importantly, the sars-cov-2 has shown evolutionary convergent relations with sars-cov and mers-cov, and the drug repurposing methods were also applied to sars-cov and mers-cov [25, 26, 27] . hence, extensive in silico studies were performed to identify potential drug candidates, for example, prulifloxacin, bictegravir, nelfinavir, and tegobuvi, were identified as repurposing candidates against covid-19 by looking for drugs with high binding capacity with sars-cov main protease [28] . again, nelfinavir, an hiv-1 protease inhibitor was also predicted to be a potential inhibitor of covid-19 main protease by another computational-based study [29] .however, secondary metabolites from plant origin are found to show effective defence mechanism against different deadly pathogens, and they have been widely used for conventional remedy to treat a wide range of human diseases since the ancient period of human civilization [30, 31, 32] . in this pandemic situation, researchers are trying find out the effective solution against covid-19 where plant metabolites could be a promising wings for screening out potential drug candidates. even few plant secondary metabolites have already been reported as effective against other coronaviruses [33, 34] . in the present study, a total of 117 plant based drug compound were screened out to check their potentiality for blocking the three important key proteins of sars-cov-2. the main protease proteins, rna-dependent rna polymerase and spike protein of sars-cov-2 were employed to molecular docking study with the repurposed drug candidates from plant origin for find out the better drug option towards the covid-19 pandemic.protein and acquisition of potential natural therapeutics pdb structures of sars-cov-2 main protease proteins (6lu7, 6y2e), rna-dependent rna polymerase (6m71) and spike protein (6vyb) were retrieved from rcsb protein data bank [35] .moreover, a total 117 plant based drugs were collected from pubchem database (supplementary table   1 ). alpha-ketoamide (cid 6482451) were also retrieved from the pubchem database database (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) of ncbi [36] .molecular docking is an effective approach for screening out potential therapeutics against specific drug-targets of deadly pathogens [37, 38] . the crystal structure of retrieved sars-cov-2 proteins (complexed with inhibitors) were refined by pymol v2.0 software [39] . unwanted molecules i.e. water, ions, inhibitors were removed from the viral retrieved viral protein, and further employed to molecular docking experiment with 117 natural therapeutics. autodock vina software [40] to analyse the binding affinity and interactive amino acids. alpha-ketoamide, an inhibitor sars-cov-2 main protease protein were used as a positive control in this study [41] and also docked against the target proteins of sars-cov-2. the default parameters for grid box were set to 62 a° x 71 a° x 60 a° (x, y and z) and center -25.389 a° x 15.333 a° x 56.865 a° (x, y and z) to perform the action. moreover, 2d ligand-protein interaction diagrams were generated by ligplot+ find out the involved amino acids with their interactive position were identified in the docked complexes [42] . the ligand molecules' interactions with the viral proteins were visualize and analyzed by discovery studio [43] and pymol v2.0 software [44] .the drug surface hotspot of sars-cov-2 proteins were identified by analysing the docked structures of each protein with the top most natural therapeutics by ligplot+, pymol v.2.0 and discovery studio software. binding patterns of azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, tetrandrine, fangchinoline with sars-cov-2 proteins and the results were allowed for the comparative structural analysis of screened natural therapeutics. furthermore, interactions of alpha-ketoamide with the studied proteins were also investigated.the adme (absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion) properties of top drug candidates were analysed by swissadme server [45] . the pharmacokinetics, drug-likeness property and medicinal chemistry were assessed [46] . default parameters were used to evaluate various physiochemical parameters (molar refractivity, molecular weight, tpsa), lipophilicity (log po/w (wlogp), log po/w (mlogp), log po/w (xlogp3), log po/w, (silicos-it), log po/w (ilogp), consensus log po/w), pharmacokinetics parameters (log kp; skin permeation) and water solubility of the probable drug candidates [47] . the inhibition effects of these natural therapeutics with different cytochromes p450s (cyp2c9, cyp2c19 cyp1a2, cyp3a4, cyp2d6) were also studied.in addition, admetsar and osiris property explorer were employed to evaluate the toxic or undesired effects (i.e. mutagenicity, tumerogenecity) of the compounds [48, 49, 50] .all of the retrieved natural therapeutics were employed for molecular docking against mpp, rdrp and spike protein of sars-cov-2 (supplementary table 2 ). the scoring function of autodock vina was utilized to predict the interaction between the ligands (therapeutics) and the proteins. the top five inhibitors for each protein was identified based on their free binding energy. results showed that rifampin had the highest negative binding energy (-16.3 kcal/mol) among top mpp inhibitors (table   1 ). azobechalcone (-14.6 kcal/mol), isolophirachalcone (-13 kcal/mol), amentoflavone (-12.8 kcal/mol) and cepharanthine (-12.7 kcal/mol) docked with the mpp of sars-cov-2 were also exhibited topmost place with a higher negative binding energy (<-12.7 kcal/mol) as well (table 1) .while interacting with rdrp of sars-cov-2, the most negative binding energy was scored by azobechalcone (-15.9 kcal /mol) following by rifampin (-15.6 kcal/mol), tetrandrine (-13.9 kcal/mol), biflavone (-13.7 kcal/mol), biflavone (-13.7 kcal/mol) ( table 2) . moreover, azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, fangchinoline and tetrandrine were found to be top most natural inhibitors for the spike protein of sars-cov-2. azobechalcone required lowest energy (-14.4 kcal/mol) to interact with the spike protein, while rifampin, isolophirachalcone, fangchinoline and tetrandrine scored -13.7 kcal/mol , -12.8 kcal/mol, -12.6 kcal/mol and -12.5 kcal/mol respectively (table 3) . however, azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, tetrandrine and fangchinoline were found to be most effective inhibitory natural compounds when the docking results were compared for all three sars-cov-2 proteins (figure 2 and table 4 ). all of these plant based natural inhibitors required minimum energy (not more than -12.3 kcal/mol) to interact with the studied protein molecules.the docking pattern and interacting amino acid residues with their respective position were analyzed to unravel the binding sites of studied sars-cov-2 proteins. rifampin were involved with the amino acid h41, n142, s144, c145, h163, m165, e166, d187, r188, q189 of mpp of sars-cov-2 ( figure 2 ). the position of h41, c145, and m165 were also crucial for the binding of amentoflavone however, an additional residue t430 were involved in case of isolophirachalcone (table 3) . p426, d428, t430, p463, f464 and f515 were also critical for binding pattern of rifampin and sars-cov-2 spike protein.the most potent mpp, rdrp and spike protein inhibitors (azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, tetrandrine and fangchinoline) were investigated in the spheres of physicochemical parameters, lipophilicity, pharmacokinetics and water solubility (table 5) .lipophilicity, partition coefficient between n-octanol and water (log po/w) were also calculated by using five widely available predictive models (xlogp3, wlogp, mlogp, silicos-it, ilogp).gi absorption was lower for all the drug candidates. azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, tetrandrine and fangchinoline molecules had no repressive action with the p450 (cyp) isoforms (cyp1a2, cyp2c19, cyp2c9, cyp2d6, cyp3a4). moreover, no permeant bbb exists among the protein inhibitors of mpp, rdrp and spike. the compounds sowed water solubility from moderate to high level i.e. 1.30e-16 mg/ml, 1.50e-02 mg/ml, 1.18e-10 mg/ml, 9.78e 09 mg/ml, 4.61e-08 mg/ml, respectively ( table 5 ). the toxicity analysis of these inhibitors showed that there were no carcinogenic effect and organ toxicity. however, rifampin, tetrandrine and fangchinoline were slightly positive in terms of mutagenesis though azobechalcone and isolophirachalcone inhibitors were completely negative. among the top five inhibitors azobechalcone was listed in the acute oral toxicity category 2 and rest of them were listed in the category 3.global pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 has become a major concern due to its excessive infection rate and lethality [51, 52, 53, 54] . despite huge research regarding the pathogen, no drugs or vaccine has proven satisfactory to combat infections caused by sars-cov-2 [55, 56] . several investigational drugs exist, however none of these could treat the patients unquestionably. moreover, lack of rapid detection procedures made sars-cov-2 diagnosis troublesome [57] . computational approach and drug repurposing strategies hold promise to face such challenges caused by sars-cov-2. hence, in the present study, attempts were taken to suggest probable drug candidates by checking the efficacy of natural inhibitors to inhibit the key proteins of sars-cov-2.the race against the covid-19 pandemic has allowed the drug repurposing through virtual for finding drugs that could be used for the treatment of covid-19. recent studies prioritized mpp inhibitors of sars-cov-2 i.e. alpha-ketoamide, hydroxy, remdesivir, chloroquine and favipiravir to evaluate their potency as drug [58, 59, 60] . several in silico approach was also adopted to screen putative drug candidates against sars-cov-2 [61, 62] . however, all these experiments used either main protease proteins or rna-dependent rna polymerase of sars-cov-2 as probable drug targets. in this study, we screened potential natural therapeutics against sars-cov-2 mpp, rdrp and spike protein by molecular docking approach. here, rifampin, azobechalcone and azobechalcone were determined as top most drug candidates as they interacted with sars-cov-2 mpp, rdrp and spike protein with lowest negative binding energy had the highest negative binding energy (-16.3 kcal/mol, -15.9 kcal /mol and -14.4 kcal/mol respectively. however, comparative analysis revealed the superiority of 5 drug candidates i.e. azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, tetrandrine, fangchinoline against sars-cov-2 ( table 4 ). the common drug surface hotspots were analyzed along with modeling of pharmacophore which is very important step for drug discovery. three amino acid residues i.e. h41, c145, and m165 played the crucial role for the interaction of mpp with its inhibitors (i.e. rifampin, amentoflavone, cepharanthine) (table 1) .azobechalcone, the top scorer among rdrp inhibitors, again, the position of f368, l371, l372, a375, w509, l514, y515 were vital for binding of rdrp with tetrandrine, biflavone and fangchinoline (table 2 ). most importantly, the binding patterns of spike protein with isolophirachalcone, fangchinoline and tetrandrine were significantly similar. this study revealed the possibility of these amino acids to efficiently interact with drugs, though requires validation in wet lab trials. adme analysis of top drug candidates reveled no undesirable consequences by these compounds. various physico-chemical parameters, lipophilicity, pharmacokinetics properties and water solubility were determined (table 5 ). in addition, no bbb permeant were identified among the top most inhibitors of mpp, rdrp and spike protein. the consequence of association of the natural inhibitory drugs of three key proteins with the cytochrome p450 (cyp) suggests that no substantial inhibition can occur. however, toxicity analysis revealed that rifampin, tetrandrine and fangchinoline can be slightly mutagenic, though there was no possibility for organ toxicity.the results suggest that azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone and tetrandrine, fangchinoline could be an option to treat sars-cov-2 infections. however, the study employed various computational approaches to screen the potent natural therapeutics and does not involve in-vivo assay.currently investigational drugs of sars-cov-2 are under immense experimental evaluation. therefore, we suggest clinical trials for the experimental validation of our findings.covid-19 pandemic situation is going to be a worst condition throughout the world. rapid detection and social distancing are being encouraged at this stage, but we need to search for immediate therapeutic options and effective vaccine candidates for battling this serious health crisis. drug repurposing approaches could screened out the already approved drugs for reusing against any serious causative agents that are causing health complications. plant metabolites based repurposed drug molecules could be a promising options against sars-cov-2. in the present study, five plantr based therapeutics such as azobechalcone, rifampin, isolophirachalcone, tetrandrine and fangchinoline were suggested for potential inhibitors for the main protease protein, rna dependent rna polymerase and spike protein of sars-cov-2 by using molecular docking based virtual screening study. the study initiated the window towards the thinking of plant based therapy against covid-19, though extensive research and wet lab validation needs to make it usable for patient. coronaviruses are a large group of highly diverse, enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded rna viruses that infect many mammalian and avian species. currently, six coronavirus strains that are able to infect humans have been identified. among them, alphacoronaviruses hcov-229e and hcov-nl63 and lineage a betacoronaviruses hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1 usually cause mild and self-limiting upper respiratory tract infection [1] . in 2002, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), a lineage b betacoronavirus, was identified and infected more than 8 000 persons including nearly 800 related deaths worldwide in the 2002-2003 sars pandemic [2] [3] [4] . ten years later, another highly pathogenic lineage c betacoronavirus named the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) emerged in saudi arabia in 2012 [5, 6] . since its discovery, the mers-cov has infected 1 800 persons including 640 related deaths according to the who data in august, 2016. these two deadly coronaviruses have been extensively studied in epidemiology, virology, clinical features and other aspects [7] [8] [9] [10] . however, there are still no approved antiviral drugs and vaccines to treat and prevent the infections of sars-cov and mers-cov.the spike (s) glycoprotein on the coronavirus envelope is responsible for host cell attachment, receptor binding, and for mediating host cell membrane and viral membrane fusion during infection. it is synthesized as a precursor single polypeptide chain of ~1 300 amino acids and then cleaved by host furin-like proteases into an amino (n)-terminal s1 subunit and a carboxyl (c)-terminal s2 subunit [7, 11] . the s1 subunit contains domains for host cell attachment by recognizing cell surface sugar molecules and binding to specific cellular receptors [12, 13] . therefore, the s1 subunit, especially its receptor-binding domain (rbd) is critical in determining cell tropism, host range and zoonotic transmission of coronaviruses [14, 15] . the s2 subunit contains a hydrophobic fusion loop and two heptad repeat regions (hr1 and hr2), which suggest a coiled helix structure of the s2 subunit [7] . previous studies suggested that three s monomers assemble to form homo-trimer spikes anchoring on the outmost viral envelope [16] . binding of rbd to cellular receptors triggers conformational changes in the s1 and s2 subunits, leading to the exposure of the fusion loop and its insertion into target cell membrane [17] . the hr1 and hr2 regions in the s glycoprotein trimer then form a six-helix bundle fusion core that bridges the viral and host cell membranes into close apposition to facilitate fusion [17] . for the highly pathogenic sars-cov and mers-cov, the rbd in the s1 subunit and the post-fusion core in the s2 subunit have been structurally and functionally studied as separate domains [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] . a previous study of the sars-cov virions by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) reported the structure of the s glycoprotein trimers on the virion at a low resolution of 16.0 å [16] . recently the pre-fusion structures of mouse hepatitis virus (mhv) and human coronaviruses hku1 and hcov-nl63 s glycoprotein trimers were determined by cryo-em at 4.0, 4.0 and 3.4 å resolutions, respectively [24] [25] [26] . however, high-resolution structures of the highly pathogenic sars-cov and mers-cov s glycoprotein trimers are still missing. in addition, intermediate states of the coronavirus s glycoprotein trimer are also required for a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying receptor binding and membrane fusion.we report here the cryo-em structure determination of the sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer in four different conformations. structural analyses revealed that these conformations are different in the position of one c-terminal domain 1 (ctd1), which functions as the rbd of the s glycoprotein trimer. structural comparisons further indicated that a "down" to "up" positional change of the ctd1 switches the s glycoprotein trimer from receptor-binding inactive to active state, which is a prerequisite for the binding of sars-cov receptor ace2 and for the neutralization by monoclonal antibodies.by using the bac-to-bac insect cell system, we expressed and purified a mutant sars-cov s glycoprotein ectodomain, in which the residue arg667 at the s1/s2 cleavage site was mutated to alanine to enhance sample homogeneity and a strep tag was added to the c-terminus to facilitate purification [27] ( figure 1a ). the purified sars-cov s glycoprotein was subjected to cryo-em structural analysis using an fei titan krios electron microscope equipped with a gatan k2 summit direct electron counting camera (supplementary information, figure s1a ). projected secondary structure features were clearly visible in the 2d classification analysis of the boxed particles (supplementary information, figure  s1b ). after 3d classification and refinement, four major different conformational states (conformations 1-4) were determined (supplementary information, figure s2a ). the sars-cov spike has an overall mushroom-like shape. one of the conformation states is closely threefold symmetric, whereas the other three conformation states show significant asymmetric features in the mushroom head region. further calculation and processing were performed with c3 symmetry imposed for the symmetric conformation 1 and without any symmetry imposed for the asymmetric conformations 2-4 (supplementary information, figures s2 and s3 ).the resolution of the final c3 symmetric conformation 1 calculated with 34 152 particles was 4.3 å (supplementary information, figure s1 ). the atomic model of the sars-cov s was built based on the c3 symmetric density map (supplementary information, table s1a ).in the sars-cov s glycoprotein, the β-strand-rich s1 subunit is composed of an n-terminal domain (ntd, residues 14-294) and three c-terminal domains (ctd1, residues 320-516; ctd2, residues 517-578 and ctd3, residues 579-663; figure 1a and 1b). the ctd1 functions as the rbd of sars-cov s glycoprotein, which specifically binds to the cellular receptor ace2 [18, 28] . the ctd1 is immediately followed by the ctd2 and ctd3, and the ntd is connected to the ctd1 through a long linker (residues 295-319; figure 1a and 1b). the ntds of mhv and hku1 s glycoproteins are structurally similar and both adopt a galectin-like β-sandwich fold. the model to map correlation values are 0.86 for the mhv ntd and 0.87 for the hku1 ntd (supplementary information, figure s4a and s4b). fitting of the mhv or hku1 ntd structure into the corresponding sars-cov s glycoprotein density map gave relatively low resolution to map correlation values (0.55 for mhv ntd and 0.52 for hku1 ntd; supplementary information, figure s4c and s4d), indicating that the sars-cov ntd has different local conformations, although it may still adopt the galectin-like β-sandwich fold. the relatively low resolution in this region also did not allow us to perform ab initio model building of the ntd, therefore only two strands and a short α-helix were built and residues 14-260 were not included in the atomic model ( figure 1a and 1b). the α-helix-rich s2 subunit begins after the s1/s2 cleavage site at residue 667 ( figure 1a ). the atomic model of the s2 subunit includes the functionally important fusion peptide (residues 798-815) and hr1 (residues 880-967; figure 1a and 1b). the c-terminal hr2 (residues 1 154-1 183) was not built due to relatively poor density in this region ( figure 1a and 1b).in the conformation 1 with three-fold symmetry, the three s glycoprotein monomers intertwine around each other to form a closely packed mushroom-shaped homotrimer ( figure 1c and 1d). the triangular head of the trimer spike is composed of the ntds and ctd1s of three s1 subunits. three ctd1s locate in the center of the triangular head and are arranged around the 3-fold symmetry axis ( figure 1c and 1d). three ntds locate at the outside of the triangular head and each ntd interacts with one ctd1 from the neighboring s1 subunit ( figure  1c and 1d). the stem of the trimer spike consists of a core helix bundle formed by the long helices of three s2 subunits, and the core helix bundle is further surrounded by ctd2s and ctd3s of three s1 subunits ( figure 1c and 1d). the three ctd1s in the head all lay on and cover the top of the s2 subunits ( figures 1c, 1d and 2a).we observed three other conformations 2-4 showing asymmetric features of the ctd1 in the triangular head ( figure 2b-2d ). in the symmetric conformation 1, the ctd1s in the head are all in a "down" position, covering the s2 subunits in the stem (figure 2a ). the angle between the long axis of the ctd1 and its projection on the horizontal plane perpendicular to the 3-fold axis is ~19 degree (figure 2a ). in the conformations 2-4, two ctd1s still adopt the same "down" conformation as in the conformation 1, whereas one ctd1 rotates outward to an "up" position and no longer covers the s2 subunit ( figure 2b-2d) . the angles between the long axes of the "up" ctd1s and their projections on the horizontal plane have increased to 52, 64 and 70 degrees, respectively ( figure 2b-2d ). of note, the ntd and ctd2 around the rotated ctd1 do not have significant conformational changes (supplementary information, figure s5a ). therefore, the rotation of the ctd1 is a hinge motion around the loops connecting ntd to ctd1 and ctd1 to ctd2 that are in close proximity (supplementary information, figure s5b and s5c), suggesting that these two loops would play key roles in the conformational switch between the "down" and "up" positions of ctd1. although the position of the ctd2 is not affected within the monomer where the ctd1 adopts an "up" conformation, the ctd2 may become more liable to undergo conformational changes to expose the fusion loop underneath.as the rbd of sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer, the ctd1 specifically binds to the cellular receptor ace2, which is a prerequisite for the host cell attachment of the virion and the subsequent membrane fusion [18, 28] . we superimposed the previously determined ctd1-ace2 complex crystal structure onto one ctd1 of the s glycoprotein trimer ( figure 3a ). for conformation 1 in which all ctd1s are in the "down" positions, numerous steric clashes were observed between ace2 and the neighboring ctd1, and the volume of the steric clashes reaches 10 696 å 3 ( figure 3b and 3c) . therefore, the sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer with all its ctd1s in the "down" positions would not be able to bind the cellular receptor ace2, suggesting that the three-fold symmetric conformation 1 represents a receptor-binding inactive state of the spike. in contrast, similar structural superimpositions showed that ace2 binds the "up" ctd1 well without steric clashes with other regions of the s glycoprotein trimer ( figure 3d -3f, supplementary information, figure s6a and s6b), suggesting that spikes with one ctd1 in the "up" position are able to bind receptor ace2 and asymmetric conformations 2-4 represent a receptor-binding activate state of the spike. notably, the "up" position of the ctd1 also exposes one of the covered s2 subunits, leaving the space for the large-scale conformational change of the s2 subunit to expose and insert the fusion peptide into the target cell membrane.the "up" conformation of the ctd1 is also required for the binding of neutralizing antibodies several neutralizing antibodies targeting the ctd1 (m339, 80r and f26g19) have shown potent inhibition activity against the cell infection of pseudo-typed or live sars-cov, and the antibody binding epitopes have been elucidated by crystal structure determination of the antibody-ctd1 complexes [29] [30] [31] . these antibodies binds to the receptor-binding site on the ctd1, thereby directly inhibiting the engagement of ace2 receptor. structural superimpositions showed that these antibodies all have steric clashes with other regions of the s glycoprotein trimer in the conformation 1 state (figure 4a -4c). in contrast, the s glycoprotein trimer conformations 2-4 would allow the antibodies to bind the "up" ctd1 and inhibit its interaction with the ace2 receptor ( figure  4d-4f) . these results indicated that the receptor-binding inactive to active state transition of the s glycoprotein trimer is required not only for successful infections of the sars-cov virions, by also for efficient neutralization by antibodies targeting the ctd1.as the known largest class i viral fusion protein, the coronavirus s glycoprotein trimer recognizes a variety of host cell receptors through the ntd or ctd1 of the s1 subunit, and subsequently mediates the viral and cell membrane fusion through the fusion peptide and two heptad repeats of the s2 subunit. since the discoveries of highly pathogenic sars-cov in 2002 and mers-cov in 2012, most studies have been focused on the rbd (green) to one s monomer (pink) of the conformation 1 s trimer. the ctd1 is in the "down" conformation. (b) "binding" of the receptor ace2 (green) to the conformation 1 s trimer. three ctd1s are all in the "down" conformations. the steric clashes between a neighboring ctd1 (grey) and ace2 (green) are colored blue. (c) the same model as in a, with the s trimer density map presented. only the boundary profile of the "bound" ace2 is shown (green lines) for a better view of the clashes (volume: 10 696 å 3 ). (d) "binding" of the receptor ace2 (green) with the conformation 3 s monomer (pink) of which the ctd1 is in the "up" conformation. (e) "binding" of the receptor ace2 (green) to the "up" ctd1 (pink) of the conformation 3 s trimer showing no steric clashes with any neighboring "down" ctd1 (grey). (f) the same model as in d with the s trimer 3d density map presented. all models are generated by superimposing the ctd1-ace2 complex crystal structure onto the ctd1 of the corresponding sars-cov s monomer or trimer. the ntd models are not shown.(ntd or ctd1) of the s1 subunit because it binds to the host receptors and is also the main target of neutralizing antibodies during infection. our knowledge about the structures of complete sars-cov and mers-cov spike trimers in pre-fusion and post-fusion states are still very limited.in the present study, we determined the structure of sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer in four different conformational states. recently reported cryo-em structures of the mhv and hku1 s glycoprotein trimers are simi- lar to the conformation 1 of the sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer in the receptor-binding inactive state, in which all three ctd1s in the s1 subunit are in "down" positions (figure 2a) . the sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer conformations 2-4 in the receptor-binding active state ( figure 2b-2d) , in which one ctd1 is in an "up" position, were not observed in the mhv and hku1 s gly-coprotein trimers. the protein receptor of the hku1 has not been identified and the ntd in the s1 subunit was shown to bind o-acetylated sialic acids on host cells [32] . the rbd of mhv s glycoprotein is the ntd of the s1 subunit, and structural alignment revealed that the mhv protein receptor ceacam1a binds to the ntd in the s glycoprotein trimer without steric clashes (supplementary information, figure s6c ) [33] . therefore, the mhv and hku1 s glycoprotein trimer may not need the prerequisite receptor-binding inactive to active state transition for receptor binding. this intrinsic receptor-binding difference among these coronavirus s glycoprotein trimers may be one of the reasons why the previous studies were not able to reveal other conformations rather than conformation 1 in the mhv and hku1 s glycoprotein trimers. nevertheless, the conformational change of ctd1 may still be needed for the subsequent exposure and conformational changes of the s2 subunit for membrane fusion during the infection of mhv and hku1.the protein receptor-binding site in the ctd1 has also been confirmed for mers-cov and bat coronavirus hku4, which are lineage c betacoronaviruses and have the same host receptor dpp4 [19, 20, [34] [35] [36] . structural superimposition of dpp4 complexed with the ctd1 of mers-cov or hku4 onto the sars-cov s glycoprotein trimer also showed that the "up" conformation of ctd1 is required for the binding of dpp4 by these two betacoronaviruses (supplementary information, figure s7 ). therefore, we suggest that the receptor-binding inactive to active state transition observed in the sars-cov spike would also occur in the spikes of other betacoronaviruses that bind to their host receptors through the ctd1. in receptor-binding inactive state, all three ctd1s in the "down" positions would not allow efficient binding to receptors ( figure 5) . the transition of one ctd1 from "down" to "up" position would release the steric clashes and enable the binding of one receptor molecule ( figure 5 ). whether the binding of the first receptor molecule is enough, or the binding of the second and third receptors is required to trigger conformational changes in the s1 and s2 subunit necessary for membrane fusion will be an interesting question for future studies.a human codon-optimized gene coding the sars-cov spike (s) glycoprotein ectodomain (ncbi accession np_828851.1) residues 1-1 195 with an r667a mutation to enhance sample homogeneity and a c-terminal strep tag for purification was cloned and inserted into pfastbac-dual vector (invitrogen). the construct was transformed into bacterial dh10bac competent cell and the extracted bacmid was then transfected into sf9 cells using cellfectin ii reagent (invitrogen). the low-titer viruses were harvested and then amplified to generate high-titer virus stock, which was used to infect 2 l sf9 cells at a density of 2 × 10 6 cells/ml. the supernatant of cell culture containing the secreted sars-cov s glycoprotein was harvested 60 h after infection, concentrated and buffer-exchanged to binding buffer (10 mm hepes, ph 7.2, 500 mm nacl). sars-cov s glycoprotein was captured by streptactin sepharose high performance (ge healthcare) and eluted with 10 mm d-desthiobiotin in binding buffer. the eluted protein was then purified by gel filtration chromatography using the superose 6 column (ge healthcare) pre-equilibrated with hbs buffer (10 mm hepes, 150 mm nacl). fractions containing sars-cov s glycoprotein were pooled and concentrated for electron microscopy analysis.aliquots of 3 µl purified sars-cov s glycoprotein were applied to glow-discharged holey carbon grids (quantifoil, cu 400 mesh, r1.2/1.3) or grids with a layer of continuous ultrathin carbon film (with/without glow-discharge treatment) (ted pella, inc.). the protein concentration was ~0.34 mg/ml for holey carbon grids and ~0.17 mg/ml for continuous carbon grids. the grids were blotted and then were plunged into liquid ethane using an fei vitrobot. the grids were checked in an fei f20 microscope operating at 200 kv with a gatan 895 4 k × 4 k ccd camera and a small data set was collected for generating the initial model. data for final classification and refinement were collected on an fei titan krios microscope operating at 300 kv using a k2 summit camera (gatan inc.) in super-resolution mode with a nominal magnification of 22 500× (yielding a calibrated pixel size of 1.32 å). each image was fractionated into 32 movie frames with a total exposure time of 8 s and at a dose rate of ~8 counts per physical pixel per second (~4.7 electrons/å 2 /s). ucsfimage4 was used for all data collection [37] .the image processing procedures were summarized in supplementary information, figure s2a . an initial map was generated using the program eman2 with the images collected on the f20 microscope [38] . a total of 3 309 movie stacks were collected using the k2 camera. all movie frames were aligned using the program motioncorr and the ctf parameters were determined by ctffind4 [39, 40] . a total of 4 015 particles were manually picked and 2d classifications were performed in relion 1.3 [41] . four representative class averaged images were selected as references for automatic particle picking with the whole data set using relion 1.4. all 2d and 3d classifications and refinements were performed using relion 1.4. auto-picked particles were visually inspected and then were selected by several rounds of reference-free 2d classifications. during the 2d classification, particles from classes not showing clear secondary structure features were deleted, finally yielding 210 129 selected particles. these selected particles were subjected to an initial 3d refinement with c3 symmetry imposed, followed by two runs of 3d classifications. a total of 52 983 particles of the best class were selected and subjected to a 3d auto-refine. at the final stage of the refinement, 34 152 particles with a higher "loglikelicontribution" value were used. the resolution of the final c3 symmetric density map was 4.3 å post processing in relion.the initial 210 129 selected particles were also subjected to 3d refinements and classifications without any symmetry imposed. the central parts of the different classes were similar but most classes showed obvious asymmetric features with one of three ctd1 domains protruding up. these asymmetric particles could be grouped into three major classes according to the tilt angle of the "up" ctd1. particles from these classes were separately subjected to 3d auto-refine. the resolutions of the final density maps were 7.3, 5.7 and 6.8 å for the three classes.the handedness of the density maps was verified by docking the crystal structure of sars-cov s glycoprotein ctd1 into the maps. reported resolutions are based on the gold-standard fsc 0.143 criterion. local resolution variations were estimated using resmap [42] .the crystal structure of the sars-cov s glycoprotein rbd (or ctd1, residues 324-502, pdb accession code: 3d0g) and the structures of hku1 s glycoprotein (pdb accession code: 5i08), ctd2 (residues 596-673), ctd3 (residues 674-771) and s2 domain (residues 793-1147) were initially fitted into the sars-cov density map using ucsf chimera [43] . sequence alignment of the sars-cov s and the fitted structures was performed using dnaman (lynnon corporation, quebec, canada) and clustalx [44] . the fitted model was rebuilt using rosettacm with c3 symmetry imposed and the best output model was selected according to the energy and fitness of the model to the em density map [45] . the model of ctd2, ctd3 and s2 region was refined using rosettarelax and phenix real-space refinement [46, 47] . the crystal structure of the ctd1 domain was fitted into the em density and was refined as a rigid body in real space by using phenix. then the two models were merged, manually adjusted in coot and refined in phenix again with reference model restrains, secondary structure restrains and geometry restrains [48] . cross-validation of overfitting was performed following the procedures described before [49, 50] . briefly, the atom coordinates of the model (including ctd1, ctd2, ctd3 and s2) were randomly displaced by 0.5 å using phenix pdb tools. then the displaced model was refined against one of the two half maps in reciprocal space by using phenix. fsc curves were calculated between the refined model and the corresponding half map that was used for the refinement (half1, fsc work ) and between the refined model and the other half map (half2, fsc test ) that was not used for the model refinement. no big gaps were observed between the work and test fsc curves (supplementary information, figure s1d) , indicating that the model was not overfitted. molprobity was used to evaluate the final refined model.models of the three asymmetric conformations were built by fitting the symmetric model of sars-cov s into the density maps using ucsf chimera. the fitted models were then refined as rigid bodies in real space using phenix. for the subunit with the "up" ctd1, the subunit was split into two rigid bodies for refinement, including the "up" ctd1 and the rest part of the subunit.structural comparisons between different density maps and between density maps and models were performed using ucsf chimera measure correlation, phenix get_cc_mtz_mtz and get_ cc_mtz_pdb. the cross correlation values were listed in supplementary information, figure s4a-s4d and table s1b .the sars-cov s rbd-receptor complex (pdb accession code: 3r4d) and sars-cov s rbd-fab complexes (pdb accession code: 2ghw, 2dd8 and 3bgf) were superimposed onto the models with the sars-cov s rbd structure as reference using the "match" command in ucsf chimera. to calculate the "up" angles of the ctd1s (figure 2) , the horizontal plane of the s perpendicular to the 3-fold axis and the long axis of the ctd1 were generated using the ucsf chimera "define" command and then the angle between the axis and the plane was calculated using the ucsf chimera "angle" command. the overlap volumes between the fitted receptor and the s spike were also calculated using ucsf chimera. two atoms were considered to be overlapped if their overlap score > 0. the overlap score is defined as the sum of two vdw (van der waals) radii minus the distance between them and minus an allowance (0.4 å) for potentially hydrogen-bonded pairs. all the overlap atoms were used for the generation of the steric clash area. the volume of the steric clashes was calculated using ucsf chimera "measure volume" command. all figures were generated with ucsf chimera and pymol (the pymol molecular graphics system, version 1.7.0.5 schrödinger, llc.).the cryo-em maps and related materials have been deposited to the em data bank under accession codes emd-6679, emd-6680, emd-6681 and emd-6682. the atomic coordinate has been deposited to the protein data bank under accession code 5wrg.of february 29, 2020, 881 samples of suspected cases referred from different states, with a travel history to wuhan, china, and other sars-cov-2-affected countries, were screened.the viral rna was extracted from the ts sample using the magmax rna extraction kit (applied biosystems, usa) as per the manufacturer's instructions. the extracted rna was immediately used for testing the presence of sars-cov-2 using the realtime rt-pcr protocol published by the who 12 for the detection of rdrp (1), rdrp (2), e gene and n gene. rnase p gene was used as the internal control for the analysis. confirmatory laboratory tests were performed as per the who-recommended test protocols 13 . these samples were also sequenced using the ngs approach to retrieve the complete genome of the virus.the total rna of three positive ts specimens from kerala, was extracted from 250-300 µl of the sars-cov-2 real-time rt-pcr positive samples. qiaamp viral rna extraction kit (qiagen, hilden, germany) was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. the extracted rna was further quantified using a qubit rna high-sensitivity kit (invitrogen, usa). rna libraries were prepared as per the earlier-defined protocol and quantified using kapa library quantification kit (kapa biosystems, roche diagnostics corporation, usa) as per the manufacturer's protocol. further, individual libraries were neutralized and loaded on the miniseq platform (illumina, usa). the detailed protocols for the steps undertaken have been published earlier 15, 16 . the data generated from the machine were analyzed using clc genomics workbench version 11.0 (clc, qiagen, germany). reference-based mapping was performed to retrieve the sequence of the sars-cov-2.full-length genome sequences of sars-cov-2 were downloaded from the gisaid database 17 (supplementary table i (available from http://www.ijmr. org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/indianjmedres_ 2020_151_2_200_281471_sm5.pdf)). multiple sequence alignment was performed using the mega software version 7.0 18 with retrieved sequences from two of the three positive cases and the available gisaid sequences. a phylogenetic tree was generated using the neighbour joining method and the kimura-2parameter as the nucleotide (nt) substitution model with 1000 bootstrap replications as implemented in mega software 18 . per cent nucleotide divergence and amino acid (aa) divergence were calculated using the p-distance method 18 . mutations specific to the indian sars-cov-2 viruses were identified by comparing the coding regions with respect to the sars-cov-2, wuhan, china (wuhan hu-1).three-dimensional (3d) model of the spike protein and epitope prediction: the pre-fusion structure of the indian case 1 sars-cov-2 spike (s) glycoprotein was modelled using the swiss-model server (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/interactive) and the corresponding s protein of wuhan-hu-1 (6vsb.pdb) as the template (99.97% identity). sequential (linear) b-cell epitopes were predicted using bepipred-2.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/bepipred/). the abcpred prediction tool (http://crdd.osdd.net/ raghava/abcpred/) was also used to identify the b-cell epitopes in the indian sars-cov-2 sequence. the epitope prediction probability of >0.8 was set to increase the specificity of the peptide stretch. the overlapping epitopes predicted by bepipred-2.0 online server and the abcpred prediction tool were identified. the antigenicity of the shortlisted peptide sequences was further predicted using the vaxijen online server (http://www.ddg-pharmfac.net/vaxijen/ vaxijen/vaxijen.html) with a default threshold of 0.4.discontinuous epitopes on the modelled structure of the indian case 1 sars-cov-2 spike protein were predicted using the online servers, ellipro (http://tools.iedb.org/ellipro/) and discotope 2.0 (http://tools.iedb.org/discotope/), integrated in the immune epitope database. ellipro predicts epitopes based on the protusion index (pi), wherein the protein shape is approximated as an ellipsoid (ref for ellipro and discotope). an ellipsoid with the pi value of 0.8 indicates that 80 per cent of the residues are within the ellipsoid and 20 per cent are outside. all residues that are outside the 80 per cent ellipsoid will have a score of 0.8. residues with larger scores are associated with greater solvent accessibility. the pi value was set to a score of 0.8. discotope predicts epitopes using 3d structure and half-sphere exposure as a surface measure in a novel spatial neighbourhood definition method. default values were set for sensitivity (0.47) and specificity (0.75) for selecting the amino acids forming discontinuous epitopes. a sensitivity of 0.47 means that 47 per cent of the epitope residues are predicted as part of the epitopes, while a specificity of 0.75 means that 25 per cent of the non-epitope residues are predicted as part of the epitopes. outputs from both the methods were combined, and the final regions were mapped on the modelled 3d-structure as the most probable conformational epitopes. in addition, we also predicted n-linked glycosylation sites in the s protein using netnglyc 1.0 server (http://www.cbs. dtu.dk/services/netnglyc/). the spike proteins were also screened for the presence of potential epitopes presented by major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i molecules to cytotoxic t lymphocytes (ctls). the online netctl1.2 server (http://www.cbs.dtu. dk/services/netctl/) based on machine learning techniques such as artificial neural network (ann) and support vector machine (svm) was used to predict the t-cell epitopes. the prediction was made for all the human leucocyte antigen (hla) supertypes and the available human alleles. the c terminal cleavage, weight of transport-associated protein (tap) efficiency and threshold for identification were kept as default. vaxijen v2.0 tool was used to predict the antigenicity of the predicted epitopes (http://www.ddg-pharmfac. net/vaxijen/vaxijen/vaxijen.html). the sequences were further screened to be potential epitopes using the ctlpred online server (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/ ctlpred/).the ability of the predicted linear b-cell and the t-cell epitopes to mount interferon-gamma (ifn-γ) response was assessed using the ifnepitope (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/ifnepitope/index.php).detection of sars-cov-2 in suspected samples: three of the 881 ts/nasal swab (ns) specimens from the suspected cases, tested positive for the sars-cov-2 using the real-time rt-pcr specific to e gene, rdrp (1), rdrp (2) and n gene. the ct value of the e gene ranged from 19.8 to 34.5 for the ts/ns specimens. detailed ct values for the real-time rt-pcrs specific to the above-mentioned genes of the positive specimens are given in table i . blood samples were found to be negative for the sars-cov-2.case 1 travelled from wuhan, china, reached india on january 23, 2020 and further travelled to the final destination of kerala on january 24. this individual developed cough on january 25 and further experienced a sore throat and mild fever and was admitted to the general hospital, thrissur, kerala. the second case travelled from wuhan and had close contact with case 1 during the travel to the final destination in india. case 2 developed similar symptoms along with fever and diarrhoea on january 26, and the collected ts specimens were referred to the icmr-niv on january 28. the second case was hospitalized on january 30, in a medical college, alappuzha, kerala. the clinical sample (ts) was collected on january 31, 2020. case 3 travelled from china to india, developed a runny nose on january 30 and was admitted to the general hospital, kasaragod, kerala, on january 31, 2020. ts specimens were collected on january 31, 2020.ngs of sars-cov-2 from india -phylogenetic analysis and molecular characterization: ngs analysis from the ts specimens retrieved two complete genome sequences from case 1 and case 3. the complete genomic sequence data for case 2 could not be recovered due to the lower kappa concentration of the sample and hence not included in the study for analysis. the fastq files were reference mapped with the available wuhan seafood pneumonia virus (wuhan hu-1) complete sars-cov-2 genome (accession number: nc 045512.2). the total reads which were mapped and the percentage of the genome recovered for the two cases are summarized in table i .analysis of the complete genome sequences of sars-cov-2 from the positive cases in india revealed that the percentage nt and aa differences between case 1 and case 3 were 0.038 and 0.10 per cent, respectively. the sequences of case 1 and case 3 diverged from the wuhan-hu1 sequence by 0.017 per cent nt and 0.041 per cent aa respectively. indian sars-cov-2 clustered with the sarbecovirus subgenus of the betacoronavirus genus and was closest to the batcov ratg13 sequence (96.09% nt) 8 . the phylogenetic comparison showed the clustering of the genome sequences of case 1 and case 3 with the existing sequences of the sars-cov-2 sequences (fig. 1) . the phylogeny revealed emerging heterogeneity within the sars-cov-2 sequences globally. the indian sars-cov-2 viruses were positioned in different clusters.indian sars-cov-2 sequences showed two changes 408 arg→ile and 930 ala→val in the spike protein compared to the wuhan hu-1 sequence. the mutations were further mapped on the spike protein model of the indian sequence ( supplementary fig. 1 (available from http://www.ijmr.org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/ indianjmedres_2020_151_2_200_281471_sm6.pdf)). deletion of a three-nucleotide stretch, encoding tyrosine residue at position 144, of the spike gene was also observed in the indian sars-cov-2 from case 1 when compared to the other sars-cov-2 sequences.as noted in the earlier sars-cov-2 sequences, both the indian sequences possessed the polybasic cleavage site (rrar) in the spike protein at the junction of s1 and s2, the two subunits of the spike protein 19 .epitope predictions: thirty one linear b-cell epitopes were predicted by bepipred in the indian sars-cov-2, of which three were found to have a length of <6 amino acids and hence not considered. linear epitopes were also predicted using the abcpred prediction tool, which predicted 47 epitopes based on the threshold of 0.8. regions common to both the prediction methods (n=17) were identified manually. the 17 epitopes were screened for their antigenicity using the vaxijen v2.0 tool (http://www.ddg-pharmfac. net/vaxijen/vaxijen/vaxijen.html), and nine of these epitopes were shortlisted. these epitopes were further screened for their ability to elicit an ifn-γ response, which was predicted using the ifnepitope tool. finally, five epitopes, four in the s1 domain and one in the s2 domain, were predicted, which could possibly generate an immune response and suppress the ifn-γ response (table ii) . n-linked glycosylation site prediction revealed that two putative glycosylation sites (with a low value for jury agreement) were present within the epitope stretch 328-344.the discontinuous epitopes in the spike protein of the indian sars-cov-2 were further identified using multiple methods, ellipro and discotope. conformational epitopes based on these methods were mapped on the pre-fusion structure of the modelled indian sars-cov-2 spike protein. the newly released structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein was used as the template for modelling the indian spike protein. ramachandran plot statistics revealed 83.7 per cent of the residues to be in the core region, 14.4 per cent in the additionally allowed region and 0.5 per cent in the disallowed region. four epitopes were predicted by ellipro based on the pi threshold of 0.8 (supplementary table ii the mapped conformational epitopes are depicted in figure 2 . for the purpose of comparison, the indian s protein sequence was also modelled using the prefusion structure of sars-cov-1 (6acc.pdb; 87.29% identity), and the results for the conformational epitopes predicted are in supplementary t-cell epitope prediction revealed 105 strong binding epitopes capable of binding to different hla types using the netctl1.2 software based on the threshold of 0.4. twelve of these were shortlisted, considering a binding efficiency of >0.5 nm and capable of eliciting ifn-γ response (table iii) .till february 29, 2020, three positive cases of sars-cov-2 were reported from india from 881 suspected cases tested at icmr-niv, pune. all the three cases had a travel history from wuhan, china, during january 2020. although ngs was performed on the specimens for all the three positive cases, the complete genome sequence could be retrieved only from case 1 and case 3. the three cases were recovered after hospitalization and were home quarantined as per the guidelines of the ministry of health and family welfare, government of india 14 . epitopes were predicted using a combination of the bepipred server and the abcpred prediction server. the antigenicity was predicted using the vaxijen v2.0 tool. ifn-γ response was predicted using the infepitope server. # values in bracket show prediction score given by the software threshold of >0.7 nm was used for increased specificity of the prediction. the peptides were reconfirmed using ctlpred server using default parameters. the peptides that were classified as epitopes were further checked for their antigenicity score using the vaxijen v2.0 tool yadav et al:the low viral copy number of the ts specimen from case 2 could be the possible reason for lesser viral reads being retrieved during the ngs run, leading to a fragmented genome. the recent study from china on serial samples (tss, sputum, urine and stool) from two patients followed days 3-12 and days 4-15 post onset 20 . n gene-specific real-time rt-pcr assay showed that the viral loads in ts and sputum samples peaked at around 5-6 days after symptom onset, ranging from around 10 4 -10 7 copies per ml during this time 20 . in another study, the virus was detected in the saliva specimens of 11 of the 12 patients, and serial saliva testing showed declines of viral rna levels 21 .the two indian sars-cov-2 sequences were found to be non-identical (0.04% nt divergence), and the result of phylogenetic analysis indicated that there were two different introductions into the country. a recent study using 52 published genbank sequences showed evidence of substantial genetic heterogeneity and estimated the time to the most recent common ancestor to be december 5, 2019 (95% confidence interval: november 6 -december 13, 2019) 22 . continuous monitoring and analysis of the sequences from the affected countries would be vital to understand the genetic evolution and rates of substitution of the sars-cov-2.the comparison of the amino acid sequences of the non-structural (nsp1-nsp16) and structural polyproteins was undertaken with reference to the wuhan-hu1 strain for molecular characterization. some human betacoronaviruses, including hcov-hku1 (lineage a), have a polybasic cleavage site as well as predicted o-linked glycans near the s1/s2 cleavage site of the spike protein. as published recently, the polybasic cleavage site that has not been previously observed in related lineage b betacoronaviruses and is a unique feature of sars-cov-2 was noted in the indian sars-cov-2. the mutation arg408ile in the spike protein of one of the indian sequences is noted to be in the rbd and ala930val, is located in the s2 domain. however, both are away from the ace2 receptor-binding interface 19, 23 . mutations in the spike protein sequences of sars-cov-2 observed currently are localized over the s1 and s2 domains and, so far have not been found in the ace2-binding interface.from the alignment of the spike protein sequences of sars cov-1 and sars-cov-2 (wuhan-hu1 and india), it can be observed that the three nucleotide-deletion in the case 1 sars-cov-2 from india, is located close to the insert 1 region of the sars cov-1 ( supplementary fig. 3 (available from http://www.ijmr.org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/ indianjmedres_2020_151_2_200_281471_sm11.pd f )). notably, case 1 and case 2 were in close contact while travelling to india, but due to the absence of the complete genome of case 2, the genetic relatedness and source of infection could not be pinpointed. among the sars-cov structural proteins, the spike protein has been found to elicit neutralizing antibodies 24 . in this study, it was observed that of the five b-cell linear epitopes, which were predicted, four epitopes were present in the s1 domain and one in the s2 domain. prediction of conformational b-cell epitopes revealed that one of these (residue positions 341-505) in the spike protein incorporates two of the predicted linear epitopes (327-342 and 404-419) having good antigenicity along with a favourable ifn-γ response that enables differentiation and proliferation of the b-cells 25 . notably, an equivalent epitope (347-499) is predicted for the model generated using the sars-cov-1 s protein as a template. in both cases, this epitope lies within the rbd 6 . although the epitope has two putative n-linked glycosylation sites within it at positions 330 and 332, the probability of these sites being actually glycosylated is very low. a major immunodominant epitope has been reported from sars-cov between residues 441 and 700 26 . hence, the predicted b-cell conformational epitope identified in the present study may play an important role in initiating a b-cell response. among the five linear epitopes predicted in this study, epitopes 327-342 and 1204-1219 are conserved between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1. epitopes 243-258, 404-419 and 413-428 are found to have variations.the spike protein of sars-cov has also been reported to be immunogenic and elicit high ifn-γ-specific t-cell response 26 . the prediction results in this study revealed that nine possible ctl epitopes possessing good antigenicity and inducing ifn-γ response were present in the s protein. a recent report 27 also predicted t-cell epitopes in the s protein based on a similar ann/svm method and antigenicity score. although the ifn-γ response was not considered by these authors, it was noted that two of the predictions were found to be common. among the t-cell epitopes predicted in the present study, four epitopes 89-97 and 256-264 in the s1 domain and 825-833 and 1058-1066 in the s2 domain were found to have good ctl prediction scores with a broad hla allele coverage of a and b supertypes. these hla supertypes being predominant in the indian population, the predicted epitopes may be considered suitable for future experiments towards vaccine design.to conclude, the prompt intervention by the government of india and the health authorities of the state of kerala, ensured that the said cases did not become secondary foci of transmission. further, the timely identification of sars-cov-2 in these suspected cases by the icmr-niv, pune, has helped in the isolation of the patients, containment and enhanced surveillances for the virus and its restricted movement. the availability of the genomic sequences of the identified cases will contribute to the public repositories and help towards the development of diagnostics, vaccines and antivirals. the sequence data would also help in tracking the virus from its origin and evolution with its transmission in time. monitoring the mutation dynamics of sars-cov-2 is critical for the development of effective approaches to contain the 20 pathogen. by analyzing 106 sars-cov-2 and 39 sars genome sequences, we provided direct genetic evidence that 21 sars-cov-2 has a much lower mutation rate than sars. minimum evolution phylogeny analysis revealed the putative 22 original status of sars-cov-2 and the early-stage spread history. the discrepant phylogenies for the spike protein and its 23 receptor binding domain proved a previously reported structural rearrangement prior to the emergence of sars- despite that we found the spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 is particularly more conserved, we identified a mutation that 25 leads to weaker receptor binding capability, which concerns a sars-cov-2 sample collected on 27 th january 2020 from 26india. this represents the first report of a significant sars-cov-2 mutant, and raises the alarm that the ongoing vaccine 27 development may become futile in future epidemic if more mutations were identified. 28 29 evolutionary rate assessment 95the ratio of nonsynonymous mutations (dn) to synonymous mutations (ds) was calculated using codeml in the paml 96 (version 4.7) package (18). cds sequences for each protein encoding gene were filtered to remove redundant identical 97 sequences. then codon-based cds sequence alignment was performed using muscle program, and an individual nj 98 tree was generated using mega7.0 (17) with p-distance model. the obtained sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree 99 files were used as paml inputs for dn and ds calculations. 100protein structural analyses 101 3d structure of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein in complex with (pdb: 6vw1, 6vw1) has been determined recently 102 (5, 9) genetic diversity analyses identified a single amino acid mutation in rbd of the spike protein in sars-cov-2 112as of 24 th march 2020, there are a total of 174 nucleotide sequences for sars-cov-2 in the ncbi database. by restricting 113 to the complete or near-complete genomes, 106 sequences from 12 countries were obtained and used for further analyses. 114this encompasses 54 records from usa, 35 from china, and the rest from other countries: australia (1), brazil (2), finland 115(1), india (2), italy (1), nepal (1), spain (3), south korea (1), and sweden (1). 116based on the gene model of the reference sars-cov-2 genome (genebank: nc_045512.2), a total of 12 protein-encoding 117 open reading frames (orfs), plus 5utr and 3utr were annotated ( figure 1a) . overall, the gene sequences from 118 different samples are highly homologous, sharing > 99.1% identity, with the exception of 5utr (96.7%) and 3utr (98%) ( table 1) , which are relatively more divergent. sequence alignment showed that there is no mutation in orf6, orf7a, 120 and orf7b. the genetic diversity profile across the 106 genomes was displayed in figure 1a . a few nucleotide sites 121 within orf1a, orf1b, orf3a, and orf8 exhibiting high genetic diversity were identified ( figure 1a) . 122the s protein is critical for virus infection and vaccine development. as shown in figure to assess how the mutation rate and genetic diversity of sars-cov-2, the ratio of nonsynonymous mutations (dn) and 138 synonymous mutations (ds), was calculated for each protein-encoding orf based on the 106 sars-cov-2 and 39 sars 139 genomes. for sars-cov-2, the highest dn was observed for orf8 (0.0111), followed by orf1a (0.0081), orf9 (0.0079), 140 and orf4 (0.0063) ( table 1) , indicating these genes may be more likely to accumulate nonsynonymous mutations. in 141 contrast, orf1b (0.0029), s gene (0.0040) encoding the spike protein, and orf5 (0.0023) are relatively more conserved 142 in terms of nonsynonymous mutation. noteworthy, orf6, orf7ab and orf10 are strictly conserved with no 143 nonsynonymous mutation. compared to sars-cov-2, sars displayed higher mutation rates for all of the orfs in the 144 virus genome (table 1) , suggesting an overall higher levels of genetic diversity and mutation rate. in particular, the dn and 145 ds values for the s gene in sars-cov is around 12 and 7 times higher than that for sars-cov-2. in contrast, the mutation 146 rate differences for orf1a and orf1b between sars-cov-2 and sars are relatively milder, varying from 1.5 times to 147 4.8 times only. in contrast to sars-cov-2, which has strictly conserved orf6, orf7a, and orf7b, sars displayed 148 mutation rates at different levels. notably, the ds for orf10 are comparable between the two genomes at 0.0326 and 0.0341, 149 respectively. 150 151to trace the potential spread history of sars-cov-2 across the world, an unrooted minimum evolution (me) tree of the 153 106 genomes was developed based on whole-genome sequence alignment. the clustering pattern of the me phylogeny 154 the spike glycoprotein is critical for the virus infection. recent study suggested that the s protein in sars-cov-2 may 185 has underwent a structural rearrangement(13). to investigate this hypothesis, two separate phylogenies were developed 186 based on the full-s and rbd sequences, respectively. overall, the two phylogenies displayed similar clustering patterns, 187 separating into three major clades (figure 3) . sars-cov-2 was identified in the same major clade, and was clustered most 188 closely with two bat sars covs (highlighted in purple and green colors, figure 3 ) and the human sars-cov (orange 189 color, figure 3) . in both phylogenies, sars-cov-2 is most closely related to bat_cov_ratg13, suggesting sars- 2 may have originated from bat. however, the evolutionary positions of human sars-cov and bat-sl-covz45 were 191 swapped between the full-s and rbd-only phylogenies. in the full-s phylogeny, bat-sl-covz45 is relatively more similar 192 to human sars-cov-2, whilst human sars-cov is closer to sars-cov-2 than bat-sl-covz45. taken together, these results suggested that the rbd of sars-cov-2 is more likely originated from human sars-cov, whilst the rest part of 194 the s protein in sars-cov-2 may have originated from bat-sl-covz45, supporting the potential structural rearrangement 195 of s protein in sars-cov-2. bat_cov_ratg13 is similar to sars-cov-2, indicating the proposed structural 196 rearrangement may have occurred in bat first before its transmission to human. the rbd of virus s protein binds to a receptor in host cells, and is responsible for the first step of cov infection (3). thus, 204 amino acid mutation to rbd may have significant impact on receptor binding and vaccine development. the 3d structure 205 of the spike protein rbd of sars-cov-2 (pdb: 6vw1) has recently been determined in complex with human ace2 206 receptor (6). one of the12 amino acid mutations in the rbd of s protein (r408i) was identified among the 106 sars-207cov-2 genomes. sequence alignment showed that 408r is strictly conserved in sars-cov-2, sars-cov and bat sars-208 like cov (figure 4a) . based on the determined cov2_rbd-ace2 complex structure, 408r is located at the interface 209 between rbd and ace2, but is positioned relatively far away from ace2, thus does not have direct interaction with ace2 210 ( figure 4b) . however, the determined rbd0-ace2 structure showed that 408r forms a hydrogen bond (3.3 å in length) 211 with the glycan attached to 90n from ace2 ( figure 4c ) (6). the hydrogen bond may have contributed to the exceptionally 212 higher ace2 binding affinity. in contrast, despite this arginine residue is also conserved in human sars-cov 213 (corresponding to 395r in pdb: 2ajf), it is positioned relatively distant (6.1 å) from the glycan bound to 90n from ace2 214 ( figure s1) . interestingly, the 408r-glycan hydrogen bond seem to be disrupted by the r408i mutation in one sars-cov-215our results clearly showed that the distribution of the linear epitopes is not related to nglycosylation, if any, subtle.to call the highly immunogenic peptides, the criteria were set as the average_signal intensity is larger than 3*cutoff2, and the response frequency is larger than 10% (see methods for the definitions). a total of 16 peptides were obtained, surprisingly, all of them are outside of rbd. because the significance of rbd, we lowered the criteria, i. e., the response frequency is larger than 1%, while keep the average_signal intensity larger than 3*cutoff2, 3 consecutive peptides of moderate immunogenicity, i. e, s1-76, s1-77 and s1-78 were selected (table s3) . interestingly, all these peptides locate within rbm (receptor binding motif), the binding interface of spike protein and ace2.while a few of these immunogenic peptides are dispersed on spike protein, there are two linear epitope "hot" regions could be immediately recognized, aa525-685 and aa770-829, one of which is ctd (c-terminal domain) and another covers the s2' cleavage site and the fusion peptide (fp). for the immunogenic peptides (table s3) , the solubility (20) and pi range from -1.97 to 1.06, and 3.01 to 11.16, respectively. this indicates the overall immunogenicity of spike protein is not correlated to solubility and pi. there are several sars-cov-2 epitope related studies involving small sample sets (21, 22) . our immunogenic epitopes are partially consistent with these studies (table s3) . a relative high consistency was observed between our data and rescan, a phage display based strategy (23, 24) .it is known that the immune response may be related to some key clinical parameters, such as gender, disease severity, age and the final outcome (25, 26) . to test whether the linear epitope landscape correlates with these parameters, we divided the linear landscape ( fig. 1a) according to these parameters, i.e., male vs. female for gender (fig. s2.) , mild vs. severe for severity (fig. s3) , >60 vs. <60 for age (fig. s4) and recovered vs. death for final outcome (fig. s5) . unexpectedly, overall, no obvious difference was observed. these suggest that the linear epitope landscape is highly robust and consistent among covid-19 patients.to further illustrate the location and distribution of the 19 immunogenic peptides (table   s3) , we mapped them to the 3d structure of spike protein (27) (fig. s6a and s6b) . it is clear that most of these peptides locate on the surface of spike protein, which is consistent . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07. 13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint to the common notion (28) . however, s1-111, s2-15 and s2-16 are not on the surface of the trimeric spike protein, but on the surface of the monomer. a plausible explanation is that the monomer spike protein could be exposed to the immune system at a certain yet undiscovered stage.it is well known that rbd is highly immunogenic (26, 29) . however, according to our selection criteria, no highly immunogenic peptide was obtained from rbd. only when we lowered the selection criteria, 3 peptides were selected, i.e., s1-76, s1-77 and s1-78 ( fig.   2a) . when rbd is compared to other regions of spike protein, it is obvious that rbd is very poor of linear epitopes. this seems contradictory to the knowledge that rbd is highly immunogenic. it is possible that most of the epitopes of rbd region are conformational.to test this possibility, we collected a set of 9 high affinity monoclonal antibodies of rbd or spike protein (see methods). these antibodies were obtained through memory b cell isolation from covid-19 recovered patients (30) . we analyzed these antibodies individually on the spike protein peptide microarray (14) (fig. 2b) . among these antibodies, 414-1 has the highest affinity (2.96 nm) to rbd, as expected, strong bindings were observed for both s1 protein and rbd, however, negative signals were obtained for all the peptides, including the rbd peptides from aa331-524. also, no peptide bindings were observed for the rest of the rbd specific antibodies (data not shown). for antibody 414-4, strong binding was obtained for s1 protein but not rbd. interestingly, 414-4 binds s1-97 with high affinity, indicating the epitope that 414-4 recognized is around aa577-588. actually, the 3 immunogenic peptides, i. e., s1-76, s1-77 and s1-78 were also identified in other related studies (22, 31) . these three peptides are consecutive and locate in rbm region, which are at least partially overlapped with or close to the binding epitopes of a variety of sars-cov-2 neutralization antibodies, e.g., b38 (6), cb6 (32) and p2b-2f6 (33) . to further illustrate the locations of these peptides, we mapped them to the 3d structure of spike protein of both the open state and the closed state (fig. 2c) . in closed state, aa455-465 of s1-76/77/78 locate at the contact area among the three monomers and probably is difficult to be accessed, aa452-454 and 473-474 form as β-strand, and are covered but could be accessed from both sides, while only aa466-472 are exposed and . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint present as flexible sequence ( fig. 2c and fig. s7) . in the open state of spike protein, all residues of s1-76/77/78 are exposed and highly accessible (fig. s7) . to further analyze the immunogenicity of s1-76/77/78, neutralization antibody-rbd complexes are used (fig.   s8 ), the antibodies are cb6 (32), p2b-2f6 (33), bd23 (7), cr3022 (8) and s309 (34) .among these structures, cb6 and p2b-2f6 interact directly with residues within s1-76/77/78. for the cb6-rbd complex (fig. s8d) , there are several residues within s1-76/77/78, which have direct interactions with the antibody, i. e., y453, l455, f456, r457, k458, s459, n460, y473 and q474. while for the p2b-2f6-rbd complex (fig. 8e) , the only residue which has direct interaction with the antibody is l452.broad neutralization antibody and vaccine effective for sars-cov-2 and other human coronaviruses are of high interest (35) . we performed the homology analysis for s1-76/77/78 among sars-cov-2, the other 6 human coronaviruses, and bat coronavirus btcov-ratg13 (1). high homologies were observed for all these 3 peptides among sars-cov-2, sars-cov and btcov-ratg13. the high homology indicate that antibodies elicited by s1-76/77/78 may at least be effective for both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov.these results strongly suggest that rbd is rich of conformational epitopes while poor of linear epitopes. the underlying mechanism is worth for further investigation. taken together, our results suggest that s1-76/77/78 could serve as a promising candidate for the development of broadly neutralization antibodies or vaccine.the first "hot" region of linear epitopes is ctd. the whole domain is densely covered by linear epitopes (fig. 3a) . according to the selection criteria, 6 highly immunogenic epitopes, i.e., s1-93, s1-97, s1-105/106, s1-111 and s1-113 were identified. these peptides are about evenly distributed cross ctd. we then asked whether these 6 highly immunogenic peptides/ epitopes were also revealed by other studies. it showed that s1-93 was identified by rescan (23)( table s3 ) and covidep (21), s1-97 by rescan, and s1-111 by covidep. s1-93 and s1-97 locate at ctd1, aa555-564 of s1-93 and aa578-584 of s1-97 present as loop region and are on the surface of trimeric spike protein. s1-105, s1-106, s1-111, . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint s1-113 locate at ctd2, s1-105/106 are almost loop and present on the surface, s1-111 is β-strand and loop but buried inside, only aa667-669 on loop region could be accessed. s1-113 is nearly to s1/s2 cleavage site, although aa677-684 is invisible in spike protein structure, these residues could be exposed on surface and induce antibody response to prevent s1/s2 hydrolysis (fig. 3b) . s1-113 is also on the out surface while s1-111 is on the inner surface, the underlying mechanism why s1-111 triggers strong igg reaction in many patients worth further study.homology analysis was performed for the 6 highly immunogenic peptides (fig. 3c) .except s1-113, high homologies were observed for all the 5 peptides among sars-cov-2, sars-cov and btcov-ratg13. the high homology indicate that antibodies elicited by s1-93, s1-97, s1-105 and s1-111 may be effective for both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. and antibody targeting s1-113 may specific for sars-cov-2.d614g mutant is the current dominant strain in europe (36) , which has about 9 times higher infection efficiency in cell assay than that of the wild type strain (37) . d614 is within s1-102, a peptide of moderate immunogenicity, and close to the highly immunogenic peptide s1-105. block the d614 region may cause functionally significant effect.the second region with highly enriched linear epitopes spans aa770-829 (fig. 4a) .according to the selection criteria, 6 highly immunogenic peptides were obtained, i.e., s2-15, s2-16, s2-18, s2-19, s2-22 and s2-23.it is interesting to see whether these 6 highly immunogenic peptides/ epitopes were also identified in related studies. we revealed that s2-22 was identified by a peptide microarray study (22) . four peptides (s2-18, s2-19, s2-22 and s2-23) were identified by rescan (23), and 2 peptides (s2-22 and s2-23) were predicted by covidep (21) . of these peptides, s2-22 is the only one that was identified or predicted in all these studies. since s2-22/23 covers the s2' cleavage site and fp, we speculate that antibody targeting s2-22/23 may block the cleavage and disturb the function of fp, thus has potent neutralization activity.interestingly, strong s2-22 specific igg reaction was also elicited by a mrna vaccine study (38) , which further demonstrated the high immunogenicity and high potential of neutralization activity of s2-22.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. to check the similarity of the peptides among human coronaviruses, we performed the homology analysis for s2-22/23, s2-15/16 and s2-18/19. high homologies were observed for all these peptides among sars-cov-2, sars-cov and btcov-ratg13 (fig. 4c) .interestingly, s2-22/23 is highly homologous among all the coronaviruses, and almost identical among sars-cov-2, sars-cov and btcov-ratg13. if this peptide can elicit strong neutralization activity, it may could serve as a promising candidate for making broad neutralization antibody and vaccine.except the immunogenic peptides that belong to rbd and the two "hot" regions, there are also other highly immunogenic peptides dispersed across spike protein (fig. 5a) . s1-5 locates at ntd, part of the residues, i. e., aa28-31 form β-strand and are on the surface of trimeric spike protein, aa32-36 form as loop and are partially covered by other region.s2-78, s2-96 and s2-97 locate at unobserved regions in the c-terminal of spike protein.we applied a modeling structure to present these unobserved regions (fig. 5b) . s2-78 is predicted as α-helix and s2-96/97 is predicted as loop. s2-96/97 are at the very cterminal end of spike protein (fig. 5b) , which locates in the cytoplasm of the host cell.we checked whether these 4 highly immunogenic peptides/ epitopes were also revealed in other studies. it showed that s1-5 was identified by a peptide microarray study (22) . s2-78 was identified by rescan (23) , and 3 peptides (s2-78, s2-96, s2-97) were predicted by covidep (21) . the functional role of s1-5 specific antibodies may worth further investigation. s2-78 is adjacent to hr2, the antibody targeting this site may block the conformational change that is essential for effective virus-cell fusion (39). it is surprising to see the high immunogenicity of s2-96 and s2-97, since they are at the very c-terminal . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint end of spike protein and theoretically localize in the cytoplasm. further study is necessary to explore the underlying mechanism and functional roles of these peptides/ epitopes. high homologies were observed for all these peptides among sars-cov-2, sars-cov and btcov-ratg13 (fig. 5c) . interestingly, s2-78 and s2-96/97 are highly homologous among all the coronaviruses, and almost identical among sars-cov-2, sars-cov and btcov-ratg13. for s2-78, high homology was also observed for mers-cov. same as s2-22/23, s2-78 has the potential to serve as a promising candidate for developing broad neutralization antibody and vaccine.herein, we aim to reveal igg responses triggered by sars-cov-2 spike protein on a systematic level. we adopted a newly developed peptide microarray with full coverage of spike protein (14), analyzed 1,051 covid-19 sera and 528 control sera. a set of highly immunogenic peptides/epitopes were revealed, and a comprehensive igg linear epitope landscape was constructed.one limitation of this study is that only short peptides were involved. though linear epitopes are nicely represented, conformational epitopes may not, for example, for rbd region, which is highly immunogenic, only 3 linear epitopes of moderate immunogenicity were identified. to overcome this limitation, one way is to synthesize longer peptides which may retain some conformational information (31) . it is necessary to point out that for the linear epitopes that we identified, they are highly physiologically relevant, since all of them were revealed through the analysis of sera from covid-19 patient.our study presents the first igg linear epitope landscape of spike protein, which could only be enabled by analyzing a large cohort of samples using a systematic approach, such as the peptide microarray of full coverage of spike protein. according to the landscape, it is obvious that spike protein is highly immunogenic, there are many epitopes on the protein, and these epitopes are not evenly distributed across spike protein. among the 19 immunogenic peptides (table s3) , some may be good candidates for developing neutralization antibodies or vaccines, some may cause ade, if any. the rest of the peptides may have no direct biological function, but serve only as neutral immunodominant epitopes . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint that could not trigger neutralization activity and ade. we believe that most of the 19 immunogenic peptides (table s3 ) are worth further testing in animal model to identify which peptides can specifically trigger neutralization activities. when use the intact spike protein for vaccine development, we can take a more precise way by deleting or mutating the peptides that correspond to ade and neutral immunodominant epitopes, thus assure the efficacy while minimize the side effect. alternatively, the peptides which elicit neutralization activity have the potential to be applied directly for neutralization antibody generation, or applied as peptide vaccine. by this way, we can avoid many challenges when working with intact spike protein or rbd.the linear epitope landscape and the highly immunogenic peptides identified in this study could serve as a solid base to guide the precise development of prophylactic/ therapeutic antibodies and vaccines for combating covid-19. because of the high homology, they may also effective for other human coronaviruses, including sars-cov and mers-cov. since most of the highly immunogenic peptides are outside of rbd, we believe that the antibodies and vaccines based on these peptides/epitopes could be used alone or at least as a complementary to the rbd centered antibodies and vaccines.the n-terminal amidated peptides were synthesized by gl biochem, ltd. (shanghai, china). each peptide was individually conjugated with bsa using sulfo-smcc (thermo . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprintthe peptide-bsa conjugates as well as s1 protein, rbd protein and n protein of sars-cov-2, along with the negative (bsa) and positive controls (anti-human igg and igm antibody), were printed in triplicate on path substrate slide (grace bio-labs, oregon, usa) to generate identical arrays in a 1 x 7 subarray format using super marathon printer (arrayjet, uk). the microarrays were stored at -80°c until use. table s1 ). sera of the control group from healthy donors, lung cancer patients, patients with autoimmune diseases were collected from ruijin hospital, shanghai, china or tongren hospital, shanghai, china.all the sera were stored at -80℃ until use. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint (jackson immunoresearch, pa, usa), which were diluted for 1: 1,000 in 1×pbst. the incubation was carried out at room temperature for 1 h. the microarrays were then washed with 1×pbst and dried by centrifugation at room temperature and scanned by luxscan for each spot, signal intensity was defined as the mean_foreground subtracted by the mean_background. the signal intensities of the triplicate spots for each peptide or protein were averaged. the overall_mean_background and the overall_standard deviation (sd)_background of all the arrays probed with covid-19 sera were calculated. cutoff1 was defined as (the overall_mean_background + 2*overall_sd_background). according to the array data, cutoff1 was calculated as 380.7. for the control arrays, mean_forground and sd_foreground for each peptide and protein were calculated. cutoff2 was set as (control_mean_singal intensity + 2*control_sd_ signal intentisy). for each peptide or protein, sars-cov-2 specific positive response was called when the average_signal intesnty is larger than both cutoff1 and cutoff2. response frequency was then defined as the number of the peptides with positive response divided by the total number of the peptides on the microarray.the spike protein structures (pdb id: 6x6p and 6vyb), rbd-ace2 structure (pdb id: 6m0j) and antibodies-rbd complex structure (pdb id: 7c01, 7bwj, 7byr, 6w41 and 6wpt) were used to analyze the structural details of the epitopes identified from the peptide microarray. the c terminal (1146-1273) structure of spike protein was from a modeling structure, qhd43416.pdb, generated by the c-i-tasser(https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/covid-19/), and aligned to c terminal of spike . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. the signal intensities of 1,051 covid-19 sera against 197 peptides were obtained by using the peptide microarray. the peptides are listed in x-axis and aligned to the corresponding locations on spike protein. as a control, the signal intensities of s1 protein were also presented. the missing spots are peptides either could not be synthesized or failed for bsa conjugation (see table s2 for details). a cohort of 528 controls sera were also analyzed on the microarray. in addition, the known n-glycosylation sites (n-glyco) were aligned with spike protein. the peptides or regions with significant binding were marked blue. peptide s1-88 was specifically labeled because significant bindings were also observed for the controls. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 2 . rbd is lack of highly immunogenic linear epitope. a. rbd region of the linear epitope landscape; b. the peptide microarray results of two spike protein specific monoclonal human antibodies (from active motif co. ltd.), one (414-1) is specific for rbd and the other (414-4) is not. c. the detailed structures of the significant peptides (s1-76/77/78, aa451-474, red) on rbd of the closed state spike protein trimer, the side view (pdb id: 6x6p); d. the locations of the significant peptides (s1-76/77/78, aa451-474, red) on the co-crystal structure of rbd and ace2 (pdb id: 6m0j). e. the homology analysis of the significant peptides among the 7 known human coronaviruses and the bat coronavirus btcov-ratg13, which is highly homologous to sars-cov-2, the amino acids with consistencies >=50% among the 8 coronaviruses are marked red, the loop and β-strand region are shown as line and arrow above the sequences, respectively.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint specifically, s1-93, aa553-564, red; s1-97, aa577-588, blue; s1-105/106, aa625-642, yellow; s1-111, aa661-672, green; s1-113, s1-113, 673-684, orange; c. the homology analysis of the significant peptides among the 7 known human coronaviruses and the bat coronavirus btcov-ratg13. the amino acids with consistencies >=50% among the 8 coronaviruses are marked red, the loop, α-helix and β-strand region are shown as line, coil and arrow above sequences, respectively. unobserved structure is shown as dotted line.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . figure 5 . other highly immunogenic linear epitopes. a. other 5 significant peptides which are not belong the two "hot regions" (see figure 3 and figure 4) ; b. the significant peptides locate on spike protein. s1-5, aa25-36, red; s2-78, aa1148-1159, red; s2-96/97, aa1256-1273, red; c. the homology analysis of the significant peptides among the 7 known human coronaviruses and the bat coronavirus btcov-ratg13. the amino acids with consistencies >=50% among the 8 coronaviruses are marked red. the loop, α-helix and β-strand region are shown as line, coil and arrow above sequences, respectively. unobserved structure is shown as dotted line.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s1 . the peptide microarray. a. the layout of the peptide microarray that was used in this study (please see table s2 for the details of the peptides on the array); b. an example array probed with covid-19 patient serum; c. an example array probed with a control serum.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s4 . the igg linear epitope landscape of sars-cov-2 spike protein: age < 60 vs. >= 60. a. the linear epitope landscape was separated to two sub-landscapes according to age, i.e., 437 age < 60 vs. 614 age >= 60; b. the correlation between age >=60 and age < 60.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint of contacting residues are shown as stick. the significant peptides (s1-76/77/78, aa451-474) were marked as red (a-e).table. s1. serum samples tested in this study.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprint table s3 . highly immunogenic peptides.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20152587 doi: medrxiv preprintthe catastrophic coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic caused by a novel coronavirus referred to as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has brought the world to a standstill and has afflicted global public health (abraham et al., 2020; bhardwaj et al., 2020; elasnaoui & chawki, 2020; paniri et al., 2020; . the virus has infected over six million people and has ruthlessly claimed nearly four hundred thousand lives till date (as per updates on june 2, 2020) (https://www.worldometers. info/coronavirus/). covid-19 has surpassed the two other coronavirus-related outbreaks associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) that occurred in recent past in terms of the frequency of infected individuals and the number of deaths (lu et al., 2020) , though the overall case-fatality rate remains lower than both sars and mers (wu & mcgoogan, 2020) . patients infected with covid-19 are diagnosed with mild-to-severe respiratory illness and symptoms like high fever, cough, dizziness and shortness of breath which might further advance to pneumonia and acute respiratory distress causing death (lu et al., 2020; wu & mcgoogan, 2020) .sars-cov-2 is a positive-stranded rna virus that represents the genus betacoronovirus and belongs to the family coronaviridae (benvenuto et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020) . the novel coronavirus is significantly distant from sars-cov (around 79% identify) and mers-cov (around 50% identity) (lu et al., 2020) . despite the novelty of sars-cov-2, significant advancements have been made in elucidating the complex genomic features , understanding the codon usage signatures and evolutionary enigma (andersen et al., 2020; tort et al., 2020) and unraveling the riddles of infectivity and epidemiology (lu et al., 2020; rothan & byrareddy, 2020) of the intimidating virus. the viral genome encodes several structural and non-structural proteins (nsp) that play crucial roles in attaching the virus to host cellular receptors, regulating viral replication and facilitating subsequent infection tai et al., 2020; . the spike (s) protein is a vital structural protein component that forms prominent spikes on the outer surface of the virus and helps in viral attachment, successful fusion and subsequent entry into the host cells sinha et al., 2020; tai et al., 2020) . the imperative main protease enzyme m pro (also referred to as 3 c-like protease) of sars-cov-2 plays pivotal role in proteolytic cleavage and processing of the large viral polyprotein orf1ab in combination with papain-like proteases and facilitates viral replication (al-khafaji et al., 2020; gyebi et al., 2020; islam et al., 2020; jin et al., 2020; joshi et al., 2020; mittal et al., 2020) . efficient replication and the spread of sars-cov-2 in host cells are largely dependent on proper functioning of the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) ziebuhr, 2005) . non-structural protein 12 (nsp12), the catalytic subunit of rdrp, mediates viral replication and enhances template binding and processivity in combination with nsp7 and nsp8 (subissi et al., 2014; te velthuis et al., 2010) . the pivotal roles of these viral proteins in the attachment of the virus to host cell receptors and subsequent replication and infection establish them as promising drug and vaccine candidates (aanouz et al., 2020; adeoye et al., 2020; das et al., 2020; lobo-galo et al., 2020; mahanta et al., 2020; pant et al., 2020; sk et al., 2020; tai et al., 2020; yin et al., 2020) . several methods like drug repurposing (ciliberto & cardone, 2020; elmezayen et al., 2020) , administration of convalescent plasma transfusion and usage of sars-cov and mers-cov antibodies are presently being employed to combat covid-19. a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin has been observed to be effective in the treatment of the disease (gautret et al., 2020) . hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug, facilitates endosomal acidification and blocks viral entry and fusion by inhibiting glycosylation of the host cellular receptors that bind with the viral proteins (sanders et al., 2020) . though hydroxychloroquine efficiently arrests viral growth, toxic side effects and concerns over drug poisoning remain the major bottlenecks in using it in covid-19 therapy (enmozhi et al., 2020) . drugs like arbidol targeted against the sars-cov-2 spike protein (sanders et al., 2020) and lopinavir and ritonavir targeted against sars-cov-2 m pro have been reported to be effective against the menacing pathogen. antiviral drugs like remdesivir and favipiravir that inhibit rdrp activity (hendaus, 2020; li et al., 2020) ; nejadi babadaei et al., 2020have been observed to arrest sars-cov-2 replication and are currently in clinical trials. despite relentless attempts, researchers and medical practitioners are struggling to limit the rapid transmission and combat the calamitous health hazards posed by sars-cov-2 due to the lack of specific effective therapeutics and prophylactics. though several drugs and vaccines are in clinical trials all over the world, an effective therapeutic remedy specifically targeted to treat and cure covid-19 is yet to be achieved.since time immemorial, phytochemicals and natural compounds have been employed as medicinal agents towards the effective treatment of grave ailments. in the quest of natural therapeutic remedy against covid-19 several studies have been designed to explore the inhibitory prospects of phytochemicals from various important and conventionally used medicinal plants and herbs all over the world (boopathi et al., 2020) . clerodendrum, a perennial shrub and a member of lamiaceae family, is prevalent in the tropical regions of asia including india, myanmar, bangladesh, malayasia, indonesia, thailand, bhutan, nepal and also in temperate tibet (chathuranga et al., 2019) . various medicinally important species of clerodendrum are frequently used to treat respiratory ailments like common cold, bronchitis and pneumonia (chathuranga et al., 2019; patel et al., 2014) . a crude extract of clerodendrum trichotomum has been reported to actively inhibit respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) without any cytotoxic effects towards normal tissues (chathuranga et al., 2019) .considering the fact that clerodendrum spp. often finds widespread applications in treating respiratory disorders (chathuranga et al., 2019; patel et al., 2014) , an in house repertoire of the phytochemicals obtained from gc-ms analysis of twelve clerodendrum species were assessed to explore their inhibitory prospects against the imperative spike, m pro and rdrp proteins of sars-cov-2 employing an in silico molecular interaction-based approach. present work also involves a comprehensive investigation of the physicochemical features of the screened phytocompounds and their accordance with the general rules of drug-likeness viz., lipinski's rule of five (ro5) and veber's rule, with a purpose to assess their potential drug-likeness.the leaves of twelve species of clerodendrum were collected during 2019 (table s1 , supplementary material) from different localities in north bengal (garden of the medicinal plants of department of botany, university of north bengal and jalpaiguri) and roadside sites from azra, guwahati, assam. the plants were identified by plant taxonomist of department of botany, university of north bengal and were deposited at the herbarium of the same department.all the reagents and chemicals used in the present study were purchased from hi-media laboratories pvt. ltd. (mumbai, india), merck (mumbai, india) and sigma-aldrich (usa). milli-q ultrapure water from the departmental facility was used in all the experiments. all the chemicals were of analytical grade.fresh and disease free leaves of selected plants were washed twice with double distilled water, shade dried at room temperature for 21 days and pulverized into fine powder by using a mechanical grinder. powdered leaves of selected plants (10 g each) were extracted in a soxhlet apparatus using absolute methanol (the ratio of plant material to solvent was 1:10 m/v) for 6-7 h. the extracts were then concentrated under reduced pressure and controlled temperature (40 -50 c) using a rotary evaporator (buchi rotavapor r-3, switzerland). the extracts were further lyophilized using an eyela freeze dryer (fdu-506, usa) to obtain dry powder and stored at 4 c until further use.all the lyophilized methanolic extracts were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min. clear supernatants thus, obtained were utilized for gc-ms analysis to identify the different phytochemical compounds. thermo scientific make 'trace 1300' gc, attached to a tg-5ms column (30 m â 0.25 mm â 0.25 lm) and equipped with isq-qd (thermo scientific) single quadrupole mass analyzer conditioned at ion trap 230 c, transfer line 290 c, electron energy of 70 ev (vacuum pressure-2.21e-0.5 torr) was employed for the present study (kar et al., 2016) . one microlitre of the sample was injected through a thermo scientific ai-1310 auto-sampler in splitless mode (split flow 50 ml/min) with a splitless time of 0.80 min. helium was selected as the carrier gas with a constant flow of 1 ml/min. all samples were run thrice to minimize the error and the results were plotted only with the compounds identified in all three runs. the essential compounds were identified by their retention times and mass fragmentation patterns using the reference of parent compound using ms interpreter version 2.0 and also by matching with the reference database of national institute of standards and technology (nist) with a ms library version 2011. no external standards were used in this study.the most prominent and active compounds present in the selected species of clerodendrum (detected through gc-ms analysis) were subjected to robust molecular docking analysis against the imperative sars-cov-2 proteins that currently serve as promising targets for effective drug development namely, the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the sars-cov-2 spike protein, sars-cov-2 main protease enzyme m pro and sars-cov-2 rdrp (tai et al., 2020) . the high-resolution x-ray diffraction crystal structures of the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (pdb id: 6lzg chain b; 2.50 å resolution) , sars-cov-2 main protease enzyme m pro (pdb id: 6lu7 chain a; 2.16 å resolution) (jin et al., 2020) and sars-cov-2 rdrp (pdb id: 7bv2 chain a; 2.50 å resolution) were retrieved from pdb . the inhibitor and water molecules were removed from the pdb files prior to analysis. polar hydrogen atoms and kollman charges were added to the corresponding pdb files using autodock tools. the structures of the concerned phytocompounds were retrieved from ncbi pubchem (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and respective three-dimensional structures were generated through the open babel software (o'boyle et al., 2011) . energy-optimization of the structures was achieved using the prodrg server (sch€ uttelkopf & van aalten, 2004). gromos 96 force field was applied for the process of energy minimization. gasteiger charges were added to the corresponding ligand structures using autodock tools.molecular docking was achieved using the autodock vina software (naidoo et al., 2020; trott & olson, 2010) . thorough information about the active site residues of the rbd of sars-cov-2 spike, sars-cov-2 m pro and sars-cov-2 rdrp proteins was obtained from recent reports on their structure and interaction/inhibition binding pockets (andersen et al., 2020; jin et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020; yin et al., 2020) . the ligands were docked at the active binding pockets of the concerned proteins employing a grid-based docking method opting a rigid protein receptor and flexible ligand docking protocol (naidoo et al., 2020) . grid boxes of coordinates 30, 30 and 30 in x, y and z dimensions involving the active site residues were generated to carry out molecular docking at the binding pockets of the viral proteins (naidoo et al., 2020) . the dinc server was used to further validate the results of autodock vina (antunes et al., 2017) . ligand-receptor complexes with the lowest binding scores and rmsd < 2.0 å (naidoo et al., 2020) were used for robust interaction profiling employing the pymol software (version 1.7.4) and the protein-ligand interaction profiler (plip) web-server (salentin et al., 2015) . the compounds displaying binding energy scores à7.0 kcal/mol were selected for the next phases of analysis (naidoo et al., 2020) .physicochemical features of the selected phytocompounds were thoroughly estimated using the swissadme server and the results were validated with the pkcsm server (daina et al., 2017; pires et al., 2015) . pan-assay interference structures (pains) medicinal chemistry analysis was performed employing the swissadme and faf-drugs4 (lagorce et al., 2017) servers. toxicity parameters like mutagenicity (ames mutagenesis) and cytotoxicity of the phytochemicals were assessed using the protox-ii web-server (banerjee et al., 2018) and validated with the vnn-admet server (schyman et al., 2017) .molecular mechanics-generalized born surface area (mm-gbsa) was used to estimate the free energies of binding (dg bind ) of the selected protein-ligand complexes employing the default parameters of the prime mm-gbsa modules (vijayakumar et al., 2014) implemented in the schr€ odinger software. prime mmgbsa is an approach that uses the optimized potential for liquid simulations (opls) force field in combination with molecular mechanics energies (emm), surface generalized born (sgb) solvation model for polar solvation (gsgb) and a non-polar solvation term (gnp) for the calculation purpose (al-khafaji et al., 2020; mittal et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020) . the total free energy of binding of each concerned protein-ligand complex was calculated as:molecular dynamics (md) simulations allow proper validation of molecular docking results and offer reliable assessment of potential stability of a protein-ligand complex muralidharan et al., 2020) . the complexes of the ligands displaying the best interaction (in terms of binding energy values) with each sars-cov-2 spike, m pro and rdrp proteins were subjected to md simulation for a timescale of 40 nanoseconds (ns) using gromacs software (version 2019) (abraham et al., 2015) . the md simulations were executed as per the protocols opted by . the equilibration steps were set with constant pressure and temperature (npt) ensemble (elfiky & azzam, 2020; enayatkhani et al., 2020; umesh et al., 2020) the md simulations were carried out at standard temperature of 300 k and pressure level of 1.013 bar (umesh et al., 2020). the md trajectories were estimated by analyzing the root mean square deviation (rmsd) and the root mean square fluctuation (rmsf) of the complexes for a timescale of 40 ns . md simulations were followed by detailed interaction profiling of the protein-ligand complexes using the ligplot software (wallace et al., 1995) .3.1. investigation pertaining to gas chromatographymass spectrometry (gc-ms)the current study was intended at the identification of active compounds present in the twelve species of clerodendrum using a gc-ms method. it was evident from a thorough analysis of the gc-ms chromatograms of the twelve concerned clerodendrum spp. (figures s1-s12 ) that among the 68 commonly shared phytocompounds (table s2 , supplementary material), 29 were unique. accordingly, molecular docking analysis was performed employing these 29 unique phytocompounds (tables 1-3 against the concerned sars-cov-2 proteins. taraxerol, friedelin and betulin, as identified by the gc-ms analysis, are triterpenoid chemical compounds mainly found in various higher groups of plants. the compounds have been shown to possess anti-inflammatory, anti-carcinogenic, anti-obesity and antimicrobial activities with significant therapeutic potential (giweli et al., 2012; takasaki et al., 1999; tang et al., 2011; yao et al., 2013) . fatty acids like linoleic acid (la) and hexadecanoic acid, profiled in present study, are some of the essential fatty acids that human beings require from their diet (kar et al., 2016) . a deficiency in linolenic acid has been reported to be associated with infertility, skin, kidney degeneration and abrupt changes in the fatty acid composition of lipids (dobryniewski et al., 2007) . in addition, squalene and stigmasterol, as identified by the present gc-ms analysis, have been reported to be potent antioxidants and effective against oxidative stress related disorders (amarowicz, 2009; yoshida & niki, 2003) .sars-cov-2 infection initiates with the attachment of its spike protein to the human receptor angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) via the receptor-binding domain (rbd) (abdelli et al., 2020; basit et al., 2020; ; tai et al., 2020; wahedi et al., 2020) . molecular docking of the phytochemicals of clerodendrum spp. was performed at the active pocket of the rbd of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (pdb id: 6lzg), in light of prior knowledge about the active site residues that bind with human receptor ace2 (andersen et al., 2020; hasan et al., 2020; tai et al., 2020; wan et al., 2020) . the detailed binding energy scores of all the concerned phytocompounds have been provided in table 1 (compounds displaying binding energy scores à7.5 ± 0.01 leu27, glu166, pro168, gln189hydrophobic interactions are marked in italics and hydrogen bonds are highlighted in bold. à7.0 kcal/mol) and table s3 [supplementary material] (compounds displaying binding energy scores > à7.0 kcal/mol). the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol were found to exhibit the best binding energy scores of -7.5 (± 0.01) kcal/mol, à7.3 (± 0.02) kcal/mol and -7.2 (± 0.01) kcal/ mol, respectively, among the concerned phytochemicals (table 1) . a thorough inspection revealed that taraxerol interacted with leu455, glu484 and tyr489 residues of the rbd ( figure 1 and table 1 ), all of which have been inferred to play vital roles in the attachment of the sars-cov-2 spike protein with human ace2 receptor (andersen et al., 2020; ortega et al., 2020; wan et al., 2020) . molecular interactions of friedelin involved the residues lys444, tyr449 and asn450, whereas, stigmasterol interacted with the residues tyr449 and phe490 of the receptor-binding domain of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (table 1 ). in the present study, the mode of binding of the drug arbidol which is currently being used in targeting the sars-cov-2 spike protein to inhibit viral attachment with human ace2 receptor (sanders et al., 2020) was also analyzed and compared with the binding patterns of the concerned phytochemicals. arbidol displayed a binding energy score of -6.2 (± 0.01) kcal/mol with the rbd of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (table 1) . it was striking to note that the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol exhibited significantly higher (p < 0.01) binding potential relative to the drug arbidol, as evident from the binding energy scores (table 1) . our observations provide opportunities to further validate the inhibitory potential of the compounds in vitro and in vivo towards the development of effective therapeutics targeted against sars-cov-2 spike protein.proper inhibition of sars-cov-2 m pro arrests viral replication (jin et al., 2020) . recently, michael acceptor inhibitor n3 has been observed to exhibit significant inhibitory efficacy against sars-cov-2 m pro and has been proposed as a promising drug lead compound (jin et al., 2020) . a robust molecular docking of our in-house phytochemicals of clerodendrum spp. revealed interesting facts regarding their inhibitory prospects. a detailed account of the binding energy scores has been provided in table 2 (compounds displaying binding energy scores à7.0 kcal/mol) and table s3 [supplementary material] (compounds displaying binding energy scores > à7.0 kcal/mol). compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol were found to display significantly higher (p < 0.01) binding potential, with binding energy scores of -8.4 (± 0.01) kcal/mol, à7.9 (± 0.02) kcal/mol and -7.7 (± 0.01) kcal/mol respectively (table 2) , than the inhibitor n3 (-7.1 ± 0.02 kcal/ mol) at the active binding pocket of sars-cov-2 m pro . it has been reported that glu166 and pro168 residues of sars-cov-2 m pro are crucial in the binding of the inhibitor n3 (jin et al., 2020) . interestingly, taraxerol also involved these two imperative residues in its interaction ( figure 2 and table 2 ) which indicated towards its potential inhibitory efficacy against the sars-cov-2 m pro enzyme. the compounds friedelin and stigmasterol interacted with the residue pro168 at the active binding pocket of sars-cov-2 m pro ( table 2 ). the binding efficacy of the drugs lopinavir and ritonavir that are currently being employed to inhibit sars-cov-2 m pro activity (sanders et al., 2020) were estimated through molecular docking and the binding energy scores were observed to be -8.1 (± 0.01) kcal/mol and -7.5 (± 0.01) kcal/mol for lopinavir and ritonavir respectively. it was interesting to note that taraxerol exhibited significantly higher (p < 0.01) binding energy score with sars-cov-2 m pro than both the currently used drugs (table 2 ) and present observations confer scopes to further evaluate the inhibitory efficacy of taraxerol in vitro and in vivo against sars-cov-2.the vital catalytic component nsp12, in combination with nsp7 and nsp8, of sars-cov-2 rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) mediates viral replication in host cells (subissi et al., 2014; ziebuhr, 2005) . proper inhibition of rdrp activity has been reported to arrest sars-cov-2 replication and thus, limit its infective prowess (sanders et al., 2020; yin et al., 2020) . the binding energy scores of the phytocompounds of clerodendrum spp. at the active binding pocket of sars-cov-2 rdrp have been detailed in table 3 (compounds displaying binding energy scores à7.0 kcal/mol) and displaying binding energy scores > à7.0 kcal/mol). the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol displayed the highest binding potential with scores -7.4 (± 0.02) kcal/mol, à7.1 (± 0.01) kcal/mol and -7.0 (± 0.03) kcal/mol, respectively, with sars-cov-2 rdrp (table 3) . taraxerol was observed to involve the residues lys545 and arg555 ( figure  3 and table 3 ), whereas, friedelin interacted with sars-cov-2 rdrp through the residue asp623 (table 3) . stigmasterol was found to interact with the residues lys545, arg555, thr687 and ala688 of sars-cov-2 rdrp (table 3) . remdesivir and favipiravir are antiviral drugs that inhibit viral rdrp activity and arrest their growth and replication (sanders et al., 2020) . both these drugs have been reported to exhibit significant viral inhibition and are presently in clinical trials with prospects of effective treatment against covid-19 ; sanders et al., 2020) . accordingly, the binding patterns of these drugs with sars-cov-2 rdrp were compared with the modes of binding of the concerned phytocompounds of clerodendrum spp. remdesivir and favipiravir were noted to display binding energy scores of -6.3 (± 0.01) kcal/mol and -3.6 (± 0.01) kcal/mol respectively, with sars-cov-2 rdrp (table 3) . it was intriguing to note that the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol exhibited significantly higher (p < 0.01) binding energy values than both the drugs (table 3) . thus, the present findings provide opportunities to further explore the inhibitory potential of the concerned phytocompounds in vitro and in vivo towards their effective deployment as inhibitors against sars-cov-2.an accurate account of the physicochemical features of a therapeutic compound in compliance with the general rules of drug-likeness is an imperative step in the initial phases of drug development (paul gleeson et al., 2011) . decent binding affinities (binding energy scores à7.0 kcal/mol) of the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol against the sars-cov-2 spike, m pro and rdrp proteins conferred an appropriate scope to further evaluate their physicochemical attributes related to drug-likeness. lipinski's rule of five proposes that a drug candidate with logarithm of partial coefficient (log p) 5, molecular weight 500 dalton, number of hydrogen bond acceptors 10 and number of hydrogen bond donors 5 exhibits decent gastrointestinal absorption and enhanced membrane permeability (lipinski et al., 2001) . a thorough investigation revealed that all the three compounds (table 4) were in accordance with lipinski's rule of five (ro5), with slightly higher log p (logarithm of partial coefficient) values than the optimum. in this pretext, it is worth mentioning that most of the oral drugs frequently used in the treatment of cancer have log p values higher than the optimum range proposed by lipinski's rule of five (o'neill & twelves, 2002 ). veber's rule suggests that a potential therapeutic molecule with the number of rotatable bonds 10 and topological polar surface area (tpsa) 140å 2 tends to display decent oral bioavailability (veber et al., 2002) . the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol were noted to be in agreement with the veber's rule and our observation correlated well with their decent bioavailability score of 0.55 (table 4 ) (naidoo et al., 2020) . the physicochemical features of the compounds were further compared with the relevant drugs like arbidol, lopinavir, ritonavir, remdesivir and favipiravir that are presently being employed against sars-cov-2, with a motive to infer about the potential druggability of the compounds in relevance to the drugs. it was striking to note that the drugs lopinavir (molecular weight > 500 dalton; number of rotatable bonds > 10), ritonavir (molecular weight > 500 dalton; number of rotatable bonds > 10; tpsa > 140å 2 ) and remdesivir (molecular weight > 500 dalton; number of rotatable bonds > 10; tpsa > 140å 2 ) violated the rules of drug-likeness. the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol were predicted not to possess any structural alerts associated with toxic consequences on pains toxicophore estimation (table 4 ) (naidoo et al., 2020; pouliot & jeanmart, 2016) . however, the drug arbidol was observed to possess 1 structural alert. the phytocompounds were found to display relatively better physicochemical and drug-likeness features compared to the drugs that are presently being employed against sars-cov-2. an in silico toxicity estimation revealed that all the compounds were potentially non-mutagenic and non-cytotoxic (table 4 ) and our observations were found to be consistent with previous reports demonstrating their non-toxic nature (al-snafi, 2016; ayaz et al., 2019; boldrin et al., 2013; borges et al., 2013; subash-babu et al., 2017; surapaneni & prakash, 2018) . thus, the concerned phytocompounds exhibited promising drug-like features and provide further scopes to be validated in vitro and in vivo towards the development of effective therapeutics against covid-19 (blomme & will, 2016).decent binding energy scores ( à7.0 kcal/mol) of the compounds taraxerol, friedelin and stigmasterol against the sars-cov-2 spike, m pro and rdrp proteins offered scopes to further estimate the free energies of binding of the concerned protein-ligand complexes using the mm-gbsa method. it has been suggested that mm-gbsa provides apt estimates of free energies of binding of protein-ligand complexes and a more negative value indicates stronger binding (al-khafaji et al., 2020) . a detailed investigation of the mm-gbsa binding free energy scores (dg bind ) of the selected protein-ligand complexes revealed that the compound taraxerol displayed higher binding potential with the respective sars-cov-2 proteins in comparison to the compounds friedelin and stigmasterol (p < 0.01), as evident from the dg bind mm-gbsa scores of taraxerol with the sars-cov-2 spike (-45.19 kcal/mol), m pro (-58.53 kcal/mol) and rdrp (-43.72 kcal/ mol) proteins (table 5) . our observations signified a better binding efficacy of taraxerol with the concerned sars-cov-2 proteins relative to friedelin and stigmasterol.the compound taraxerol exhibited better binding potential with the sars-cov-2 spike, m pro and rdrp proteins in terms of binding energy (tables 1-3) and dg bind mm-gbsa scores (table 5 ) in comparison to the phytochemicals friedelin and stigmasterol. accordingly, the complexes of taraxerol with the respective sars-cov-2 proteins were selected for md simulations along a timescale of 40 ns to validate the results of molecular docking and assess their conformational stability. the taraxerol-rbd sars-cov-2 spike protein complex displayed fluctuations in rmsd values of ca atoms until 31 ns and attained stability thereafter (figure 4) . the taraxerol-sars-cov-2 m pro complex was noted to experience initial fluctuations in rmsd values of ca atoms until 25 ns after which it attained equilibrium and remained stable (figure 4) . the taraxerol-sars-cov-2 rdrp complex exhibited significant dynamicity in rmsd values of ca atoms in the initial phases of md simulation. however, it attained considerable stability after 27 ns and remained in equilibrium (figure 4 ). our observations reflected the conformational stability of the complexes and indicated towards the decent binding potential of taraxerol against the sars-cov-2 spike, m pro and rdrp proteins . analysis of root mean square fluctuation (rmsf) of the residues of a protein-ligand complex is effective in addressing local changes along a protein chain and deciphering its conformational stability (muralidharan et al., 2020) . extensive analysis of rmsf pertaining to the complexes revealed that the average rmsf values were 1.9 å, 1.3 å and 1.6 å for the complexes taraxerol-rbd sars-cov-2 spike protein ( figure  5a ), taraxerol-sars-cov-2 m pro ( figure 5b ) and taraxerol-sars-cov-2 rdrp ( figure 5c ) respectively. the peaks in the rmsf plot depict the residues which experience major fluctuations during the md simulations (muralidharan et al., 2020) . it was evident from our analysis that the residues in the active binding pockets of the sars-cov-2 proteins that interacted with taraxerol (tables 1-3) conformational stability of a protein-ligand complex is inferred when there are no considerable changes in the interaction patterns of a complex prior to and after md simulations . extensive analysis of interaction profiles of the complexes taraxerol-rbd sars-cov-2 spike protein, taraxerol-sars-cov-2 m pro and taraxerol-sars-cov-2 rdrp after md simulations for 40 ns revealed that they did not suffer any change in their binding patterns. the interacting residues prior to and after the md simulations of 40 ns were found to be the same (figure 6a-c and tables 1-3) . thus, it was evident that the complexes were conformationally stable and supported the initial observations of the molecular docking studies.covid-19 pandemic has afflicted human population worldwide with its calamitous impact, and rapid spread, transmission and infectivity. there has been an utmost demand for the development of specific drugs and vaccines targeted against sars-cov-2, the causal agent of covid-19. the present research venture aimed at exploring the inhibitory prospects of the phytocompounds from clerodendrum spp. revealed that taraxerol was indubitably the most promising inhibitory candidate against the sars-cov-2 spike, m pro and rdrp proteins, followed by friedelin and stigmasterol, as evident from the binding energy scores. the fact that taraxerol displayed decent binding potential against all the concerned sars-cov-2 proteins included in the present analysis might provide a foundation for it to be deployed as a universal target against sars-cov-2 with further in vitro and in vivo validations required to draw a final inference.1 neutralizing antibodies can fully block viral entry into host cells; however, the general 2 location of the binding of other antibodies would strongly affect the body's ability to 3 produce neutralizing antibodies [7] . to date, no coronavirus vaccine has been approved 4 [10] . inactivated sars-cov has been demonstrated to offer incomplete protection, 5 whereas purified coronavirus spike protein nanoparticles have been found to induce 6 coronavirus neutralizing antibodies in mice [10] . therefore, full exposure of neutralizing 7 epitopes with other b cell epitopes are likely to represent important factors in coronavirus 8 vaccine design.the high homology of the s protein between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov resulted in 10 the design of a subunit vaccine for sars-cov-2, which is focused on the rbd region 11 and its vicinity. for the purpose of vaccine design, we analyzed the biological 12 characteristics (e.g., homology analysis, t and b cell epitope prediction, and advanced the b cell epitopes of sars-cov-2-spl were predicted online with disctope2 [11] 23 and iedb [12] . a disctope score peak chart was subsequently constructed using 7 1 in the rbd region, whereas two were located in the tail region. as expected, there were 2 also five motifs in the sars-cov-spl, thr425-gln492 (thr433, 2.403; thr486, 0.943),3 leu538-leu571 (arg544, 1.618), val389-asp414 (val404, -1.604), thr332-trp340 4 (ala339, -5.031), and thr517-lys521 (asp518, -8.507) (fig. 1b) . furthermore, the two 5 discotope score peaks were almost mirror images (fig. 1) .according to the maria percentiles for all possible 15 mer peptide sequences and 7 netmhcpan4 percentiles for all possible 9 mer peptide sequences for sars-cov-2-spl,8 broad coverage was defined as being presented by 1/3 of mhc alleles [8] . we found that 9 15 cd4 epitopes and 17 cd8 t cell epitopes met this requirement. after overlapping 10 integration, there were nine potential cd4 and 11 potential cd8 t cell antigenic 11 determinants (table 1 ). the rbd region possessed seven cd4 epitopes and nine cd8 t 12 cell epitopes, whereas the tail region has two cd4 epitopes and two cd8 t cell epitopes. 13 moreover, when comparing these epitopes with verified cd4 and cd8 t cell epitopes of 14 sars-cov-spl [16] , a one-to-one correspondence was observed (e.g., ser516-asn53016 lys411-val420 (sars-cov) to lys424-val433 (sars-cov-2).the amino acid identity was 76.25% between sars-cov-2-spl and sars-cov-spl 19 (fig. 2 ). there were 76 amino acid differences between them, 36 of which were located 20 in the receptor-binding motif (rmb) (ser438-gln506), accounting for 47.4% (36/76).21 empirically, the biological characteristics of some amino acids (e.g. arg-lys, thr-ser, 22 glu-asp, and ile-leu) were similar. after taking the biological similarity of amino acids 1 appear similar to a goldfish, with rmb as the head, rbd as the trunk, and remainders as 2 the tail ( fig. 3a and 3b ). the rmb (head; critical for receptor binding) of 3 sars-cov-2-spl was completely exposed on the surface (fig. 3a) , which is also 4 crucial for the production of neutralizing antibodies. homotrimer sars-cov-2-spl was 5 arranged in a barrel with three rbms on the top (fig. 3a) , which might represent the 6 natural state of the sars-cov-2-spl structure. 